WATSEKA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 2761, passed 9-26-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
      This City Code of the City of Watseka, as supplemented, contains the 1980
City Code and ordinances up to and including ordinance 2761, passed September
26, 2025. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the
provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the City Office in order to ascertain whether
any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                  American Legal Publishing Corporation
                  Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1: WATSEKA CITY CODE
Section
1-1-1: Authority To Adopt Code
1-1-2: Title
1-1-3: Acceptance
1-1-4: Amendments
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-6: Copies Of Code
1-1-1: AUTHORITY TO ADOPT CODE:
This City Code is adopted pursuant to the home rule powers of the City.
(1980 Code § 75-9)
1-1-2: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Watseka. This City
Code shall be known and cited as the WATSEKA CITY CODE, and it is hereby
published by authority of the City Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in section
1-1-4 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto as well as to the section itself when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal document.
(2019 Code)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title.
(2019 Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code.
(2019 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the Office of the City Clerk.
Said Code Books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the Office of the City Clerk upon termination of office or separation of
duties.
(2019 Code)
1-1-6: COPIES OF CODE:
   A.   Distribution Of Copies: All of the printed copies of this Code
belonging to the City shall be deposited with the City Collector. He shall
deliver one copy thereof to each member of the Council, and copies to such
other persons as the Council may direct.
(1980 Code § 75-15)
   B.   Presentation Of Copies: The City Council shall have the power to extend
to or reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by presenting them with a
copy of this Code, bound at the expense of the City, as to them shall seem
suitable, and they shall also have the power to present two (2) copies of this
Code to the Illinois Municipal League, two (2) copies to the Watseka Public
Library, and two (2) copies to the Iroquois County Historical Society.
(1980 Code § 75-17)
CHAPTER 2: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed by the City Council prior to the
adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are excepted from
repeal herein, and except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are, by necessary implication, herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
(1980 Code § 75-19; amd. 2019 Code)
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the City; and
   L.   All special ordinances.
(1980 Code § 75-19)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform, as far as practicable, to the ordinance in force at the time of such
proceeding. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may, by consent of the party
affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
(1980 Code § 75-21)
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Code.
(1980 Code § 75-21; amd. 2019 Code)
   D.   Effect Of Repeal: When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance,
clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be
construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall
be expressly so provided.
(1980 Code § 75-8)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The City Council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(1980 Code § 75-18; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
Section
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: Statute And Court Definitions
1-3-3: General Definitions
1-3-4: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other City officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender And Number: Whenever any word in any section of this Code
importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters,
parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be
included, although distributive words may not be used. When any subject matter,
party or person referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included.
   E.   May; Shall: The word “may” is permissive; the word “shall” is
mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   H.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words “of the City of Watseka” and shall be taken to mean the officer or
employee of the City having the title mentioned or performing the duties
indicated.
   I.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   J.   Ordinance: The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the City
has been changed in the content of this City Code to “title”, “chapter”,
“section” and/or “subsection” or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to City ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
   K.   These rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or contents of such section may be repugnant thereto.
(1980 Code ch. 75 art. I; amd. 2019 Code)
1-3-2: STATUTE AND COURT DEFINITIONS:
When any word or term is used in this Code, for which the Statutes of the State
of Illinois or the Supreme or Appellate Courts of the State of Illinois have,
under like circumstance, defined said word or term, said definition or
construction shall be adopted as the meaning and definition of said word or
term in this Code.
(1980 Code § 75-3)
1-3-3: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
CITY: The City of Watseka, County of Iroquois, State of Illinois.
CODE OR THIS CODE: The City Code of the City of Watseka.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Watseka.
COUNTY: The County of Iroquois, State of Illinois.
HERETOFORE AND HEREAFTER: Whenever the word “heretofore” occurs in any
ordinance, it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the day when such
ordinance shall take effect; and whenever the word “hereafter” occurs, it shall
be construed to mean the time after the ordinance containing such word shall
take effect.
ILCS: Illinois Compiled Statutes.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or
corporation in his or its own capacity as administrator, conservator, executor,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the Court. Whenever the
word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine
as applied to partnerships or any such word as applied to corporations, it
shall include the officers, agents, or employees thereof who are responsible
for any violation of said section.
SHALL HAVE BEEN: Includes past and future cases.
STATE OR THIS STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, the State of Illinois.
(1980 Code ch. 75 art. I; amd. 2019 Code)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Fine: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this Code, any person
found to have been in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this Code
shall be fined in an amount of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one offense. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
   B.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in subsection A
of this section, the Circuit Court may impose a period of “conditional
discharge”, as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4, or “court
supervision”, as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21, for a
period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to perform
community service, an order to complete an education program and/or any other
appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this Code or
stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set forth in
730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to time.
   C.   Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this
Code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this section, to
the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
   D.   Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any
installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The City Attorney may retain attorneys and
private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment
of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the City
with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the City
Attorney under this subsection shall be charged to the offender.
(2019 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalties: The penalties provided in this chapter shall
be applicable to every section of this City Code, the same as though it were a
part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of
any section of this City Code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be
unlawful, shall be penalized appropriately. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this City Code.
(2019 Code)
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this City Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but
not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
(1980 Code § 75-7)
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this City Code,
and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of this Code shall apply, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues.
(2019 Code)
1-4-3: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.
(1980 Code § 75-4)
ARTICLE A: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF NONVEHICULAR VIOLATIONS
Section
1-4A-1: Statute Authority
1-4A-2: Purpose
1-4A-3: Jurisdiction
1-4A-4: Code Hearing Unit
1-4A-5: Violation Notice
1-4A-6: Administrative Hearings
1-4A-7: Administrative Review
1-4A-8: Enforcement Of Judgment
1-4A-9: Nonexclusive Enforcement
1-4A-10: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties
1-4A-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
Section 1-2.1-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-2.1-2, authorizes home rule municipalities to provide by ordinance for a
system of administrative adjudication of municipal code violations to the
extent permitted by the Illinois Constitution. The City is a home rule
municipality. The Illinois Constitution provides that a home rule unit may
exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and
affairs (Illinois Constitution, art. VII, sec. 6(a) (1970)). The Illinois
Constitution also provides that a home rule unit may exercise and perform,
concurrently with the State, any power or function of a home rule unit to the
extent that the General Assembly, by law, does not specifically limit the
concurrent exercise, or specifically declare the State's exercise to be
exclusive (Illinois Constitution, art. VII, sec. 6(i) (1970)).The Illinois
Constitution further provides that the powers and functions of home rule units
shall be construed liberally.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient method of
enforcing the City ordinances through administrative adjudication of charges of
nonvehicular violations of this Code.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-3: JURISDICTION:
All provisions of the City Code, whether or not hereinbefore limited to
specific means of enforcement, may be enforced through the administrative
adjudication system, except for: a) proceedings not within the statutory or
home rule authority of the City; or b) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle
Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement
of vehicles, and reportable offenses under section 6-204 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-204).
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-4: CODE HEARING UNIT:
   A.   Unit Established; Composition: There is hereby established a department
within the City government to be known as the “Code Hearing Unit”, which shall
have the power to administer and enforce a system of administrative
adjudication of nonvehicular regulation violations. The Code Hearing Unit shall
be comprised of a Hearing Officer, and may include any one or more of the
following: an Administrator, System Coordinator, and hearing room personnel
(Deputy).
   B.   Selection, Appointment And Compensation: The persons who shall hold the
positions of Hearing Officer, Administrator, Systems Coordinator, and hearing
room personnel shall be appointed or assigned by the Mayor and compensated as
provided herein:
      1.   Hearing Officer: The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a Hearing
Officer. To be eligible to the hold the position of Hearing Officer the person
shall:
         a.   Be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois
for at least three (3) years; and
         b.   Have successfully completed a formal training program consisting
of:
            (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings which he/she will conduct;
            (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that
he/she will adjudicate;
            (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
            (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders.
      2.   Administrator, System Coordinator And Hearing Room Personnel: The
Mayor shall assign the duties of Administrator, System Coordinator and hearing
room personnel, as needed, to City employees. One or more persons may be
assigned to hold the positions and fulfill the duties set forth above.
      3.   Compensation: Compensation to be paid for any of the above-stated
positions or assignments shall be established by the City Council.
   B.   Powers And Authority: The Code Hearing Unit is vested with the
following powers and authority:
      1.   Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of the powers
enumerated in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-4, the provisions of which
are incorporated herein by reference, including the power to:
         a.   Preside over all administrative hearings;
         b.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
         c.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the Code violation;
         d.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documentation upon the request of the parties
or their representatives;
         e.   Rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence;
         f.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         g.   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a Code violation exists. A determination of liability shall
be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision, and order
including the fine, penalty, or action with which the person found liable must
comply;
         h.   Impose penalties or award remedies consistent with this Code and
assess costs upon a finding of liability. However, in no event shall the
Hearing Officer have the authority to 1) impose a penalty of incarceration; or
2) impose a fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), which shall
be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with
this Code and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any
tax imposed and collected by the City;
         i.   Order the removal of persons whose conduct is disruptive to the
hearing process; and
         j.   Request that the City Attorney, or other attorney representing
the City, attend a hearing to formally prosecute a particular Code violation.
In such a case, the Hearing Officer shall establish the order of proof.
However, the matters set forth in the citation shall remain prima facie
evidence of the offense.
      2.   Administrator: The Administrator shall be empowered and is
authorized and directed to:
         a.   Operate and manage the administrative adjudication system;
         b.   Adopt, distribute, and process violation notices and other
notices as may be required to carry out the purpose of this article;
         c.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
determination of liability;
         d.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate
and maintain the administrative adjudication system;
         e.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties, and otherwise pursue all
post-judgment remedies available under law;
         f.   Compromise or otherwise settle violation notices prior to a
hearing date. Any such compromise should be made of record by the Administrator
on the date the violation notice was scheduled to be heard, with an explanation
by the Administrator as to the reason for such compromise. The Hearing Officer
shall be required to approve any such compromise or settlement at the hearing;
and
         g.   Amend violation citations on their face to correct scrivener and
typographical errors, and to complete minor omissions and insert missing
information.
      3.   System Coordinator: The System Coordinator shall operate and
maintain computer programs for the administrative adjudication system created
hereunder, on a day-to-day basis, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Input of violation notice information;
         b.   Hearing and notice dates;
         c.   Fine and penalty assessments and payments;
         d.   Issue receipts for payment;
         e.   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates or court dates and/or
final determination of liability, as directed by the Administrator or by the
Hearing Officer, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth; and
         f.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, and fines and penalties assessed and
paid.
      4.   Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel shall be full-time,
part-time, or auxiliary police officers. The hearing room personnel shall:
         a.   Maintain hearing room decorum;
         b.   Have and carry out such authority as is granted to courtroom
deputies of the Circuit Court; and
         c.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required
by the Hearing Officer or the Administrator.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-5: VIOLATION NOTICE:
   A.   Issuance Of Notice: Citations administered through the administrative
adjudication system shall be issued in accordance with the following
provisions:
      1.   Violation notices shall be served, certified, and have evidentiary
value as hereinafter stated. Certain violation notices may be issued that allow
the recipient to pay a fine prior to any hearing. If the recipient fails to pay
the required fine within the allotted time, the violation notice will be
processed through the administrative adjudication system as otherwise provided
in this article.
      2.   All full-time, part-time, and auxiliary police officers, as well as
any other person authorized under this Code to issue citations for violations
of the this Code, shall have the authority to issue violation notices.
      3.   Violation notices shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
         a.   The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known;
         b.   The date, time, and place of the violation (date of issuance);
         c.   A citation to the particular section of this Code violated;
         d.   The common address of the building or property alleged to be in
violation (the “cited property”) of this Code, if applicable;
         e.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed;
         f.   The signature and identification number, if applicable, of the
person issuing the violation notice;
         g.   The date, time, and place of the administrative hearing at which
the charge may be contested on its merits. The date of the hearing shall be no
less than fifteen (15) days after the date of service of the violation notice.
A hearing may be set at a date less than fifteen (15) days after the date of
service of the violation notice in an emergency if the violation constitutes a
threat to public interest, safety, or welfare;
         h.   A statement of penalties for failure to appear at the hearing;
and
         i.   A statement noting that the payment of the indicated fine,
including any late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation.
   B.   Service Of Notice:
      1.   Service of violation notices shall be made by the person issuing
such notice, or his/her designee, by:
         a.   Personal service of process on the person responsible for the
Code violation, or his/her employees or agents;
         b.   Mailing a copy of the violation notice to the person responsible
for the Code violation by certified mail, return receipt. Such service shall be
completed as of the date of deposit in the United States mail; or
         c.   Posting the notice upon the cited property when the person
responsible is the owner or manager of the property.
      2.   The correctness of the facts contained in the violation notice shall
be verified by the person issuing the violation notice by:
         a.   Signing his/her name to the violation notice at the time of
issuance; or
         b.   In the case of a violation notice produced by a computer device,
by signing a single certificate, to be maintained by the Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all violation notices produced by the device
while under his/her control.
      3.   The original or complete copy of the violation notice shall be
retained by the Administrator and kept in accordance with the ordinary course
of business.
      4.   Any violation notice, or complete copy thereof, shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown thereon.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate City Code violations on
their merits in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Time, Date And Location: The time, date, and location of any
administrative hearing shall be as set forth on a violation notice.
   B.   Recording: Administrative hearings shall be tape-recorded.
   C.   Nonappearance: Persons who do not appear on their scheduled hearing
date shall have a determination of liability entered against them by default. A
determination of liability entered by default shall be forwarded to any person
who fails to appear and shall contain the same information as a determination
of liability. The default determination of liability may be set aside by the
Hearing Officer if, within twenty one (21) days of issuance of the
determination, a petition is received stating what the Hearing Officer
determines is good cause for failure to appear or at any time if the petitioner
establishes the City did not provide proper service of process of the violation
notice. The Hearing Officer shall provide the petitioner with notice of a new
hearing date or his/her denial of the petition. The default determination shall
state that it shall constitute a determination of liability if such petition is
not received, if the petition is denied, or if, after setting of a new hearing
date, the person fails to appear.
   D.   Hearing Rights: Persons appearing to contest an alleged ordinance
violation may be represented by counsel of their own choice at their own
expense, may present witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross-
examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel
the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
Subpoenas shall be certified by the Administrator and shall be served and
include a witness fee in the same manner and rate as applicable to Circuit
Court subpoenas.
   E.   Evidentiary Standard: The formal and technical rules of evidence do not
apply. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted if it is of the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs. City police reports, inspection reports, and records of State and
other governmental agencies shall be admissible in evidence.
   F.   Determinations: Hearings shall result in a final determination of
liability or nonliability after consideration of the facts and/or testimony.
The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines,
penalties, and costs in accordance with this article. A determination shall
constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review.
   G.   Notice Of Determination: A notice of determination shall be sent
following the conclusion of the administrative hearing and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
      1.   The determination, including the findings, decision and order of the
Hearing Officer;
      2.   A statement of any fines, penalties and costs imposed;
      3.   A date by which the violation must be brought into compliance with
this Code;
      4.   A statement that any unpaid fines and penalty constitute a debt due
and owed to the City; and
      5.   A warning that the determination of the Hearing Officer may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction. In the case in which a defendant fails to comply with a judgment
ordering the correction of a City Code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of the City Code violation, a statement that any expenses
incurred by the City to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to,
attorney fees, court costs and costs related to property demolition or
foreclosure, shall be a debt due and owed to the City and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-7: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
Administrative review of final determinations issued by the Hearing Officer
shall be subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as is set
forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. The City shall have the
right to appeal a determination, regardless of whether the citation in question
was formally prosecuted with the presence of an attorney representing the City.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-8: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Collection: Upon exhaustion or expiration of the period in which
judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought,
unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or costs
imposed that remain unpaid shall constitute a debt due and owed to the City and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   Judgment: Upon exhaustion or expiration of the period in which judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought, unless
stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, a determination of liability may
be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction. In any case in which the Hearing Officer finds that a defendant
failed to comply with a determination ordering the defendant to correct an
ordinance violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of an
ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the City to enforce the judgment,
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the Hearing Officer,
shall be a debt due and owed to the City and may be collected in accordance
with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a Hearing Officer
hereunder, the Administrator shall provide notice to the defendant that
provides that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the Hearing
Officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the
judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be
less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If notice is
served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the
notice was deposited in the mail.
   C.   Lien: A determination of liability may be enforced in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction, including the
recording of a memorandum of judgment or other instrument in the manner
authorized by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS art. XII) or
by the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.), and upon recording,
the judgment shall constitute a lien on the real estate or personal estate, or
both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owed to the City.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-9: NONEXCLUSIVE ENFORCEMENT:
The City reserves the right to employ all other means and methods available
under the law to enforce this City Code, including direct application to the
courts.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
1-4A-10: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties assessed for Code violations administered through the
administrative adjudication system shall be as provided in this Code.
(Ord. 2479, 8-22-2017)
CHAPTER 5: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
1-5-1: Corporate Seal
1-5-2: Election Wards
1-5-3: Service Of Notices
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The Corporate Seal of the City shall be the seal heretofore established.
(1980 Code § 13-9)
1-5-2: ELECTION WARDS:
   A.   The City is hereby divided into four (4) wards for the purpose of
electing the members of the City Council, and each ward shall be and is
entitled to two (2) Alderpersons or members of the City Council. For the
purpose of electing said Alderpersons, the City is hereby divided into the
following wards, namely:
      1.   First Ward: The first ward shall consist of all that part of the
City of Watseka, lying East of the Center line of Fourth Street in said City
and North of the center line of Walnut Street of said City.
      2.   Second Ward: The second ward shall consist of all that part of said
City lying West of the center line of Fourth Street in said City and North of a
line beginning at a point in said City where the center line of said Fourth
Street intersects and crosses the center line of Walnut Street in said City,
and running thence West and Northwesterly along and upon the center line of
said Walnut Street to a point in said City where the center line of Fleming
Street, if extended, would intersect with the center line of said Walnut
Street, thence West along the center line of said Fleming Street to the end of
Fleming Street and to the Western boundary of the corporate limits of said
City.
      3.   Third Ward: The third ward shall consist of all that part of said
City, lying West of the Center line of Fifth Street in said City and South of a
line beginning at a point in said City where the center line of said Fifth
Street intersects and crosses the center line of Walnut Street in said City,
and running thence West and Northwesterly along and upon the center line of
said Walnut Street to a point in said City where the center line of Fleming
Street, if extended, would intersect with the center line of said Walnut
Street, thence West along the center line of said Fleming Street extended to
the first intersection with the western boundary of the corporate limits of
said City; and all that part of the City of Watseka lying West of Sugar Creek.
      4.   Fourth Ward: The fourth ward shall consist of all that part of said
City of Watseka, lying East of the center line of Fifth Street in said City and
South of the center line of Walnut Street of said City.
   B.   Whenever, in this section, the centerline of a street is used as a
boundary of a ward and the street does not happen to extend to the corporate
limits, the boundary line shall be considered to be that line which would be
the centerline of the street in question, if the same were extended to the
corporate boundary line. This same rule shall apply in determining in which
ward new territory annexed to the City may lie, which may happen to lie beyond
the end of any of the boundary streets in question.
(1980 Code § 2-8)
1-5-3: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
Whenever in this Code there is a provision that a notice be given or served,
without any further particulars as to how it may be given or served, and there
is no applicable statute governing the giving or service of said notice, a
wholly written and signed copy of said notice, or a typewritten, printed,
photocopied, or duplicated copy of said notice, may be given or served in any
one of the following manners:
   A.   The person causing the notice to be given, any police officer of the
City, or any other officer or employee of the City may deliver a copy thereof
in person to the person to whom the notice is to be given or served.
   B.   The notice may be served by any sheriff or deputy sheriff.
   C.   By mailing a copy thereof by United States mail, either by first class
or certified mail, to the person to whom it is to be given at his or her last
known address, postage prepaid.
(1980 Code § 13-21)
CHAPTER 6: MAYOR
Section
1-6-1: Elected Official; Term
1-6-2: Bond
1-6-3: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
1-6-4: Mayor Pro-Tem; Acting Mayor
1-6-1: ELECTED OFFICIAL; TERM:
The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified as is provided by law.
(1980 Code § 1-1)
1-6-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Mayor shall execute a bond
in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the City Council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office.
(1980 Code § 1-9)
1-6-3: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   General Duties:
      1.   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall
perform such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall
have supervision over all of the executive officers and employees of the City,
except as by ordinance or law shall be otherwise provided, and shall have the
power and authority to inspect at any reasonable time all books and records
pertaining to City affairs and kept by any officer or employee of the City.
(1980 Code § 1-2)
      2.   The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the City on formal
occasions and receptions, but in his absence or inability to attend any such
function, the City Council may select any other City officer to so act.
(1980 Code § 1-8)
   B.   Appointment Of Officers; Vacancies:
      1.   All appointed officers of the City shall be appointed by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. Vacancies in all appointed
offices may be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
      2.   Appointed officers shall hold their office for such term as may be
established by law or until their successor has been chosen and has qualified.
      3.   An appointed officer may resign from his or her office. If an
appointed officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office until a successor
has been chosen and has qualified.
      4.   If there is a failure to appoint an officer, or the person appointed
fails to qualify, the appointed officer then holding the office shall continue
in the office until a successor has been chosen and has been qualified.
      5.   If an appointed officer ceases to perform the duties of or to hold
an office by reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability,
conviction of a disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or abandonment of
office, the mayor may appoint a temporary officer to fill the office.
      6.   The term for any temporary officer appointed shall be thirty (30)
days. No person shall be eligible to be appointed or to fill an office as a
temporary officer more than two (2) times in any one fiscal year.
(Ord. 2604, 3-23-2021)
   C.   Designate Duties Of Officers: Whenever there is a dispute as to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the City, this dispute
shall be settled by the Mayor, after consultation with the City Attorney. The
Mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which
is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that
duty.
(1980 Code § 1-4)
   D.   Supervisory Powers: The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all
officers of the City and see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the
duties of their respective offices. He shall inquire into all reasonable
complaints made against them and cause their neglects or violations of duty to
be promptly corrected, and he shall, in case he becomes satisfied that any
officer wilfully neglects or violates his duty, cause such officer to be
prosecuted and punished.
(1980 Code § 1-5)
   E.   Removal Of Officers: Except where otherwise provided by statute, the
Mayor may remove any officer appointed by him, on any formal charge, whenever
he is of the opinion that the interests of the City demand removal, but he
shall report the reasons of the removal to the City Council at a meeting to be
held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after the removal. If
the Mayor fails or refuses to report to the City Council the reasons for
removal, or if the City Council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members
authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the officer
thereupon shall be restored to the office from which he was removed. The vote
shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the Council's Journal.
Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and a new oath of office.
No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
(1980 Code § 1-6)
   F.   Signature Required; Advise Attorney: The Mayor shall sign all
commissions, licenses, permits and warrants granted, issued or drawn by order
of the City Council, or authorized by the ordinances of the City. In all
contracts where the City is a party, unless otherwise provided, the Mayor shall
sign the same on behalf of the City, and it shall be his special duty to see
that the other contracting party faithfully complies with the contract. And in
all suits wherein the City is a party, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to
advise with and assist the City Attorney in prosecuting or defending the same,
as the case may be.
(1980 Code § 1-10)
1-6-4: MAYOR PRO-TEM; ACTING MAYOR:
   A.   Mayor Pro-Tem: During a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor,
the City Council shall elect one of its members to act as Mayor Pro-Tem who,
during such absence or disability, shall possess the powers of Mayor, as is
provided by statute.
(1980 Code § 1-7)
   B.   Acting Mayor: In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the
Council may elect one of its members as Acting Mayor to serve until the vacancy
is filled at a regular or special election called as is provided by law.
(1980 Code § 1-11)
CHAPTER 7: CITY COUNCIL
Section
1-7-1: Elected Officials; Term; Functions
1-7-2: Oath And Compensation
1-7-3: Meetings
1-7-4: Order Of Business
1-7-5: Committees
1-7-5-1: Standing Committees
1-7-5-2: Special Committees
1-7-6: Petitions And Communications In Writing
1-7-7: Ordinances, Resolutions And Actions
1-7-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS; TERM; FUNCTIONS:
The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four-year
term. The Council shall be the legislative division of the City government and
shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by law.
(1980 Code § 2-1)
1-7-2: OATH AND COMPENSATION:
The members of the City Council shall take the oath of office prescribed by
statute, and shall receive such compensation as may be provided by ordinance.
(1980 Code § 2-27)
1-7-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular And Adjourned Meetings: The regular meetings of the City Council
shall be held in the Council Room in the City Hall on the fourth Tuesday of
each month at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided, that if the
regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall take place on the
next day at the same hour and place. Adjourned meetings may be held in the City
Hall at such other times as the Council may determine.
(Ord. 2313, 2-23-2010)
   B.   Special Meetings:
      1.   Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or
three (3) Alderpersons; provided, that a written notice of such meeting and the
purpose thereof shall be given to each member of the Council at least forty
eight (48) hours before the time set for the meeting. In the event that all the
elected members of the Council are present at any special meeting, then the
requirement of notice shall be unnecessary and shall be deemed waived. No
business other than that mentioned in the notice shall be transacted at such
special meeting, unless all the elected members of the Council shall be
present, in which event, the Council may adopt and pass legislation and
resolutions or transact business not within the purpose for which the meeting
was called only by the unanimous vote of the Council.
(1980 Code § 2-4)
      2.   No vote or action of the Council shall be rescinded at any special
meeting of the Council unless there shall be present at such meeting as many
members of the Council as were present at the meeting when such vote or action
was taken.
(1980 Code § 2-26)
   C.   Public Meetings:
      1.   All meetings of the City Council and its committees shall be public
meetings, except for: a) collective negotiating matters between the City and
its employees; b) meetings where the acquisition of real property is being
considered or where a pending court proceeding against or on behalf of the City
is being considered; c) where the Constitution provides that the City may hold
secret meetings; d) when a Federal regulation requires that the meeting not be
public; e) when the City Council has enacted an ordinance which provides for
closed meetings for conciliating complaints of discrimination under the
Illinois Municipal Code; f) when, as provided by statute, the City Council
holds closed sessions to consider the appointment of a member to fill a vacancy
on the City Council; and g) when otherwise permitted by Illinois law.
      2.   This subsection does not prevent the City Council from holding
closed sessions to consider information regarding the appointment, employment
or dismissal of an employee or officer, or to hear testimony on a complaint
lodged against an employee or officer, to determine its validity; provided,
that no final action is taken at a closed session. Except as above provided, or
by Illinois Statute, no other portion of such meetings shall be closed to the
public.
(1980 Code § 2-3)
      3.   All meetings required to be public shall be held at specified times
and places which are convenient to the public, and no meeting required to be
public shall be held on a legal holiday. Meetings that fall on a holiday shall
be moved to the nearest business day.
(1980 Code § 2-5)
   D.   Schedule Of Meetings:
      1.   The City Council and each of its committees shall, at the beginning
of each fiscal year, state the dates, times and places of its regular meetings
and shall make available a schedule thereof. If a change is made in a regular
meeting date, at least ten (10) days' notice of such change shall be given by a
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and notice of
such change shall also be posted in the City Hall on a bulletin board to be
located outside the Office of the City Collector.
      2.   Public notice of any special meeting or of any rescheduled regular
meeting or of any reconvened or adjourned meeting, if reconvened or adjourned
for more than twenty four (24) hours, shall be given at least twenty four (24)
hours before such meeting.
      3.   Each committee and the Council shall supply copies of the notices of
its regular meetings and of any special, rescheduled, reconvened or adjourned
meeting to any local newspaper, radio station or television station which has
filed an annual request for such notice. (1980 Code § 2-6)
   E.   Presiding Officer: The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the
Council at all regular and special meetings and when the Council meets as a
committee of the whole. In the absence of the Mayor, Acting Mayor, or Mayor
Pro-Tem, the City Council may elect an Alderperson to act as temporary chair.
He shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote in his
capacity as Alderperson on any ordinance, resolution, or motion.
(1980 Code § 2-7)
   F.   Quorum:
      1.   A majority of the elected members of the Council shall constitute a
quorum thereof, but no ordinance or measure for the expenditure of money shall
be passed except upon the favorable vote of a majority of the elected members.
(1980 Code § 2-25)
      2.   A quorum of Alderpersons must be physically present at the location
of an open or closed meeting of the City Council.
   G.   Electronic Participation:
      1.   As provided herein, Alderpersons who are not physically present may
participate in open or closed meetings by means of a video or audio conference.
Such electronic participation may only occur if the Trustee is prevented from
physically attending by: a) personal illness or disability; b) employment
purposes; c) business of the public body; d) a family emergency other
emergency. If an Alderperson wishes to attend a meeting electronically, the
Alderperson must notify the City Clerk at least forty eight (48) hours before
the meeting, unless advance notice is impractical. Notification may be in
person or in writing, or by phone, e-mail or facsimile transmission. The
notification shall include a detailed recitation of the particular
circumstances why the Alderperson cannot attend, and shall also cite one of the
four (4) above-specified categories. The notification also shall substantially
follow the format laid out in the attachment to Ordinance 2460. Copies of the
request shall be provided to all Alderpersons promptly, but in no event later
than the meeting in question.
      2.   Upon receipt of notice of intent to participate electronically, the
City Clerk shall make appropriate arrangements for the Alderperson to
participate electronically, such as by arranging a speakerphone for the meeting
room and obtaining contact information. The equipment shall provide output
sufficient for persons attending the meeting, and members of the audience, to
hear the Alderperson speak, and also shall allow the Alderperson to hear other
Alderpersons and any person who addresses the City Council.
      3.   The City Council allows electronic attendance for qualifying reasons
listed in the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as a matter of
policy. The studio or video equipment shall be activated at the beginning of
the meeting, or at the time requested by the Alderperson, so that the
Alderperson can participate.
      4.   If the Alderperson who is attending electronically would normally
chair the meeting, a President Pro-Tempore who is physically present may be
appointed.
      5.   When an Alderperson attends a meeting electronically, all votes
shall be by roll call vote. An electronically attending Alderperson must
identify himself or herself by name and be recognized by the Mayor or Committee
Chair before speaking.
      6.   An approved request to participate electronically shall entitle the
Alderperson involved to attend at the subject meeting and any closed sessions
called during that meeting.
      7.   This subsection shall apply in like manner to any subsidiary
committee, subcommittee or other agency of the City that is a "public body"
under the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   H.   Minutes To Reflect Participation: Minutes of all meetings shall reflect
if an Alderperson was physically present or present by means of a video or
audio conference. Lack of such a specification shall be deemed to indicate that
the Alderperson in question was physically present.
(Ord. 2460, 6-26-2016)
   I.   Preservation Of Order: The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and
shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the City Council.
Appeals to the Council shall be decided without debate, and the decision of the
Mayor may be reversed by a two-thirds vote (2/3) of the Alderpersons present.
(1980 Code § 2-31)
   J.   Limit Of Debate: No member or other person shall speak more than twice
upon any question, nor more than ten (10) minutes at one time, except by
permission of the Council.
(1980 Code § 2-32)
   K.   Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful to disturb any regular or
special meeting of the City Council or of any committee thereof, or to behave
in a disorderly manner at any such meeting. Any person violating any provision
of this subsection shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
(1980 Code § 2-37)
   L.   Motion To Adjourn: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and
shall be decided without debate.
(1980 Code § 2-38)
1-7-4: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business at meetings of the City Council shall be as follows:
   A.   Submission for approval of minutes of the proceedings of the previous
regular and special meetings.
   B.   Presentation of claims and accounts.
   C.   Reports of standing committees.
   D.   Reports of officers.
   E.   Reports of special committees.
   F.   Miscellaneous business.
(1980 Code § 2-30)
1-7-5: COMMITTEES:
1-7-5-1: STANDING COMMITTEES:
   A.   Committees Established:
      1.   The following shall be the standing committees of the City Council:
            Finance, Legal, and Audit Committee.
            Public Safety Committee.
            Code Enforcement Committee.
            Liquor Committee.
            Public Works Committee.
            Purchasing Committee.
            Economic Development Committee.
(Ord. 2290, 5-12-2009, eff. 5-12-2009; amd. 2019 Code)
      2.   The standing committees shall consist of the City Council members as
a whole.
      3.   The standing committees shall consist of three (3) or more
Alderpersons and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of
the City Council. But nothing herein shall prevent the Council from time to
time establishing other committees in addition hereto. The duties of the
standing committees are set out in this section.
(Ord. 2290, 5-12-2009, eff. 5-12-2009; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Finance, Legal, Audit And Insurance Committee:
      1.   The Finance, Legal, Audit, and Insurance Committee shall have charge
of all matters pertaining to the financial condition of the City, shall audit
and examine the City Treasurer’s report, shall receive estimates from the other
committees for annual appropriations, shall supervise the preparation of the
annual appropriation ordinance, and shall report to the City Council at each
regular meeting thereof the amount of expenditures made by each department or
agency of the City and the balances remaining unexpended. The committee or any
member thereof shall have the right of immediate access and inspection, at any
time, to any of the books, accounts or records of any officer or employee,
which may relate in any way to the financial condition of the City. The
committee shall also have, upon the close of each fiscal year, the accounts of
all the officers and employees of the City examined, compared and audited by
some certified public accountant. The committee shall also be responsible, in
the first instance, for the consideration of all legal matters relating to the
City and for making of recommendations of actions to be taken by the City
Council upon said legal matters.
      2.   The committee shall also keep the City Council advised on the
insurance which is carried by the City and make recommendations as to insurance
to be carried by the City.
   C.   Public Works Committee:
      1.   The Public Works Committee shall have charge of and direct all
improvements on public thoroughfares and shall have charge of and superintend
the opening, laying out, widening, extending and vacating all streets and
alleys. The committee shall take such steps as are necessary to keep the
streets and alleys of the City in good, passable and safe condition. The
committee shall, from time to time, report to the City Council such changes,
repairs and improvements as have been made and make recommendations as to
future changes, repairs or improvements of streets and alleys which it thinks
should be made.
      2.   The Public Works Committee shall also have charge of all matters
relating to the removal of trees located on public properties or in public ways
and relating to the planting of trees thereon. It shall also be responsible for
the repair, maintenance and replacement of sidewalks for which maintenance the
City is responsible.
      3.   The Public Works Committee shall also have charge of all buildings
and grounds, including parks and the swimming pool, belonging to or occupied by
the City, and the preservation, repair or improvement of the same. The
committee shall also make, from time to time, recommendations as to any
property or building to be leased, acquired, purchased or erected by the City.
      4.   The Public Works Committee shall see that the City is properly
lighted, recommend changes in locations of lights, and report to the City
Council any violations of contract with the electric light company. The
committee, from time to time, shall report its activities to the Council and
shall make recommendations regarding any changes or improvements which it
wishes to make, to be acted upon by the Council.
      5.   The Public Works Committee shall have general supervision of the
sewer and drainage systems of the City, shall supervise all improvements and
extensions thereto, shall, from time to time, report its activities to the City
Council, and shall make, from time to time, recommendations as to repairs and
improvements to be made to said systems.
   D.   Purchasing Committee: The Purchasing Committee shall constitute the
central purchasing agency and authority of the City, and all purchases shall be
made by the committee on behalf of the City, subject, however, to the prior
request or approval of the specific committee for which each purchase is being
made and subject to the compliance with all statutory requirements relating to
each purchase. The committee shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and
regulations relative to the procedure to be followed in presenting proposed or
requested purchases to it for its consideration and may prescribe or supply a
specified form or forms upon which said requested purchases may be submitted to
the committee. However, notwithstanding any prior ordinance to the contrary,
the Mayor and the Finance Chair shall each have the power to approve all
purchase orders requiring immediate action by or on behalf of the City.
   E.   Public Safety Committee:
      1.   The Public Safety Committee stall be in charge of Emergency Services
and Disaster Agency functions of the City, unless said functions are otherwise
modified or limited by other provisions of this Code or the provisions of “The
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.)”, now in
force or as from time to time hereafter amended.
      2.   The Public Safety Committee shall also be charged with the
responsibility of supervising, in conjunction with the Mayor, the Police
Department of the City and the operation thereof.
      3.   The Public Safety Committee shall also have general supervision over
the Fire Department of the City, and all improvements and machinery belonging
thereto. It shall, from time to time, report its activities to the City Council
and make recommendations as to repairs, improvements and purchases of equipment
to be made thereby.
   F.   Liquor Committee: The Liquor Committee shall aid, advise and assist the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner in the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of the law relating to the sale of liquor within the City (see title
4, chapter 2 of this Code).
(Ord. 2290, 5-12-2009, eff. 5-12-2009)
   G.   Economic Development Committee: The Economic Development Committee
shall have general supervision over economic development activities within the
City and shall, from time to time, report its activities to the City Council
and make recommendations thereto.
(Ord. 2290, 5-12-2009, eff. 5-12-2009; amd. 2019 Code)
   H.   Code Enforcement Committee: The Code Enforcement Committee is
responsible for the supervision of all Code enforcement actions within the City
arising under this Code and under the International Property Maintenance Code
(see title 11, chapter 3 of this Code), as adopted and as from time to time
amended (the “Codes”). It shall receive regular reports from the City officials
who investigate claimed violations of the Codes, and shall make recommendations
to the City Council for improvements in the Code enforcement system and the
Codes.
(Ord. 2290, 5-12-2009, eff. 5-12-2009)
1-7-5-2: SPECIAL COMMITTEES:
The Mayor shall appoint such special committees as he may deem necessary or as
may be directed by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 2-29)
1-7-6: PETITIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS IN WRITING:
All petitions and other communications to the City Council shall be in writing.
(1980 Code § 2-34)
1-7-7: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND ACTIONS:
   A.   Sought By Individuals: Whenever some private individual, partnership,
or corporation desires or shall seek the adoption by the City Council of an
ordinance or resolution or desires or shall seek some other action on the part
of the Council, the individual, partnership or corporation shall appear either
in person or by attorney before the Council for the purpose of furnishing the
members of the Council such information on the matter at hand as may be
requested before any consideration will be given to the proposed ordinance,
resolution or action. Any proposed ordinance, resolution, or action sought in
violation of this subsection shall be tabled indefinitely and shall not be
considered by the Council until there is compliance herewith by the person,
partnership or corporation. Any person seeking any action or relief from the
Council, which will only benefit the interest of an individual or group of
individuals, and does not benefit the public generally, shall be wholly
responsible for the presentation of the particular matter and any attorney fees
and expenses incurred in relation thereto. No City official or employee shall
have any responsibility to aid in the presentation of any such matters.
(1980 Code § 2-33)
   B.   Action On Ordinances: No ordinance or ordinances which shall be
presented to the City Council shall be acted upon at the meeting during which
the same is presented but shall be laid over until the next regular meeting of
the Council for consideration and investigation; provided, however, that any
ordinance or ordinances may be passed at the meeting at which the same is
presented by the unanimous consent of the Mayor and of all members of the
Council present at the meeting.
(1980 Code § 2-35)
   C.   Resolutions: Any resolutions submitted to the City Council shall be
reduced to writing before being voted upon.
(1980 Code § 2-28)
CHAPTER 8: CITY CLERK
Section
1-8-1: Election And Term
1-8-2: Bond
1-8-3: Duties
1-8-4: Vacancy In Office
1-8-5: Deputy City Clerk
1-8-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The City Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four-year term and until his
successor is selected and qualified according to law.
(1980 Code § 3-1)
1-8-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Clerk shall execute a
bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the Council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties.
(1980 Code § 3-2)
1-8-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Attend Council Meetings; Minutes And Records:
      1.   The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council and
shall keep in a suitable book, to be styled "The Journal of the City Council",
a full and faithful record of its proceedings, except if the Clerk is the
subject matter of the meeting and his or her presence creates a conflicting
interest. (1980 Code § 3-16)
      2.   The City Clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the Council
meetings.
(1980 Code § 3-3)
   B.   Signature Required; Appoint Collector: The City Clerk shall seal and
attest all contracts of the City, and all licenses, permits and other such
documents as shall require this formality. The City Clerk may, subject to the
approval of the City Council, appoint the City Collector as his deputy for the
purpose of the issuance of licenses and permits.
(1980 Code § 3-4)
   C.   Monies And Accounts:
      1.   The City Clerk shall turn over all monies received by him on behalf
of the City to the City Treasurer promptly on receipt of the same, and with
such monies, he shall give a statement as to the source thereof.
(1980 Code § 3-5)
      2.   The City Clerk shall keep accounts showing all monies received by
him, and the source and disposition thereof, and such other accounts as may be
required by statute or ordinance.
(1980 Code § 3-6)
   D.   Records Kept:
      1.   In addition to the records of ordinances and other records which the
City Clerk is required by statute to keep, he or she shall keep a register of
all licenses and permits issued and the payments thereon, a record showing all
of the officers and regular employees of the City, and such other records as
may be required by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 3-7)
      2.   The City Clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment
and confirmation of all officers of the City, and said record shall be so ruled
and headed that the same shall exhibit the name of the officer elected or
appointed, the date of confirmation or election, the date of commission, and
the date of death, resignation, removal or expiration of term of office, with a
column for remarks.
(1980 Code § 3-11)
      3.   The City Clerk shall file in the Ordinance Book kept thereby the
original executed copy of each ordinance and each resolution passed by the City
Council. The original executed copy shall show the date of the passage of the
ordinance and the date of the signing by the Mayor and attesting by the City
Clerk, together with the date it is published in the newspaper and the date it
is recorded in the Ordinance Book.
(1980 Code § 3-17)
   E.   Documents:
      1.   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to
the City which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer of the
City by the Mayor or Council.
(1980 Code § 3-9)
      2.   The City Clerk shall not allow any books, records or papers or other
instruments of writing to be taken out of his office by any person other than
himself, the Mayor, Alderpersons, and the City Attorney, or upon the order of a
court of competent jurisdiction, or the City Council.
(1980 Code § 3-12)
   F.   Indices: The City Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all
documents and records kept thereby so that ready access thereto and use thereof
may be had.
(1980 Code § 3-10)
   G.   Custodian Of Seal: The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the City
Seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever this is required.
(1980 Code § 3-8)
   H.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the City
Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by
statute or ordinance. As required by section
3-11-26 of the Illinois Municipal Code, he shall publish at least once in a
newspaper published or of general circulation in the City, within ten (10) days
from the receipt thereof, the annual statement of the City Collector.
(1980 Code § 3-13)
1-8-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In case the office of City Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the Mayor
shall appoint a successor City Clerk, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, which appointee shall serve as City Clerk until a new City Clerk is
elected and qualified at the next regular City election for Alderpersons.
(1980 Code § 3-14)
1-8-5: DEPUTY CITY CLERK:
There is hereby created the office of Deputy City Clerk. The City Clerk is
authorized to appoint any adult resident of the City as his or her Deputy
Clerk, with the advice and consent of the City Council, which appointment shall
be for the purpose of the issuance of licenses and permits, of attending
meetings of the City Council and its various committees and subcommittees, and
of acting as City Clerk when the City Clerk is temporarily absent from the
City. The Deputy Clerk shall have such further power and authority as may be
provided by law.
(Ord. 2239, 8-14-2007)
CHAPTER 9: CITY TREASURER
Section
1-9-1: Election And Term
1-9-2: Bond Requirements
1-9-3: Duties
1-9-4: Special Assessment Funds
1-9-5: Vacancy In Office
1-9-6: Deputy City Treasurer
1-9-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The City Treasurer shall be elected and serve for a four-year term and until
his successor is qualified, as is provided by statute.
(1980 Code § 4-1)
1-9-2: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
The City Treasurer shall give bond in such sum as may be required by the City
Council, but the bond shall not be less than the amount of the estimated
revenues and special assessments of the City for the current year, and in no
event less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), with sureties to be
approved by the City Council. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance by the Treasurer of his duties of office, and to indemnify the City
for any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part of the
Treasurer.
(1980 Code § 4-2)
1-9-3: DUTIES:
A   General Duties: The City Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be
prescribed for him by statute or by ordinance. He shall receive all monies paid
to the City either directly from the person paying it or from the hands of such
other officer as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or
orders properly signed by the City Clerk and the Mayor.
(1980 Code § 4-3)
   B.   Deposit Of Funds (see also section
3-1-3 of this Code): The City Treasurer shall deposit the City funds in such
depositories as may be selected from time to time as is provided by law, and he
shall keep the City money separate and distinct from his own and shall not
intermingle his own money with it or make private or personal use of the City
funds.
(1980 Code § 4-4)
   C.   Records And Accounts:
      1.   The City Treasurer shall keep true and correct records showing all
monies received by him, the source from which received, and the purpose for
which it was paid out, and he shall keep a record showing at all times the
financial status of the City.
(1980 Code § 4-5)
      2.   The City Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be
required by the City Council, and shall keep them in the manner required by the
City Council. Said books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection
of any member of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 4-6)
   D.   Reports Required:
      1.   a. The City Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the City Council
showing the state of the finances of the City and the amounts received and
spent during the month, which reports shall be filed. He shall make an annual
report before September 1 of each year showing, with a reasonable degree of
detail, the total amounts of all receipts and expenditures of the City and his
transactions as Treasurer during the preceding year. The Treasurer shall
annually prepare and file with the City Clerk an account of all monies received
and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year. The Treasurer shall
show in such account:
            (1)   All monies received by the City, indicating the total
amounts, in the aggregate, received in each account of the City, with a general
statement concerning the source of such receipts; provided, for the purposes of
this subsection D1a(1), the term "account" shall not be construed to mean each
individual taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user, or such other persons
whose payments to the City are credited to a general account; and
            (2)   All monies paid out by the City, giving the name of each
person to whom paid, on what account paid, and the total amount, in the
aggregate, paid to each person from each such account; and
            (3)   A statement showing the state of the City Treasury at the
close of the fiscal year.
         b.   Upon receipt of such account from the City Treasurer, the City
Clerk shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers
published in the City.
(1980 Code § 4-7)
      2.   Prior to September 1 of each year, the City Treasurer shall file
with the County Collector of Taxes, who collects taxes levied by the City, a
copy of the annual account which is required to be filed with and published by
the City Clerk, together with an affidavit of the Clerk stating that such copy
is a true and correct copy of such annual account filed with him, that it was
published as required by section
3-10-5.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the date of such filing and
publication, and the newspaper in which it was published.
(1980 Code § 4-8)
      3.   It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to report to the City
Clerk any officer authorized to receive money for the use of the City who may
fail to make a return of the monies received by him at the time required by law
or by the ordinances of the City.
(1980 Code § 4-9)
   E.   Register Of Warrants: The City Treasurer shall keep a register of all
warrants, bonds or orders filed with him or paid by him, and all vouchers, as
is required by statute.
(1980 Code § 4-10)
1-9-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS:
All monies received for any special assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the payment of the improvements
for which the assessments were made, and these monies shall be used for no
other purpose except to reimburse the City for monies expended for such
improvements.
(1980 Code § 4-13)
1-9-5: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In case the Office of City Treasurer shall become vacant for any reason, the
Mayor shall appoint a successor City Treasurer, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, which appointee shall serve as City Treasurer until a new
City Treasurer is elected and qualified at the next regular City election for
Alderpersons.
(1980 Code § 4-11)
1-9-6: DEPUTY CITY TREASURER:
There is hereby created the office of Deputy City Treasurer who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council,
for the purpose of acting as City Treasurer when the City Treasurer is
temporarily absent from the City and to assist the City Treasurer in the
performance of the duties of the office and to have such other and further
power and authority as may be provided by law.
(1980 Code § 4-14)
CHAPTER 10: CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
Section
1-10-1: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
1-10-2: Bond Requirements
1-10-3: Compensation
1-10-4: Conservators Of The Peace
1-10-5: Limitation On Power To Contract Or Purchase
1-10-6: Personnel Policy Adopted
1-10-1: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The terms of all elected officers shall commence at the first regular
or special City Council meeting following the receipt of the official election
results from the Iroquois County Clerk of the regular election at which such
officers were elected. The swearing in of such elected officers at such meeting
shall occur immediately following the consideration of the minutes for the next
preceding City Council meeting.
   B.   The terms of all officers elected to fill a vacancy shall commence
immediately upon the qualification of such elected officer for such office in
accordance with the law.
   C.   The terms of all appointive officers and employees shall commence upon
appointment and qualification for said office as provided by law, which
appointment shall be for a period of time ending at twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight on the third Monday of the month of May next ensuing, or until a
successor of the appointee is duly appointed and qualified.
(1980 Code § 13-8) (Ord. 2612, 5-25-2021)
1-10-2: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Each head of a department and all officials or employees handling funds of the
City shall, at the beginning of each fiscal year, enter into a bond to the
City, conditioned on the faithful discharge of his or her duties according to
law. Each bond shall be in the principal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or in a principal amount equal to twice the amount of funds which
said official or employee will normally have in his or her possession,
whichever is the greater in amount.
(1980 Code § 13-2)
1-10-3: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Officers And Employees:
      1.   Mayor: The salary of the Mayor is hereby fixed at the sum of twelve
thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year, payable in equal monthly installments.
In addition thereto, the Mayor shall receive for all Council and committee
meetings the same rate of compensation as the Alderpersons receive.
      2.   Alderpersons: Each Alderperson shall receive for his or her services
sixty five dollars ($65.00) for each regular meeting of the City Council and
for each claims committee meeting and for each special meeting and adjourned
meeting attended, and forty five dollars ($45.00) each for all other committee
meetings attended, payable monthly.
(Ord. 2273, 8-12-2007)
      3.   City Clerk: The salary of the City Clerk is hereby fixed at the sum
of three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per year, payable in equal
monthly installments.
(Ord. 2275, 10-29-2008)
      4.   City Treasurer: The salary of the City Treasurer is hereby fixed at
the sum of three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per year, payable
monthly; provided, however, that the Treasurer shall receive an additional
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each annual report and accounting when made and
published according to law.
(Ord. 2462, 8-23-2016)
      5.   City Attorney: Retainer of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year
for full Council meeting or one hundred ninety dollars ($190.00) per hour.
(1980 Code § 14-5)
      6.   Building Official (see also section
2-1-7 of this Code): The salary of the Building Official of the City is hereby
established in the amount of twenty four dollars ($24.00) per hour.
(Ord. 1794, 9-5-1995)
      7.   Judges Of Election: All judges of election at City elections shall
each be paid the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for their
services.
(1980 Code § 14-6)
      8.   Other Compensation: All other officers and employees whose salaries
or compensation is not fixed by ordinance shall receive such salaries or
compensation as the City Council, by resolution. shall from time to time
provide.
(1980 Code § 14-7)
   B.   Expenses: The officers and officials of the City shall be compensated
for the expense of office, including meals, lodging, travel and mileage, when
using a personal vehicle when attending to the business of the City, and shall
be compensated for mileage at such rate as is and may from time to time be
established for tax purposes by the Internal Revenue Service.
(1980 Code § 14-10)
   C.   Temporary Suspensions: Nothing in this Code shall create an absolute
right in any official or employee to receive his or her entire annual salary,
or other compensation, where it is necessary on the part of the City Council to
make a temporary suspension of the services of one or more officials or
employees because of the lack of City funds with which to pay for the suspended
services.
(1980 Code § 14-8)
   D.   Work-Related Accidents:
      1.   All employees of the City sustaining work-related accidents shall be
compensated during the incapacity of said employee on account of said accident,
if the incapacity is of the duration of eight (8) weeks or less, and if the
duration of the incapacity exceeds eight (8) weeks, for the first eight (8)
weeks of the incapacity, on the following basis: a) each employee shall, during
said period of time, receive from the City such sums which, together with all
workers' compensation payments for loss of time or wages during said period and
together with all temporary disability pension payments during said period,
shall equal the normal and regular basic compensation being received by the
employee; b) to be eligible for the payments, each employee shall furnish to
the City Collector the certificate in writing of a physician duly licensed to
practice medicine in the State of Illinois certifying that the employee is
unable to fulfill and perform his regular duties on account of a work- related
accident, and the employee shall also make in writing an application to the
City, in which application the employee shall agree to reimburse the City for
such sums received from workers' compensation and pension funds during said
period, which sums are compensations for the employee's loss of time, should
the City in the first instance pay the employee during his disability his full
and regular salary or compensation.
      2.   The intent of this subsection is to provide the injured employee
during said period of time with financial stability, and the further intent of
this subsection is that during said period of time, the total receipts of the
employee from all sources for loss of time shall equal but not exceed the
regular and normal compensation (overtime excluded) being received by the
employee at the time of the accident.
(1980 Code § 14-9)
1-10-4: CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
The Mayor, members of the City Council, members of the Fire Department, as well
as every member of the Police Department are hereby declared to be conservators
of the peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to the conservators
of the peace by statute.
(1980 Code § 13-10)
1-10-5: LIMITATION ON POWER TO CONTRACT OR PURCHASE:
No committee of the City Council, nor any member of the City Council, nor any
other officer or employee of the City shall expend or contract for the
expenditure of any monies belonging to the City, or incur liability on the part
of the City, without the prior authority of the City Council so to do, or
unless authorized so to do by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 2-24)
1-10-6: PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED:
The City Personnel Policy, and any amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out at length herein. Three (3) copies are on file in the
Office of the City Clerk for public use and inspection.
(2019 Code)
ARTICLE A: CITY COLLECTOR
Section
1-10A-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-10A-2: Oath And Bond
1-10A-3: Duties
1-10A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of City Collector, an executive office of
the City. The City Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
consent of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 5-6)
1-10A-2: OATH AND BOND:
The City Collector shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
execute the oath required by law and shall also make, execute and give a bond
in the penal sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), with sureties to
be approved by the City Council for the faithful performance of the duties of
his office and for the full accounting for and payment of all monies received
by the Collector, according to the law and the ordinances of the City.
(1980 Code § 5-7)
1-10A-3: DUTIES:
   A.   General Duties: The City Collector shall collect all water bills, sewer
rentals, garbage bills, special assessments, and all other sums and monies due
the City, the collection of which is not specifically imposed upon the City
Clerk, City Treasurer, or other officials of the City government.
   B.   Annual Statement: As required by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-125, between April 1
and 10 of each year, the City Collector shall file with the City Clerk a
statement of: 1) all the monies collected by him during the year; 2) the
particular warrant, special assessment, or account on which collected; 3) the
balance of money uncollected on all warrants in his possession; and 4) the
balance remaining uncollected at the time of the return on all warrants which
he returned to the City Clerk during the preceding fiscal year.
(1980 Code § 5-6)
   C.   Deposits And Records:
      1.   The City Collector shall deposit daily all monies collected by him
in such bank as the City Council from time to time may designate, and said
deposits shall be made in the name of the City Treasurer, for which the
Collector shall take duplicate deposit slips, one of which shall be filed with
his reports to the City Council.
      2.   The Collector shall annually, between August 1 and 15 of each year,
file with the City Clerk and with the City Treasurer a verified report of all
monies collected by him during the year, and of all accounts and monies due the
City and uncollected.
   D.   Additional Duties: The Collector shall also perform such other and
additional duties as the City Council or Mayor may from time to time designate
or prescribe.
(1980 Code § 5-8)
ARTICLE B: CITY ATTORNEY
Section
1-10B-1: Office Created; Appointment
1-10B-2: Powers And Duties
1-10B-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of City Attorney, an executive office of the
City. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 5-3)
1-10B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City and shall
render advice on all legal questions affecting the City whenever requested to
do so by any City official.
(1980 Code § 5-3)
   B.   The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or
actions at law or equity to which the City may be a party, or in which it may
be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the City on
behalf of the City, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the
City, or upon the verified or sworn complaint of any other person when, in his
judgment, the public interest shall require the same to be prosecuted.
(1980 Code § 5-4)
   C.   The City Attorney shall not be required to prosecute any suit or action
arising under the ordinances of the City when, upon investigation of the same,
he shall become satisfied that the complaint was instituted maliciously or
vexatiously, and without probable cause; and he shall be authorized to
discontinue such suit or proceeding upon such terms as may be just and
equitable.
   D.   The City Attorney shall have the power to adjust all pending litigation
and to settle the same upon the authority of the Mayor and City Council.
(1980 Code § 5-5)
ARTICLE C: BUILDING OFFICIAL
Section
1-10C-1: Position Created; Appointment
1-10C-2: Duties
1-10C-3: Enforcement Powers
Cross-reference:
   Compensation, see section
1-10-3 and 2-1-7
   Generally, see section
12-3-1 
1-10C-1: POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of Building Official who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 5-13)
1-10C-2: DUTIES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to see to the enforcement
of all ordinance provisions relating to buildings or zoning and to inspect all
buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with the City ordinances.
(1980 Code § 5-14)
   B.   The appointive official designated by the City to administer and
enforce the zoning ordinance of the City, whether he be called a Building
Officer, Building Inspector, Building Official, or whatever his title, shall
attend each meeting of the Plan Commission and each meeting of any Zoning
Commission.
(1980 Code, § 12-13)
1-10C-3: ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
   A.   Stop Work Order: The Building Official shall have the power to order
all work or construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the City
stopped when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any
ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning ordinance. Work shall
not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written
permission of the official; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it
shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such written stop
order may be served by any police officer.
(1980 Code § 5-15)
   B.   Entry Powers: The Building Official shall have the power to make or
cause to be made entry into any building or premises where the work of
altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure is going on for
the purpose of making inspections at any reasonable hour.
(1980 Code § 5-16)
   C.   Penalty For Violating Stop Work Order: Any firm, person or corporation
who shall continue work in violation of a stop order of the Building Official
shall be punished as set forth in section
1-4-1- of this Code.
(1980 Code § 5-17)
ARTICLE D: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
Section
1-10D-1: Position Created; Appointment; Building Official May Serve As
1-10D-2: Powers
1-10D-3: Inspections
1-10D-1: POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT; BUILDING OFFICIAL MAY SERVE AS:
There is hereby created the position of Electrical Inspector, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, and who may be
the same person as the Building Official. In the event of the failure to
appoint an Electrical Inspector, the Building Official shall act as and be the
Electrical Inspector.
(1980 Code § 40-10)
1-10D-2: POWERS:
The Electrical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose
of making an inspection or test of the electrical equipment therein; and he
shall have the authority to enforce all the ordinance provisions relating to
electrical wiring and equipment. He shall have the power to cause the current
in any wire or conduit to be turned off whenever this is necessary in an
emergency for the protection of life and property. If necessary, he may seek a
court order requiring such inspection and the compliance with the provisions of
title 11, chapter 7 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 40-11)
1-10D-3: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The Electrical Inspector shall make all inspections necessary to see to
the enforcement of the City ordinances, and no electrical wiring shall be
covered until it has been inspected.
(1980 Code § 40-12)
   B.   The Electrical Inspector shall give a certificate of approval to the
owner or person in charge of the premises which he has inspected where he finds
that the electrical apparatus and wiring therein fully comply with the
ordinances of the City.
(1980 Code § 40-13)
CHAPTER 11: ETHICS
Section
1-11-1: State Regulations Adopted
1-11-2: Definitions
1-11-3: Interpretation
1-11-4: Prohibited Acts
1-11-5: Penalties
1-11-6: Amendments
1-11-7: Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-11-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 430/10-40 of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the City to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
(2019 Code)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
(2019 Code)
1-11-3: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of City officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
(2019 Code)
1-11-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Gifts:
      1.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act by any officer or any employee of the City is hereby
prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
any officer or employee of the City under the act is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Political Activities: The participation in political activities
prohibited under the act by any officer or employee of the City is hereby
prohibited.
(2019 Code)
1-11-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
(2019 Code)
1-11-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by the City shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the City.
(2019 Code)
1-11-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the City if the act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   B.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act, as adopted by
this chapter, shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 12: ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
1-12-1: FOIA Officers Designated; General Provisions
1-12-2: FOIA Officer Training
1-12-3: Written Request
1-12-4: Retrieval Of Request
1-12-5: Fees
1-12-6: Denial Of Request
1-12-7: Directories, Subdivision Diagram And Records Catalog
1-12-1: FOIA OFFICERS DESIGNATED; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The Administrative Assistant of the City is hereby designated as the FOIA
Officer to whom all initial requests for access to the records the City are to
be referred. Such requests are to be made at the Office of the City at 201 N.
Brianna Dr., P.O. Box 338, Watseka, Illinois 60970, between the hours of eight
thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., Monday through
Friday. In the event that the Administrative Assistant is not available during
the times described above, the City Attorney is designated as the Deputy FOIA
Officer to whom such initial requests are to be made. Except in instances when
records are furnished immediately, the FOIA Officer, or his/her designees,
shall receive requests submitted to the City under the Freedom of Information
Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.), ensure that the City responds to requests in a
timely fashion, and issue responses under the act. The FOIA Officer shall
develop a list of documents or categories of records that the City shall
immediately disclose upon request.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
1-12-2: FOIA OFFICER TRAINING:
The FOIA Officer and Deputy FOIA Officer shall, within six (6) months after
January 1, 2010, successfully complete an electronic training curriculum to be
developed by the Public Access Counselor of the State of Illinois and
thereafter successfully complete an annual training program. Whenever a new
Freedom of Information Officer is designated by the City, that person shall
successfully complete the electronic training curriculum within thirty (30)
days after assuming the position.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
1-12-3: WRITTEN REQUEST:
Upon receiving a request for a public record, the FOIA Officer shall:
   A.   Note the date the City receives the written request;
   B.   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a
notation of that date on the written request;
   C.   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including
all documents submitted with the request, until there has been compliance with
or denial of the request; and
   D.   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the
response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy of
other communications.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
1-12-4: RETRIEVAL OF REQUEST:
Any records which are the subject of a request under the Freedom of Information
Act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored, by the FOIA Officer,
or by an employee of the City acting under the direction of the FOIA Officer.
In no event shall records be retrieved by the party requesting them or by any
person who is not employed by the City.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
1-12-5: FEES:
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified
or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the FOIA Officer pursuant
to section 6(b) of the Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/6(b)). The City
shall maintain a written schedule of current fees in the City Office. The fees
so charged shall reflect the actual cost of copying the records and the cost of
certifying copies, if certification is requested.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
1-12-6: DENIAL OF REQUEST:
In the event that a request to inspect City records is denied by the FOIA
Officer, the denial may be appealed to the Public Access Counselor of the State
of Illinois.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
1-12-7: DIRECTORIES, SUBDIVISION DIAGRAM AND RECORDS CATALOG:
The City Clerk shall prepare: a) a City Information Directory; b) a block
diagram of the functional subdivisions of the City; c) a City Records
Directory; and d) a Records Catalogue, all of which shall be substantially in
the same form as the documents attached to ordinance 2325 and made a part
hereof as exhibits A, B, C, and D. This information shall also be posted on the
City's website, if any.
(Ord. 2325, 7-27-2010)
CHAPTER 13: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OFFICIAL MAP
Section
1-13-1: Official Comprehensive Plan And Official Map Described
1-13-2: Copies On File And Available
1-13-3: Initiating And Amending Plans And Maps; Adoption
1-13-1: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OFFICIAL MAP DESCRIBED:
An official comprehensive plan, or any amendment thereof or addition thereto,
proposed by the Plan Commission shall be effective in the City and contiguous
area herein prescribed only after its formal adoption by the City Council. Such
plan shall be advisory and in and of itself shall not be construed to regulate
or control the use of private property in any way, except as to such part
thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the City Council.
At any time or times, before or after the adoption of the Official
Comprehensive Plan by the City Council, the Council may designate by ordinance
an Official Map, which map may consist of the whole area included within the
Official Comprehensive Plan or one or more separate geographical or functional
parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area
within one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the City.
Such map or maps shall be made a part of the said ordinance, which ordinance
shall specifically state standard requirements of the City relating to size of
streets, alleys, public ways, parks, playgrounds, other public grounds, and
ways for public service facilities; the kind and quantity of materials which
shall be used in the construction of streets, and alleys; and the kind and
quality of materials for public service facilities as may be consistent with
Illinois Commerce Commission or industry standards, and shall contain the
standards required for drainage and sanitary sewers and collection and
treatment of sewage. The map shall be drawn to scale, shall be reasonably
accurate, and shall show north point, section lines and numbers, and streams.
(1980 Code § 12-5)
1-13-2: COPIES ON FILE AND AVAILABLE:
The Official Comprehensive Plan and the ordinance or ordinances, including the
Official Map, shall be placed on file with the City Clerk and shall be
available at all times during business hours for public inspection. Copies of
said plan, all ordinances implementing the same and including the Official Map,
shall be made available to all interested parties upon payment of such sum as
the City Council shall determine to be adequate to reimburse the General Fund
of the City for the cost of printing and distributing the same.
(1980 Code § 12-5)
1-13-3: INITIATING AND AMENDING PLANS AND MAPS; ADOPTION:
   A.   The City Council may initiate plans and maps by requesting the Plan
Commission to prepare an Official Comprehensive Plan and recommend the same, or
may originate an Official Comprehensive Plan, or a part thereof, or an
amendment thereto, and may refer same or suggested changes in an existing
Comprehensive Plan to the Plan Commission for its consideration and
recommendation thereon. No Comprehensive Plan or amendment thereto shall be
adopted that has not been submitted to the Plan Commission.
   B.   The City Council may adopt parts of a Comprehensive Plan recommended by
the Plan Commission without adopting the entire Comprehensive Plan as
recommended, or may modify or amend portions of a recommended Comprehensive
Plan without a re-reference of same to the Plan Commission, and may adopt such
Comprehensive Plan, as modified or amended. Such Comprehensive Plan, when
adopted, shall be the Official Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof of the City.
   C.   Upon submission by the City Council of any suggested Comprehensive
Plan, part thereof, or amendment to an existing Comprehensive Plan to the Plan
Commission for consideration and recommendation, the City Council may require a
report thereon from the Plan Commission with its recommendation within ninety
(90) days from the date of such submission, and if the Plan Commission shall
fail to make such report within such ninety (90) days, then the City Council
may proceed to consider such Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, or amendment
to an existing Comprehensive Plan, for adoption, including arranging for and
holding of a public hearing thereon in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter contained in the same manner as if the Plan Commission had made its
recommendation.
   D.   An Official Comprehensive Plan, or any amendment thereof, shall not be
adopted by the City until notice and opportunity for public hearing have first
been afforded in the manner herein provided. Upon submission of a Comprehensive
Plan by the Plan Commission, or a proposed amendment to an existing....
   E.   Within ninety (90) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the City
Council, after consideration of the recommendation of the Plan Commission and
such information as shall have been derived from the hearing, shall either
adopt the Comprehensive Plan or amendment in whole or in part or reject the
entire Comprehensive Plan or amendment. If adopted, the City Council shall
enact an ordinance including a map or maps as hereinbefore provided. In
adopting an Official Comprehensive Plan, except as herein otherwise provided,
the City Council shall be subject to the same limitations as to subject matter
as apply to the Plan Commission. If at the expiration of such ninety (90) days,
the City Council has taken no formal action, the Comprehensive Plan or
amendment thereto may thereafter not be acted upon by the City Council without
again complying with the conditions of notice and hearing heretofore provided.
   F.   No Official Map, or amendment or addition thereto, shall be ground for
rejection of any plat of subdivision or resubdivision by the City Council, if
application for final approval of such subdivision or resubdivision is filed
with the City Council fifteen (15) days or more prior to the date on which the
ordinance approving the Official Map, or amendment or addition thereto, is
adopted.
   G.   The Comprehensive Plan, or amendment, shall become effective upon the
expiration of ten (10) days after the date of filing notice of the adoption of
such Comprehensive Plan, or amendment, with the County Recorder of Deeds.
Whenever used in this section, the words "plans" or "Comprehensive Plan" shall
be deemed to mean and include, where applicable, an Official Map or Maps.
(1980 Code § 12-6)
TITLE 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1: PLAN COMMISSION
Section
2-1-1: Commission Created; Composition; Appointment
2-1-2: Terms Of Office
2-1-3: Organization
2-1-4: Powers And Duties
2-1-5: Public Improvements
2-1-6: Staff And Technical Advisors
2-1-7: Compensation
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created a Plan Commission for the City which shall consist of
eight (8) members to include the following:
   A.   The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the Plan Commission, with
power to vote.
   B.   Seven (7) other members, citizens of the City or residents of territory
contiguous to the City and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond
the corporate limits, as is provided by statute, shall be appointed by the
Mayor, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the Plan
Commission, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 12-1)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Ex officio members shall serve for the term of their elective office. Of the
seven (7) appointed citizens, each shall serve for a period of seven (7) years,
on a staggered term basis, with the term of one member expiring at the end of
each fiscal year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms
only.
(1980 Code § 12-2)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan
Commission shall meet, organize and elect such officers as it may deem
necessary, and adopt and later change or alter, rules and regulations of
organization and procedure consistent with City ordinances and State laws. The
commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open
at all times to public inspection. The commission shall also file an annual
report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.
(1980 Code § 12-3)
   B.   The Plan Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting of the
commission each month, at a time and place to be fixed or determined by the
commission.
(1980 Code § 12-12)
2-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan of
public improvements looking to the present and future development and growth of
the City. Such a plan, after its adoption by the City Council, will be known as
the Official Plan. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference
to streets, alleys, and public grounds within the corporate limits and in
contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/
2) miles from such limits, and not included in any city or village, such
requirements to be effective whenever the lands shall be subdivided after the
adoption of the plan (see title 1, chapter 13 of this Code).
   B.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to time, such
changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the City
Council or by the Plan Commission.
   C.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time plans
and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the Official
Plan.
   D.   To give aid to the City officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, to further the
making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the
Official Plan.
   E.   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities
for the general purpose of public understanding.
   F.   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   G.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by statute.
   H.   To act as a Zoning Commission on all applications for special use under
title 12, chapter 3, article C of this Code and applications for amendment
under title 12, chapter 3, article D of this Code.
(1980 Code § 12-4)
2-1-5: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission, for its consideration, a copy
of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report
necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 12-10)
2-1-6: STAFF AND TECHNICAL ADVISORS:
The commission may, at the direction of the City Council, employ necessary help
whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by
appropriation made by the City Council from public funds. If the Plan
Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it
may be done upon authority from the City Council and appropriations by the City
Council therefor.
(1980 Code § 12-11)
2-1-7: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the Zoning Committee and Plan Commission and the enforcing
officer appointed to administer the zoning ordinance of the City (see also
subsection
1-10-36A of this Code) shall be paid the sum of fifty five dollars ($55.00) for
each meeting. The Building Inspector shall be paid twenty four dollars ($24.00)
per hour.
(1980 Code § 12-14)
CHAPTER 2: BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Section
2-2-1: Board Created; Appointment
2-2-2: Terms Of Office
2-2-3: Qualifications
2-2-4: Oath And Bond
2-2-5: Removal From Office
2-2-6: Powers And Duties Generally
2-2-7: Appointments And Hires
2-2-8: Vacant Positions
2-2-9: Compensation
2-2-10: Advertising For Applicants
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners which shall
consist of three (3) members. The members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners are appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council. No such appointments shall be made by any Mayor within thirty
(30) days before the expiration of his term of office.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018; amd. Ord. 2687, 9-26-2023)
2-2-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve three-
year terms and until their successors have been appointed and duly qualified.
The members shall serve staggered terms with not more than three (3) terms
commencing in any given year.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
2-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be residents of
Iroquois County and otherwise meet the qualifications of section 10-2.1-3 of
the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
2-2-4: OATH AND BOND:
Each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall take an oath of
office and shall execute and deliver to the City a bond in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the performance of the duties of his office.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
2-2-5: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be subject to
removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the City.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
2-2-6: POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall have all powers, duties and authority concerning the hiring, appointment,
promotion, demotion, removal, suspension or discharge over full-time sworn
members of the Police and Fire Departments as provided in the provisions of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners Act (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.) and
shall have the power to make rules and regulations as long as they do not
conflict with the ordinances of the City.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
2-2-7: APPOINTMENTS AND HIRES:
   A.   Full-Time Sworn Police And Fire Department Members: Except as otherwise
provided in this Code, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint
all full-time sworn officers of the Police and Fire Departments pursuant to the
provisions of Article 10, Division 2.1, of the Illinois Municipal Code. All
full-time sworn members of the Police Department must be certified by the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board before assuming active duty.
   B.   Lateral Hires Of Police Officers:
      1.   In addition to the original appointment list established pursuant to
the provisions of subsection A, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners are
also authorized to appoint full-time sworn members of the Police Department who
have previously served as full-time or part-time sworn officers of a regular
police department in any municipal, county, or State law enforcement agency,
provided they are certified by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards
Board and have been with their respective law enforcement agency for the past
three (3) years.
      2.   Applicants as lateral hires shall be ranked in order of their
relative excellence, experience and qualifications as determined by the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners.
      3.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is authorized to
establish the application process for lateral hires which shall include, but is
not limited to, the submission of a written application, oral interview(s), a
background investigation, a physical examination and a psychological
examination. However, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is authorized
to waive the physical and psychological examinations.
      4.   All lateral hires shall serve a one-year probationary period.
   C.   Officers: The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall elect a
chairman and vice chairman from its members to serve during the municipal
fiscal year. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may employ a Secretary
or may designate one of its own members to act as such. The Secretary shall
keep the minutes of the board's proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers
pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as the board shall
prescribe.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018; amd. Ord. 2642, 4-26-2022)
2-2-8: VACANT POSITIONS:
   A.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners has the discretion to fill
any vacancy through either the original appointment list or through the lateral
hire application process. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is
authorized to select any of the four (4) highest ranking candidates on the
original appointment list or the most qualified lateral hire applicant.
   B.   All hires shall be at the patrol officer level, with seniority
commencing on the first working day as a member of the Police Department.
   C.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall establish an
expiration date for the original appointment list and is authorized to prepare
a new original appointment list even if a vacancy exists. All applications for
lateral hires shall be retained by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
for two (2) years.
   D.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is not required to appoint a
lateral hire if a vacancy exists.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
2-2-9: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be compensated
for each meeting attended at the rate of fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per
meeting, said compensation to be paid by the City.
(1980 Code, § 12-8; amd. Ord. 2642, 4-26-2022)
2-2-10: ADVERTISING FOR APPLICANTS:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall periodically advertise for
entry level and lateral hire applicants.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
CHAPTER 3: LIBRARY AND LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Section
2-3-1: Library Established
2-3-2: Library Board Of Directors
2-3-3: Rules And Regulations; Violations
2-3-1: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
A public library and reading room shall be maintained in the City for the use
and benefit of the inhabitants of the City. The Library shall be governed by a
Board of Library Directors.
(1980 Code § 11-1)
2-3-2: LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
   A.   Composition; Appointment And Term: The board shall consist of nine (9)
directors to be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City
Council. The term of the Library Directors shall be three (3) years, staggered
so that the terms expire each year.
(1980 Code §§ 11-1-1, 11-1-2)
   B.   Organization: The Library Directors shall select a President and
Secretary and shall meet at such time as the Library Board may determine.
(1980 Code § 11-3)
   C.   Duties And Functions:
      1.   The Library Board shall have charge of the operation of the City
Library and of the expenditure of all library funds.
      2.   Each year it shall file a report with the City Council containing,
among other things, an itemized statement of the expenses anticipated for the
coming year, and it shall also report in writing to the Council, with
reasonable detail, its receipts or revenues and its disbursements for the last
fiscal year.
      3.   The board shall perform such other duties and shall have such other
powers as is by law provided.
(1980 Code § 11-4)
2-3-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS; VIOLATIONS:
The Board of Library Directors shall have the power to make any reasonable
rules and regulations governing the use of the library facilities. Any person
violating any such rule shall be punished as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 11-5)
CHAPTER 4: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
Section
2-4-1: Established
2-4-2: Officers
2-4-3: Powers And Responsibilities
2-4-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a foreign fire insurance board. The foreign fire
insurance board shall consist of not more than seven (7) and not less than thee
(3) trustees, as set forth in the bylaws of the foreign fire insurance board,
and each shall be a member of the fire department. The fire chief shall be a
trustee, who shall hold office by virtue of rank. The other trustees shall be
elected at large by the sworn members of the fire department at a meeting to be
held in June of an odd numbered year, but the terms of office shall be not less
than two (2) years and not more than four (4) years, as set forth in the bylaws
of the foreign fire insurance board. Vacancies on the board shall be filled in
the same manner as an original election at a meeting to be held no later than
sixty (60) days following the vacancy.
(Ord. 2606, 3-23-2021)
2-4-2: OFFICERS:
The trustees of the foreign fire insurance board shall elect from their
membership a chairman and a treasurer. The election of officers shall be held
annually at a meeting to be held in June. The treasurer of the foreign fire
insurance board shall give a sufficient bond to the City, to be approved by the
mayor, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties under the
Watseka City Code and the rules and regulations established by the board.
(Ord. 2606, 3-23-2021)
2-4-3: POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The foreign fire insurance board, and its officers, shall possess all powers
and responsibilities as set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 and 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2.
The foreign fire insurance board is authorized to make all needful rules and
regulations with respect to the board and management of money appropriated to
the board. The officers of the foreign fire insurance board shall develop and
maintain a listing of those items the board feels are appropriate expenditures
for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the fire department. All expenditures
of money shall be approved by a majority of the trustees of the foreign fire
insurance board then holding office.
(Ord. 2606, 3-23-2021)
TITLE 3: FINANCES AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
Section
3-1-1: Municipal And Fiscal Year
3-1-2: Surety Bonds
3-1-3: Deposit Of Funds; Depositories
3-1-4: Claims
3-1-5: Inventory
3-1-6: Annual Audit
3-1-7: Sale And Disposal Of City Property
3-1-8: Persons Indebted To The City of Watseka
3-1-1: MUNICIPAL AND FISCAL YEAR:
The municipal or fiscal year of the City shall commence on May 1 in each year
and end at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the following April 30.
(1980 Code § 13-1)
3-1-2: SURETY BONDS:
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the City is required as a prerequisite to
exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of any
license or permit or the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on such
bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in the State
of Illinois as a surety company, unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
(1980 Code § 13-3)
3-1-3: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; DEPOSITORY:
A. Deposit Of Funds: The City Treasurer shall keep all funds and monies in his
custody belonging to the City in such places of deposit or investment as may be
designated by the City Council.
   B.   Depositories:
      1.   When a bank or other financial institution has been designated as a
depository, it shall continue as such until fourteen (14) days have elapsed
after a new depository is designated and has qualified by meeting the
requirements of this subsection.
      2.   When a new depository is designated, the City Council shall notify
the sureties of the Treasurer of that fact in writing at least seven (7) days
before the transfer of funds, if there is a transfer of funds. The Treasurer
shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or monies that he
deposits in a designated bank or financial institution while the funds and
monies are so deposited.
      3.   a.   If Municipal funds or monies are deposited in a designated bank
or financial institution, but not in a wholly insured interest-bearing
investment account, the amount of such deposits shall not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the capital stock and surplus of said institution, and the
Treasurer shall be responsible for funds or monies deposited therein in excess
of this limitation.
         b.   No such bank or financial institution shall be qualified to
receive such Municipal funds or monies until it has furnished the City Council
with copies of the last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities
which it is required to furnish to the auditor of public accounts or to the
comptroller of currency. Each bank or financial institution designated as a
depository for such funds or monies shall, while acting as the depository,
furnish the City Council with a copy of all statements of resources and
liabilities which it is required to furnish to the auditor of public accounts
or the comptroller of currency.
         c.   Investments in the name of the City in interest-bearing savings
accounts in banks, building and loan associations, or other financial
institutions, which are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation and which are made at the direction of the City Council, shall not
be considered in determining whether deposits in excess of seventy five percent
(75%) of the capital stock and surplus of the depository bank or financial
institution has been made.
(1980 Code § 4-12)
3-1-4: CLAIMS:
No bills, claims or expenditures of any kind or nature shall be paid and no
order drawn on the City Treasurer therefor, unless such bills or claims shall
have been regularly passed on and allowed by the City Council, specifying upon
what fund the order shall be drawn.
(1980 Code § 13-4)
3-1-5: INVENTORY:
Each head of each department shall, semi-annually, on May 1 and on November 1
of each year, submit to the City Council an inventory of the equipment,
supplies, materials, and invoices on hand.
(1980 Code § 13-5)
3-1-6: ANNUAL AUDIT:
The records and accounts of the City shall be fully audited at the end of each
fiscal year by some impartial accountant selected by the City Council for that
purpose, which audit shall be made in accordance with “The Illinois Municipal
Auditing Law (65 ILCS 5/8-8-1 et seq.)”.
(1980 Code § 13-7)
3-1-7: SALE AND DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY:
The head of each department of the City shall report to the appropriate
committee of the City Council any unused or surplus City property which may be
sold or disposed of. Such property then may be sold or disposed of as follows:
   A.   Where the committee in charge of such department shall then determine
the reasonable value of such unused or surplus property, and where the value of
such property is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the head of such
department is hereby authorized to sell and dispose of such property in a
reasonable manner with the approval of the committee and the Mayor.
   B.   Where the value of the property is two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) or less, the sale or disposition shall be approved by a motion of
the City Council by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote.
   C.   Where the value of such property exceeds the amount of two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), such property shall be sold or disposed of as
otherwise provided by law.
(1980 Code § 13-5.1)
3-1-8: PERSONS INDEBTED TO THE CITY OF WATSEKA:
   A.   No person or entity shall be issued any permit or license required
under this City Code, nor shall any permit or license be renewed, if at the
time of said application or renewal that person or entity, including any of
its, is in the arrears of any debt due and owing the City of Watseka.
   B.   No permit or license required under this City Code shall be issued or
renewed for any person or entity for or in relation to any real property
located in the City of Watseka if, at the time of said application or renewal,
there is arrearage of any debt due and owing the City of Watseka arising from
or in relation to that real property whether or not incurred by or owed by the
person or entity seeking a permit or license, or its renewal.
   C.   For purpose of this section, the word "debt" shall mean any amounts
assessed or to be remitted to the City of Watseka including, but not limited
to, fees, licenses, permits, fines, penalties, judgments, taxes, utility
charges, or for work performed by the City or its agents on real property,
whether or not memorialized in a lien. Unless a date is otherwise specified in
this City Code, amounts shall be deemed in arrears if they are not satisfied
within thirty (30) days following the invoice, billing, notice, assessment, or
accrual.
(Ord. 2629, 11-23-2021)
CHAPTER 2: CONTRACTS
ARTICLE A: PUBLIC CONTRACTS
Section
3-2A-1: Contractual Liabilities; Limitation
3-2A-2: Public Works Contracts
3-2A-3: Method Of Advertisement
3-2A-4: Contents Of Advertisement
3-2A-5: Receiving Bids
3-2A-6: Reservations
3-2A-7: Bid Bond
3-2A-8: Non-Responsive Bids
3-2A-9: Evaluation Factors
3-2A-10: Withdrawal Of Bids
3-2A-11: Execution Of Contract Documents
3-2A-12: Change Orders
3-2A-13: State And Federal Procurement Standards
3-2A-1: CONTRACTUAL LIABILITIES; LIMITATION:
Except as otherwise authorized by law, no contract shall be entered into, nor
any expense incurred, unless a prior appropriation has been made for such
contract or expense.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-2: PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
No contract for any work or other public improvement, the expense of which will
exceed $25,000.00, shall be entered into or commenced unless by: (a) contract
let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids in the manner
prescribed herein; or (b) a vote of two-thirds of all aldermen then holding
office. Nothing herein shall require a contract to be awarded after advertising
for bids when: (i) the contract will be paid for in whole or in part by special
assessment or special taxation, (ii) the contract is for architectural,
engineering, or land surveying services, or (iii) advertising for bids is not
required by law.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-3: METHOD OF ADVERTISEMENT:
Bids shall be advertised at least ten (10) days before the due date for
responding to the call by any one or all of the following means: (a) by
publishing a call to bidders in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Watseka; (b) by publishing a call to bidders on the City of Watseka’s
website; or (c) by sending a call to bidders to all contractors that have
registered with the Building Official to receive such advertisements with
respect to the type of work to be performed provided not less than three (3)
contractors have registered therefor.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-4: CONTENTS OF ADVERTISEMENT:
A call to bidders shall contain such information as would allow a reasonable
person in the industry to understand the general nature and conditions of the
project, directions to obtain the contract documents, instructions for
submitting bids, and any other matters deemed pertinent by the City for
contractors to properly and efficiently respond to the call.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-5: RECEIVING BIDS:
All competitive bids must be sealed by the bidder and must be opened by a City
official or agent at a public bid opening at which the contents of the bids
shall be announced. Each bidder shall receive at least three (3) days’ notice
of the time and place of the bid opening.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-6: RESERVATIONS:
A call to bidders shall not create any legal obligation on behalf of the City
to evaluate any bid that is submitted, or to enter into any contract with a
contractor submitting a bid. At any time before the City awards a contract, it
may (a) cancel or modify a call to bidders or the contract documents in whole
or in part; (b) reject any or all bids submitted; (c) waive non-material
formalities and technicalities deemed appropriate; (d) postpone a bid opening;
(e) issue a call for new bids; and/or (f) award the contract for the project in
whole or in part, or to one or more contractors.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-7: BID BOND:
When required by the call to bidders, no bid submitted in relation to any
contract to be let shall be valid or considered unless the contractor submits
with its bid a cashier’s check, certified check or bid bond guaranteeing its
offer to contract with the City if awarded the same. The security shall be made
payable to the City, without condition, in an amount of not less than ten
percent (10%) of the aggregate bid amount. Any contractor who shall fail to
enter into a contract so awarded shall forfeit all or a portion of the bid
security up to the difference between its bid and the next lowest bid accepted
by the City, if any.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-8: NON-RESPONSIVE BIDS:
All bids will be examined for responsiveness. All bids deemed materially
unresponsive shall be rejected without further evaluation or inquiry. Non-
material or technical irregularities may be waived provided they do not put the
contractor in a competitive advantage to other contractors.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-9: EVALUATION FACTORS:
Bid evaluation guidelines may be included in the contract documents available
to a contractor to bid on a particular project. In the absence of specific bid
evaluation guidelines, the following shall apply:
   A.   All bids deemed responsive, or otherwise accepted for evaluation, shall
be evaluated and ranked according to the qualifications of the contractor,
financial stability, ability commence and complete the project in an
expeditious manner, and bid amount. The contractor most qualified for the
project will receive the highest ranking in that category and the contractor
submitting the lowest bid will receive the highest ranking in that category.
   B.   The City Engineer will examine and investigate the contractor’s past
performance history, expertise, capabilities, governmental standing with the
jurisdiction authority over any part of the project, financial resources,
employment, equipment and material availability, and outstanding projects that
may affect a contractor’s workmanship or ability to start or complete the
project in a timely manner. Any and all references listed by a contractor may
be contacted by the City. Material omissions or falsification of information
requested from the contractor will result in a disqualification from the
project and may disqualify a contractor from bidding on future projects.
   C.   Uncharacteristically low or high bids shall be examined for mistakes or
the contractor’s misunderstanding of the scope of the project. A contractor
submitting an uncharacteristically low or high bid may be contacted by the City
Engineer and questioned regarding the accuracy of the same. Neither the bid
amount nor the scope of the project may be altered in consequence of such an
inquiry, except to the extent an easily identifiable typographical or
mathematical error can be objectively implemented in such a manner that does
not affect the integrity of the bidding process. Negotiations are strictly
prohibited. Bids that are uncharacteristically low or high due to mistakes that
cannot be corrected will be rejected.
   D.   The aggregate bid score of all bids shall be transcribed in a bid
abstract. The bid abstract, score calculation sheets, information generated as
a part of the evaluation, and the recommendation of the City Engineer shall be
forwarded to the City Council for review and action.
   E.   Bid scores may be adjusted by the City Council upon review of the City
Engineer’s recommendation and evaluation records. Bid scores shall be adopted
by the City Council as presented or modified.
   F.   The bid receiving the highest aggregate bid score by the City Council
shall be considered the lowest responsible bidder, and may be awarded the
contract for the project, subject to the provision and execution of necessary
documents.
   G.   The City Engineer shall notify all contractors of the result of the bid
evaluation and award. All contractors except the two receiving the highest
aggregate bid score shall be relieved of any further responsibility for the
project, and any bid security submitted to honor the same shall be released.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-10: WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS:
Bids may be withdrawn prior to the expiration of the bidding period, but any
such withdrawal shall disqualify the contractor from the project. No bid shall
be withdrawn after the bid opening until the earlier of the consent of the City
or forty-five (45) days following the expiration of the bidding period, as may
be extended.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-11: EXECUTION OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS:
The contractor determined to be the lowest responsible bidder shall execute and
deliver all contract documents no later than next regular City Council meeting
following the award, or fifteen (15) days after the award, whichever is last to
occur. Upon execution of the contract, the bid bond of the contractor awarded
the contract, and the contractor having the next highest aggregate bid score,
shall be released. In the event the lowest responsible bidder fails to execute
and deliver all contract documents in the time and manner prescribed, the City
may, but shall not be required to, award the contract to the next lowest
responsible bidder. If the City decides not to award the contract to the next
lowest responsible bidder, the bid security of the contractor that failed to
execute and deliver the contract documents will be forfeited in full.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-12: CHANGE ORDERS:
Any contract procured through competitive bidding that authorizes or
necessitates any increase in the contract price that is 50% or more than the
original contract price, then the portion of the contract that is covered by
the change order shall be resubmitted for bidding in the same manner as the
original contract.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
3-2A-13: STATE AND FEDERAL PROCUREMENT STANDARDS:
Nothing herein shall absolve the City from complying with such conditions as
may be imposed by the State of Illinois or the United States of America, or
their agencies, departments or officials, when the contract to be awarded by
the City is funded in whole or in part with state or federal monies, as the
case may be.
(Ord. 2569, 4-28-2020)
ARTICLE B: PUBLIC WORKS BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Section
3-2B-1: Scope
3-2B-2: Preparation Of Plans
3-2B-3: Advertising For Bids
3-2B-4: Contractor’s Bond
3-2B-5: Failure Regarding Contract
3-2B-6: Conflict Of Interest
3-2B-7: Application Of Other Laws
3-2B-1: SCOPE:
All contracts for the making of any public improvements in the City, to be paid
for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, shall be let
to the lowest responsible bidder therefor in the manner hereinafter prescribed,
and be approved by the Mayor and City Council.
(1980 Code § 33-2)
3-2B-2: PREPARATION OF PLANS:
Whenever any local or public improvement shall be ordered by the City Council,
which is to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, it shall be the duty of the City engineer to prepare a plan or
profile of the proposed improvement and specifications for the construction of
the same, a copy of which shall be kept on file in his office and in the Office
of the City Clerk, and be open to the inspection of City officers and other
persons interested therein.
(1980 Code § 33-3)
3-2B-3: ADVERTISING FOR BIDS:
As soon as the special tax or special assessment for any such improvement shall
have been finally confirmed, as provided by law, and sooner if deemed expedient
by the Mayor and City Council, the City Clerk is authorized to advertise in one
or more newspapers of general circulation or printed or published in the City
for proposals to furnish materials and do said work according to the plans and
specifications aforesaid. The advertisement shall be published for at least
twenty one (21) days before the date fixed for opening the proposals, and shall
state the nature and extent of the improvement ordered, the place where
specifications thereof may be seen, and the time and place when and where the
bids will be opened. The right to reject any and all proposals so received
shall be reserved in the advertisement.
(1980 Code § 33-4)
3-2B-4: CONTRACTOR’S BOND:
Whenever any such work or material is let by contract to any person or
corporation, the City shall, in all cases, take a good and sufficient bond from
such person or corporation to insure the performance of the work in the time
and manner required in the contract, and to save and indemnify the City and
keep it harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which
may in any way accrue against the City in consequence of the granting of the
contract, or which may in any way result from the carelessness or neglect of
the person or corporation, or his or its agent, employees or workers, in any
respect whatever, and to insure and guarantee the payment of all labor and
material claims growing or arising out of the work.
(1980 Code § 33-5)
3-2B-5: FAILURE REGARDING CONTRACT:
Any bidder who shall fail to enter into any contract so awarded, or shall fail
to fulfill any contract entered into by him with the City, shall not be
permitted to bid again for any City work, unless the Council shall, for good
cause shown, remove his disability.
(1980 Code § 33-6)
3-2B-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No member of the City Council or other City officer or employee shall be
interested, either directly or indirectly, in any contract with or work for the
City, or become surety for any contractor or other person upon any bond to
secure the performance of any contract with the City.
(1980 Code § 33-7)
3-2B-7: APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS:
The provisions of article A of this chapter shall also apply to this article on
public works by special assessment, except wherein the provisions of this
article provide differently.
(1980 Code § 33-8)
CHAPTER 3: TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Section
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Application Of Payments
3-3-3: Interest On Overdue Payments
3-3-4: Determinations Of Tax Liability
3-3-5: Appeals
3-3-6: Credits And Refunds
3-3-7: Records; Audit Procedure
3-3-8: Voluntary Disclosure
3-3-9: Lien Review
3-3-10: Penalties
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
CITY: The City of Watseka.
HEARING OFFICER: That person appointed as Hearing Officer under the City’s
system of administrative adjudication of nonvehicular regulation violations.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: That person charged with the administration or
collection of a locally imposed and administered tax, or his/her designee.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: A tax imposed by the City that is
collected or administered by the City and not an agency or department of the
State of Illinois.
TAX ORDINANCE: Any ordinance adopted by the City that imposes a locally imposed
and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay a locally imposed and administered tax,
which generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed, and with respect to consumer taxes, the business or entity required
to collect and pay the tax.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-2: APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS:
Payments or remittances received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order of priority: a) the interest due for the applicable period; b)
the tax due for the applicable period; and c) the penalty due for the
applicable period.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-3: INTEREST ON OVERDUE PAYMENTS:
Interest shall accrue on any untimely paid tax, underpaid tax or unpaid tax at
a rate of fifteen (15%) percent per annum.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-4: DETERMINATIONS OF TAX LIABILITY:
   A.   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority and duty to issue
determinations of tax liability to taxpayers.
   B.   The determination notice shall be issued and sent to the taxpayer by
certified mail, return receipt requested, no more than four (4) years after the
end of the calendar year in which the tax was due; however, if less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the tax was paid, a determination notice may be
issued and sent no more than six (6) years after the end of the calendar year
in which the tax was due; provided further, that if a fraudulent tax return was
filed, no period of time shall limit the issuance of a determination notice.
   C.   All determinations of tax liability shall include the following
information: 1) the reason for tax liability; 2) the amount of the tax
liability, interest, and penalties due, as well as the basis for such
calculation; 3) the procedure for appeals; and 4) information regarding the
right of the City to audit the taxpayer’s books and records for a particular
period, and its obligation to refund overpayments.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-5: APPEALS:
Any taxpayer may, within forty five (45) days of the date of receipt of a
determination of tax liability, file a written appeal of a determination of tax
liability, setting forth the basis therefor. For reasonable cause shown in
writing by the taxpayer, and full payment of the amount of the tax so
protested, plus accrued interest due, the Local Tax Administrator may extend
the forty five (45) day appeal period for an additional forty five (45) days.
The Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing on the underlying determination and
issue a written decision as to his findings and conclusions. The formal rules
of evidence shall not apply at such hearing.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-6: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A taxpayer may, in writing, claim a credit or refund for the payment of taxes,
interest, or penalties paid in error for up to four (4) years after the end of
the calendar year in which the payment was made. Claims must include
information setting forth the taxpayer, applicable tax period, proof of
payment, and an explanation/calculation of any claimed error. The Local Tax
Administrator shall review each claim and issue a determination of tax
liability, and whether or not a credit or refund is justified, within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the claim.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-7: RECORDS; AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Every (prospective) taxpayer shall be subject to an audit by the Local Tax
Administrator, and each taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
its business and activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which gave rise to or may give rise to any tax
liability, exemption, or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection at the request of
the Local Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-8: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
A taxpayer who has not received a written notice of an audit or determination
of a tax liability may seek disclosure of its tax liability by applying to the
Local Tax Administrator in writing for voluntary disclosure of the taxpayer’s
liability pertaining to a particular tax and agreeing to pay, within ninety
(90) days of the date of the application, the tax due, plus one percent (1%)
interest per month, for all periods that precede the filing or the application,
but not more than four (4) years prior thereto. The taxpayer shall be liable
for any underpaid taxes and accrued interest during the four-year time period
but, except for the taxes and interest due hereunder, the taxpayer shall not be
liable for any taxes imposed prior to the date of the application for voluntary
disclosure.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-9: LIEN REVIEW:
In January of each calendar year, the Local Tax Administrator shall cause all
liens filed against all taxpayers for unpaid taxes to be reviewed. Upon a
determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall: a) remove the lien at the City’s
expense; b) correct the taxpayer's credit record; and c) correct any public
disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
3-3-10: PENALTIES:
A penalty at a rate of five percent (5%) of a tax due and not timely paid or
remitted shall be assessed for late or unpaid tax payments; a penalty at a rate
of five percent (5%) of a tax required to be shown on a return shall be
assessed for late or underreported returns; and a penalty at a rate of twenty
five percent (25%) of the total tax due shall be assessed for taxes for which
no return is filed before the issuance of a notice of tax deficiency or tax
liability to the taxpayer. The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority
to waive or abate any penalty if he/she determines that reasonable cause
existed for such deficiency.
(Ord. 2504, 5-22-2018)
CHAPTER 4: CITY TAXES
ARTICLE A: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES
Section
3-4A-1: Taxes Imposed; Rates
3-4A-2: Exemptions From Taxes
3-4A-3: Compliance With State Laws
3-4A-4: State Administration And Enforcement
3-4A-5: Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-4A-1: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this State’s government, at retail in
the City at the rate of three-fourths percent (0.75%) of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in
effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the City in the
business of making sales of service, at the rate of three- fourths percent
(0.75%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by
such service person as an incident to a sale of service.
(Ord. 1733, 9-30-1993)
3-4A-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
The home rule municipal retailers' occupational tax and the home rule municipal
service occupation tax shall not be applicable on the sales of food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
(Ord. 1733, 9-30-1993)
3-4A-3: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS:
The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with the provisions
of sections
8-11-1 and
8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended.
(Ord. 1733, 9-30-1993)
3-4A-4: STATE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 1733, 9-30-1993)
3-4A-5: CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City
at the rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made
in the course of that business.
   B.   Tax Collections; Reimbursement: Each retailer shall collect and remit
to the Illinois Department of Revenue the tax imposed under this section. A
retailer may reimburse itself for its tax liability hereunder by separately
stating the tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination, in a single amount, with any state tax the retailer is required to
collect.
   C.   Administration and Enforcement: The Illinois Department of Revenue
shall have full power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of
this section. The tax imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as
an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department
of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected, and any tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue,
shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State.
(Ord. 2547, 9-24-2019)
ARTICLE B: MUNICIPAL USE TAX
Section
3-4B-1: Adoption Of Ordinance 1255
3-4B-1: ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE 1255:
Ordinance 1255, adopted November 18, 1974, imposing a Municipal tax of one
percent (1%) upon the privilege of using in the City any item of tangible
personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a
retailer, is incorporated herein by reference, as adopted and published.
(1980 Code § 47-3)
ARTICLE C: HOTEL OPERATORS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-4C-1: Definitions
3-4C-2: Tax Imposed; Rate; Exemptions
3-4C-3: Use Of Revenue
3-4C-4: Books And Records
3-4C-5: Certificate Of Registration Required By Business Owner
3-4C-6: Tax Return; Payment Of Tax
3-4C-7: Audits
3-4C-8: Violations
3-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words and terms shall have he meanings ascribed to them in this section:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters or sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes, but is not limited to, inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging
houses, rooming houses and apartment houses, retreat centers, conference
centers and hunting lodges.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession
of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use
and possession of the room or rooms.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room
or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters or sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE; EXEMPTIONS:
A tax is imposed upon persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental
receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross
rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent
residents of that hotel.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-3: USE OF REVENUE:
The revenue derived from this article may only be used to promote tourism and
conventions within the territorial boundaries of the City or to otherwise
attract nonresident overnight visitors to the City.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   A.   Every operator shall keep separate books or records of his business as
an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under this article
separately from his transactions not taxable under this article. If any
operator fails to keep such separate books or records, he shall be liable to
tax at the rate designated in section
3-4C-2 of this article upon the entire proceeds from his hotel.
   B.   The City may adopt rules that establish requirements, including record
forms and formats, for records required to be kept and maintained by taxpayers.
   C.   For purposes of this section, “records” means all data maintained by
the taxpayer, including data on paper, microfilm, microfiche or any type of
machine-sensible data compilation.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-5: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED BY BUSINESS OWNER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in the City without a certificate of
registration from the City.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-6: TAX RETURN; PAYMENT OF TAX:
   A.   Except as provided hereinafter in this section, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in the City during the preceding calendar
month shall file a return with the City, stating:
      1.   The name of the operator.
      2.   His residence address and the address of his principal place of
business and the address of the principal place of business (if that is a
different address) from which he engages in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel in Watseka.
      3.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms during such preceding
calendar month.
      4.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent residents
during such preceding calendar month.
      5.   Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental receipts allowed
by this article.
      6.   Gross rental receipts which were received by him during the
preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      7.   The amount of tax due.
   B.   The return must be signed by the owner, part owner or in the case of a
corporation, its president, vice president, secretary or treasurer and in the
case of an LLC, its manager, or in case of a trust, its trustee.
   C.   The person filing the return shall, at the time of filing, pay the City
the amount of tax imposed by this article.
   D.   If all payment is not made when due, or returns not filed when
required, the taxpayer shall be liable for:
      1.   An amount in the sum of double the tax due;
      2.   The costs of an audit by the City's accountant; and
      3.   Any and all attorney fees, court costs and related expenses incurred
in the collection of the taxes.
   E.   Any person who signs a false return shall be fined one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each such occurrence.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-7: AUDITS:
Audits of hotels and motels are authorized under this article should the City
not receive timely returns and/or suspect that false returns have been filed.
All hotels and motels in Watseka shall allow an audit when requested by the
City. Failure to allow a timely audit will result in a fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
3-4C-8: VIOLATIONS:
Any person, firm or other organization who violates this article in excess of
two (2) times per calendar year may be prohibited from operating within the
City.
(Ord. 2082, 2-17-2003)
ARTICLE D: MOTOR FUEL TAX
Section
3-4D-1: Title
3-4D-2: Definitions
3-4D-3: Tax Imposed
3-4D-4: Exemptions
3-4D-5: Special Fuel Sold Or Used For Non-Highway Purposes
3-4D-6: Payment On Retail Purchase
3-4D-7: Tax Collections
3-4D-8: Registration; Return; Filing
3-4D-9: Commission On Tax Paid When Due
3-4D-10: Failure To Pay Or File; Penalties And Interest
3-4D-11: Recordkeeping
3-4D-12: Sales And Uses Presumed Taxable; Burden Of Proof
3-4D-13: Disposition Of Proceeds Of Tax
3-4D-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and cited as the “Watseka Vehicle Fuel Tax
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where to the context clearly
indicates a contrary meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
CITY: The City of Watseka, Iroquois County, Illinois.
DIESEL FUEL: Any product intended for use or offered for sale as a fuel for
engines in which the fuel is injected into the combustion chamber and ignited
by pressure without electric spark.
DISTRIBUTOR: Any person who produces, refines, blends, compounds or
manufactures vehicle fuel in the city; or transports or has transported vehicle
fuel to any location in the city; or receives in the city vehicle fuel on which
the city vehicle fuel tax has not been paid; or sells vehicle fuel to a retail
dealer for resale in the city. The term shall include any person transports
vehicle fuel into the city or receives vehicle fuel in the city for his own use
and consumption, and not for sale or resale.
DYED DIESEL FUEL: Any special fuel, as defined herein, sold or used for non-
highway purposes containing only the dye Solvent Red 164 at a concentration
spectrally equivalent to at least 3.9 pounds of the solid dye standard Solvent
Red 26 per thousand barrels of special fuel. The dye must be added prior to
removal from a terminal rack.
GALLON: In addition to its ordinary meaning, its equivalent in a capacity of
measurement of substance in a gaseous state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
or a receiver, trustee, guardian, conservator, legal representative, or other
legally recognized entity.
RETAIL DEALER: Any person who is engaged in the business of selling vehicle
fuel in the city to a purchaser for the purchaser’s use or consumption, and not
for resale in any form.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale to a person for that person’s use or consumption and
not for resale to another.
SALE, RESALE OR PURCHASE: Any transfer of ownership or title tile or both, any
exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for consideration.
SPECIAL FUEL: All volatile and inflammable liquids capable of being used for
the generation of power in an internal combustion engine. The term includes
diesel fuel as defined in herein.
TAX: The city’s vehicle fuel tax.
TERMINAL RACK: A mechanism for dispensing vehicle fuel or fuel from a refinery,
terminal, or bulk plant into a transport truck, railroad tank car, or other
means of transportation.
USE: The exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to the
ownership thereof, including but not limited to the receipt of vehicle fuel by
any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle.
VEHICLE: Is the same as “motor vehicle” as defined in The Illinois Vehicle Code
(65 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.).
VEHICLE FUEL: Is the same as “motor fuel” as defined in the Motor Fuel Tax Law
(35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.) and includes all volatile and inflammable liquids
produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of, or which are suitable or
practicable for, operating motor vehicles. The term includes without limitation
gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, motor benzol, motor benzene, propane gas fuel,
kerosene, and special fuel.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-3: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of purchasing or using, in the city,
vehicle fuel purchased at retail. The tax shall be at a rate of $0.05 per
gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of
the tax shall be on the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel, and nothing in
this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling
or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this section for any
distributor or retail dealer to fail to add the tax to the retail price of the
vehicle fuel or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. The tax shall apply only to vehicle fuel delivered on or after
July 1, 2021 and shall not apply to inventory at the retail dealer on that
date.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following sales or uses:
   A.   Sale by a distributor to another distributor holding a valid
registration certificate;
   B.   Sale by a distributor or retailer of vehicle fuel whose place of
business is outside the city;
   C.   Sale or use for purposes other than for propulsion or operation of a
motor vehicle;
   D.   Sale of use to the extent the tax imposed by this article would violate
the state or United States Constitution;
   E.   Sale to or use by the federal government or any state or local
governmental body;
   F.   Sale to or use by any air common carrier, certified by the carrier to
be used for consumption, shipment or storage in the conduct of its business as
an air common carrier, for a flight destined for a destination outside the
United States;
   G.   Sale to or use of dyed diesel fuel for non-highway purposes in
accordance with the provisions of Section
3-4D-5; and,
   H.   Sale to or use of vehicle fuel by a commercial common carrier provided
the vehicle fuel is delivered directly to a stationary bulk storage tank
located on the property of the common carrier in the city and used only by such
common carrier for commercial vehicles engaged in interstate or intrastate
commerce (not-for-hire, property only) and registered to the common carrier.
For each sale described in this subsection, a specific notation of the nature
of the exemption must be made on the invoice for these sales. The distributor
must retain the invoice number and date, name of carrier, bill of lading/
manifest number, name and address of purchaser, and invoiced gallons sold. A
legible and conspicuous notice stating “Non-taxable Use Only, Penalty For
Taxable Use” must appear on all shipping papers (including delivery tickets or
manifests and excluding material safety data sheets), bills of lading, and
invoices accompanying any sale of dyed diesel fuel.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-5: SPECIAL FUEL SOLD OR USED FOR NON-HIGHWAY PURPOSES:
   A.   Sales or uses of dyed diesel fuel to retail dealers or other persons
other than distributors for non-highway purposes shall be exempt from the tax
provided:
      1.   The special fuel is delivered from a vehicle designed for the
specific purpose of such sales and delivered directly to a stationary bulk
storage tank that displays the following notice: “Dyed Diesel Fuel, Non-taxable
Use Only”;
      2.   The fuel is delivered from a vehicle designed for the specific
purpose of such sales and delivered directly into the fuel supply tanks of non-
highway vehicles that are not required to be registered for highway use; or,
      3.   The fuel is dispensed from a dyed diesel fuel dispensing facility
that has withdrawal facilities that are not readily accessible to and are not
capable of dispensing dyed diesel fuel into the supply tank of a motor vehicle.
   B.   For purposes of this section, a dyed diesel fuel dispensing facility is
considered to have withdrawal facilities that are “not readily accessible to,
and not capable of dispensing dyed diesel fuel into, the fuel supply tank of a
motor vehicle” only when the dyed diesel fuel is delivered from:
      1.   A dispenser hose that is short enough that it will not reach the
fuel supply tank of a motor vehicle; or
      2.   A dispenser that is enclosed by a fence or other physical barrier so
that a vehicle cannot pull alongside the dispenser to permit fueling.
   C.   For each sale of dyed diesel fuel described in this section, a specific
notation of the nature of the exemption must be made on the invoice for these
sales. The distributor must retain the invoice number and date, name of
carrier, bill of lading/manifest number, name and address of purchaser, and
invoiced gallons sold. A legible and conspicuous notice stating “Dyed Diesel
Fuel, Non-taxable Use Only, Penalty For Taxable Use” must appear on all
shipping papers (including delivery tickets or manifests and excluding material
safety data sheets), bills of lading, and invoices accompanying any sale of
dyed diesel fuel.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-6: PAYMENT ON RETAIL PURCHASE:
Use in the city shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the city where
the vehicle fuel is transferred into the motor vehicle by which it is to be
consumed. To the extent that a person has paid the tax imposed in this article
on the retail purchase of vehicle fuel, the user shall be exempt from the
payment of and liability for the tax on the use of such vehicle fuel.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-7: TAX COLLECTIONS:
   A.   The tax shall be collected by each distributor who sells such vehicle
fuel to a retail dealer doing business in the city. Any distributor who shall
pay the tax to the city shall collect the tax from any retail dealer to whom
the distributor sells vehicle fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel
directly to a purchaser or user, for delivery in the city, and not for resale,
shall collect the tax from the purchaser or user.
   B.   A retail dealer shall collect the tax from the purchaser of the vehicle
fuel. If any retail dealer receives vehicle fuel upon which the tax has not
been collected by the distributor, then the retail dealer shall remit such tax
directly to the city by the last day of the month following the month in which
he received such vehicle fuel, and shall collect such tax from his purchasers.
   C.   If any purchaser or user receives vehicle fuel upon which the tax has
not been collected by the distributor or retail dealer, such purchaser or user
shall pay the tax directly to the city by the last day of the month following
the month in which such purchaser or user made the taxable purchase or use of
the vehicle fuel.
   D.   Any person who collects the tax shall do so as a trustee for and on
account of the city.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-8: REGISTRATION; RETURN; FILING:
Every distributor doing business in the city on June 1, 2021, shall register
with the City Treasurer by June 30, 2021. Every person becoming a distributor
after that date shall register with the City Treasurer within thirty (30) days
after the commencement of such business. Every distributor shall file each
month with the City Treasurer remittance return, containing a report of his
sales of vehicle fuel to retail dealers or users in the city occurring in the
prior calendar month. For example, the tax return for the month of January
shall be filed and the tax paid on or before the last day of the ensuing
February. The return shall be in a form prescribed and furnished by the City
Treasurer. If mailed, the return must be postmarked on or before the last day
of the month following the month for which the report is due. Each such return
shall be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount of tax
applicable to the sales reported. Payment shall be made to the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-9: COMMISSION ON TAX PAID WHEN DUE:
A distributor or retail dealer remitting the tax to the city shall be entitled
to a commission of one percent (1%) of the tax remitted, to compensate for the
cost of collection, filing returns, and supplying information to the city, but
in no event shall any commission be allowed on any tax not remitted when due.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-10: FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return as
required by this article shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      1.   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid
or remitted; and,
      2.   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax, or remittance return, when due shall be subject to a late
penalty of ten percent (10%) of such tax.
   B.   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described herein
may be waived by the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-11: RECORDKEEPING:
Every distributor and every retail dealer required to collect and remit the tax
imposed in this article, and every purchaser or user, shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of his business of selling, purchases, and uses of
vehicle fuel, including the maintenance of all invoices and other source
documents, and whether or not exempt under this article. All books and records
shall be subject to inspection by the City Treasurer or duly authorized agents
or employees thereof, at all times during regular business hours.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-12: SALES AND USES PRESUMED TAXABLE; BURDEN OF PROOF:
It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the city are
subject to tax under this article until the contrary is established. The burden
of proving that a sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the
distributor, retail dealer, purchaser or user so claiming.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
3-4D-13: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX:
All proceeds from the imposition of the tax under this article, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to
and deposited in the Streets and Alleys Fund. Except as may be necessary to
reimburse the city for the costs of administering and collecting the tax, all
proceeds from the tax shall be used for the improvement, pavement, repairing or
maintaining public streets, alleys, curbs, and sidewalks.
(Ord. 2611, 5-25-2021)
ARTICLE E: ALCOHOL TAX
Section
3-4E-1: Title
3-4E-2: Definitions
3-4E-3: Tax Imposed
3-4E-4: Tax Collections
3-4E-5: Return; Filing
3-4E-6: Commission on Tax Paid when Due
3-4E-7: Failure to Pay or File; Penalties and Interest
3-4E-8: Recordkeeping
3-4E-9: Suspension/Revocation of Liquor License; Fine in Lieu
3-4E-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and cited as the “Watseka Alcohol Tax Ordinance.”
The tax imposed under this article shall be known and cited as the “Watseka
Alcohol Tax.”
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where to the context clearly
indicates a contrary meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
CITY: The City of Watseka, Iroquois County, Illinois.
LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT: Any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, including any premises possessing or required to obtain a retail liquor
license under Title 4, Business and License Regulations, Chapter 2, Alcoholic
Beverages, of the Watseka City Code.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
or a receiver, trustee, guardian, conservator, legal representative, or other
legally recognized entity.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-3: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of purchasing at retail alcoholic
liquor at a liquor establishment at a rate of six (6%) percent of the purchase
price therefor. The tax shall be imposed and shall be applicable to alcoholic
liquor purchased for on- and off-premises consumption, and whether in original
package quantities or not. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment
of the tax shall be on the purchaser of alcoholic liquor (the "consumer"), and
nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation
of selling, preparing or serving alcoholic liquor. The tax shall be in addition
to any and all other taxes. The tax shall apply only to the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor after August 1, 2023.(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021; amd. Ord. 2684, 6-
27-2023)
3-4E-4: TAX COLLECTIONS:
   A.   it shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of a liquor
establishment to collect the tax imposed by this article from the consumer and
to pay the tax to the city as required herein.
   B.   every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall
collect the tax from the consumer at the time he/she collects payment for the
sale of alcoholic liquor at retail. The amount due pursuant to the tax imposed
shall be stated separately on the receipt or other statement or memorandum of
the payment given to the consumer at the time of payment.
   C.   Any person who collects the tax shall do so as a trustee for and on
account of the city.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-5: RETURN; FILING:
The owner of each liquor establishment shall file with City Treasurer each
month a remittance return containing a report of retail sales of alcoholic
liquor in the prior calendar month. Each such return shall be accompanied by a
remittance of the appropriate amount of tax applicable to the sales period
reported. Payment shall be made to the City Treasurer. The return shall be in a
form prescribed and furnished by the City Treasurer. If mailed, the return must
be postmarked on or before the last day of the month following the month for
which the report is due.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-6: COMMISSION ON TAX PAID WHEN DUE:
The owner of each liquor establishment shall be entitled to a commission of one
percent (1%) of the tax remitted, to compensate for the cost of collection,
filing returns, and supplying information to the city, but in no event shall
any commission be allowed on any tax not remitted when due.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-7: FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return as
required by this article shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      1.   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid
or remitted; and
      2.   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax, or remittance return, when due shall be subject to a late
penalty of ten percent (10%) of such tax.
   B.   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described herein
may be waived by the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-8: RECORDKEEPING:
Every person required to collect and remit the tax imposed in this article
shall keep accurate and complete books and records of its daily sales of
alcoholic liquor at retail, including actual tax receipts collected. All books
and records shall be maintained for a period of at least forty-eight (48)
months, and shall be subject to inspection by the City Treasurer or duly
authorized agents or employees thereof, at all times during regular business
hours.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
3-4E-9: SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LIQUOR LICENSE; FINE IN LIEU:
Notwithstanding and in addition to any interest or penalties that may be
imposed, any person found to have willfully evaded payment, collection and/or
remittance of the tax imposed, or willfully failed to keep accurate and
complete books and records required, by this article may have his/her/its
liquor license suspended or revoked, or a fine imposed in lieu thereof in
accordance with Section
4-2-21(C) of the Watseka City Code. Prior to such suspension/hearing/fine, a
hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Section
4-2-21(B) of the Watseka City Code.
(Ord. 2621, 9-28-2021)
ARTICLE F: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
3-4F-1: Title
3-4F-2: Definitions
3-4F-3: Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed
3-4F-4: Collection of Tax by Retailers
3-4F-5: Returns to Department
3-4F-6: Resellers
3-4F-7:Disposition of Tax Proceeds
3-4F-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and cited as the "Watseka Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Ordinance." The tax imposed under this article shall be
known and cited as the “Watseka Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax.”
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
3-4F-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
ACT: The Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Act, 35 ILCS 636/5-1, et seq.
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the City
regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
CITY: The City of Watseka, Iroquois County, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois Department of Revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the City and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination
point within the City and charges for that portion of the inter-office channels
provided within the City. Charges for that portion of the inter-office channel
connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is
located within the jurisdictional boundary of the City, shall be determined by
the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-
office channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel
termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the
City and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination
points connected by the inter-office channel. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not
include any of the following:
   1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
      a.   The tax imposed by this article;
      b.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
      c.   The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      d.   911 surcharges; or
      e.   Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of
Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar
charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate
regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering
any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of
the Public Utilities Act.
   2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
City.
   3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement.
   4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   5.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-
222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity.
   6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service.
   7.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices.
   9.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   10.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if (i) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, (ii) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and (iii) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges
on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If
the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from
the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed
on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this State.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this State.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of  the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and
payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to
collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to
collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this
State in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit may be revoked by
the Department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Or any like term, means
and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or
by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and
State universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the City and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by
this article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means
a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale; Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this article. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in Section
2-27 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act.
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
3-4F-3: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the
City intrastate telecommunications by a person at the rate of six (6%) percent
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall
be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
subsection to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the
municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the
City interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six (6%) percent of
the gross charge for such communications purchased at retail from a retailer.
To prevent actual multi-state or multimunicipal taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this
State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant
to or authorized by this subsection to the extent of the amount of such tax
properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in
a municipality in this State which was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other state or local tax in this State.
   C.   The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the City.
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
3-4F-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege or
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this article shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the
manner provided by the Department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
3-4F-5: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of every month, the tax imposed under this article on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to the Act and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the
Act.
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
3-4F-6: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state the facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall clarify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
3-4F-7: DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS:
All proceeds from the imposition of the tax under this article, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City and shall be credited to
and deposited in the Streets and Alleys Fund. All proceeds from the tax shall
be used for the improvement, pavement, repairing or maintaining public streets,
alleys, curbs, and sidewalks.
(Ord. 2635, 2-22-2022)
ARTICLE G: ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
Section
3-4G-1: Title
3-4G-2: Definitions
3-4G-3: Tax Imposed
3-4G-4: Collection of Tax
3-4G-5: Tax Remittance and Return
3-4G-6: Resales
3-4G-7: Books and Records
3-4G-8: Failure to Pay or File; Penalties and Interest
3-4G-9: Disposition of Tax Proceeds
3-4G-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and cited as the "Watseka Electric Utility Tax
Ordinance." The tax imposed under this article shall be known and cited as the
"Watseka Electric Utility Tax."
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
CITY: The City of Watseka, Iroquois County, Illinois.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any
State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PUBLIC UTILITY: The meaning ascribed to it in section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act and shall include alternative retail electric suppliers as
defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Effective June 1, 2022, a tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of
using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the City at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.610 cents per kilowatt hour;
      2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.400 cents per kilowatt hour;
      3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.360 cents per kilowatt hour;
      4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.350 cents per kilowatt hour;
      5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.340 cents per kilowatt hour;
      6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.320 cents per kilowatt hour;
      7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.315 cents per kilowatt hour;
      8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.310 cents per kilowatt hour;
      9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.305 cents per kilowatt hour;
      10.   For all electricity consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours
in a month; 0.300 cents per kilowatt hour.
   B.   The tax imposed by this section is in addition to all taxes, fees and
other revenue measures imposed by the City, the State or any other political
subdivision of the State.
   C.   The tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that the imposition
or collection would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States
or the State.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   The tax authorized by article shall be collected from the purchaser by
the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. The tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity.
   B.   The tax required to be collected from the purchaser and any such tax
collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to
the City by such person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person
delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to
deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
   C.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity
for the expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the City upon request.
   D.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
City.
   E.   For purposes of this article, any partial payment of a billed amount
not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-5: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   A.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the City Clerk. The return and accompanying tax remittance shall
be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which
the tax is collected.
   B.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the
City Clerk and pay the tax directly to the City on or before the last day of
the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-6: RESALES:
   A.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this City shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the City and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
   B.   If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the City for a
resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for
the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the City may reasonably require.
   C.   Upon approval of the application, the City shall assign a resale number
to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   D.   The City may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails
to pay any tax payable under this article for electricity used or consumed by
the person, or if the number:
      1.   Was obtained through misrepresentation; or
      2.   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   E.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article
directly to the City pursuant to section 3-40-5 on the amount of electricity
that the reseller uses or consumes and shall collect the tax pursuant to
section 3-40 -4 and remit the tax pursuant to section 3-40 -5 on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
   F.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the City the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the City may reasonably require.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-7: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this
article shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-8: FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
   A.   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return as
required by this article shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      1.   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid
or remitted; and
      2.   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax, or remittance return, when due shall be subject to a late
penalty of ten percent (10%) of such tax.
   B.   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described herein
may be waived by the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
3-4G-9: DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS:
All proceeds from the imposition of the tax under this article, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City and shall be credited to
and deposited in the Streets and Alleys Fund. All proceeds from the tax shall
be used for the improvement, pavement, repairing or maintaining public streets,
alleys, curbs, and sidewalks.
(Ord. 2641, 3-22-2022)
CHAPTER 5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
3-5-1: Compliance Required
3-5-2: Tax Imposed
3-5-3: Report And Payment Required
3-5-4: Inspection Of Books And Records
3-5-5: Penalty
3-5-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any corporation, company, or association not
incorporated under the laws of the State of Illinois to engage in effecting
fire insurance in the City without fully complying with, or while in default or
in violation of, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2605, 3-23-2021)
3-5-2: TAX IMPOSED:
All corporations, companies, and associations not incorporated under the laws
of the State of Illinois and engaged in the business of effecting fire
insurance in the City shall pay to the Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Board of the City, for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the fire
department, a sum of money equal to two percent (2%) of the gross annual
receipts of premiums upon fire insurance policies effected, or agreed to be
effected, on property located in the City, by such corporation, company, or
association for each year ending as of July 1.
(Ord. 2605, 3-23-2021)
3-5-3: REPORT AND PAYMENT REQUIRED:
Every corporation, company, and association, and any person acting as agent for
or on behalf of such entity, effecting fire insurance in the City shall render
to the Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board, on July 15 of each year,
a full and true account, verified under oath, of all premiums for fire
insurance received during each year ending as of July 1 next preceding the
issuance of said report. Such corporation, company, association, or agent
shall, at the time of rendering its report, pay the sum of money due under the
provisions of this chapter. The sum of money for which a company, corporation,
or association is chargeable under the provisions of this chapter may be
recovered of it, or from its agent, by an action in the name and for the use of
the City as for money had and received.
(Ord. 2605, 3-23-2021)
3-5-4: INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The City Clerk shall have the power to examine the books, records, and other
papers and documents of a designated agent, corporation, company, or
association for the purposes of verifying the correctness of the report of
amounts received for fire insurance.
(Ord. 2605, 3-23-2021)
3-5-5: PENALTY:
In addition to such other remedies as may be afforded by law, any corporation,
company, association, or agent of such entity, found in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than
$750.00 for each violation. Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to
continue shall be deemed and constitute a separate offense. No corporation,
company, association, or agent of such entity, found in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall effect fire insurance, or transact any
business related to effecting fire insurance, until such time as it/he/she
shall come into compliance with this chapter and pay all fines due and owing
for violations hereof.
(Ord. 2605, 3-23-2021)
CHAPTER 6: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES REMOVAL COSTS
Section
3-6-1: Costs Established
3-6-2: Amendments To Charges
3-6-3: Other Charges Authorized
3-6-4: Waiver Of Charges
3-6-1: COSTS ESTABLISHED:
Charges for removal or remediation of a release or substantial threat of a
release of a “hazardous substance”, as defined in applicable United States
Environmental Protection Acts, State of Illinois Environmental Protection Acts,
natural gas, gas liquids, and liquefied natural gas, pesticides, natural gas
leaks caused by the improper or incorrect location of electrical or natural gas
service lines or by the negligent actions of any contractor performing labor or
services with the City, when rendered by the City Fire Department or any agency
in accordance with any mutual aid agreement to which the City is a party, shall
be as specified in exhibit A attached to ordinance 2412 and by this reference
incorporated herein.
(Ord. 2412, 2-25-2014)
3-6-2: AMENDMENTS TO CHARGES:
Pursuant to the authority of Illinois law, including, but not limited to, the
Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), the City Council may, from
time to time, amend the charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by
the City Fire Department or any agency in accordance with any mutual aid
agreement to which the City is a party, identified in this chapter by duly and
properly adopting an amended exhibit A at a meeting convened pursuant to the
Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), memorializing the amendatory exhibit
A, the effective date of the amendatory exhibit A, and recording in the minutes
of said meeting the roll call vote of the City Council approving the amendment.
(Ord. 2412, 2-25-2014)
3-6-3: OTHER CHARGES AUTHORIZED:
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the assessment of fees or other charges
pursuant to any other City Council ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. 2412, 2-25-2014)
3-6-4: WAIVER OF CHARGES:
The City Council is hereby authorized to waive any or all of the fees due under
this chapter.
(Ord. 2412, 2-25-2014)
TITLE 4: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT REGULATIONS
Section
4-1-1: Persons Subject To License
4-1-2: Application For License Or Permit
4-1-3: Forms And Signatures
4-1-4: Investigation And Inspection Of Applicant
4-1-5: License And Permit Fees
4-1-6: Term Of License
4-1-7: Nontransferability Of License; Change Of Location
4-1-8: Posting License
4-1-9: Building And Premises Requirements
4-1-10: Nuisance Businesses Prohibited
4-1-11: Inspections And Analyses
4-1-12: Revocation Of License Or Permit
4-1-13: Penalties
4-1-1: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the City.
(1980 Code § 23-2)
4-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made
in writing to the City Clerk, in the absence of any other provision to the
contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or
license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee
to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as
may be needed for the proper guidance of the City officials in the issuing of
the permit or license.
(1980 Code § 23-1)
4-1-3: FORMS AND SIGNATURES:
   A.   Forms: Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor,
shall be prepared and kept on hand by the City Clerk.
(1980 Code § 23-3)
   B.   Signatures Required: Each license or permit issued shall bear the
signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to
the contrary.
(1980 Code § 23-4)
4-1-4: INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where the ordinances of
the City require an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the proper
official or officials for making the investigation within forty eight (48)
hours of the time of such receipt. The official charged with the duty of making
the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof.
(1980 Code § 23-5)
4-1-5: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES:
   A.   In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all fees and charges
for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time the application
therefor is made to the City Clerk.
   B.   When an application for an annual license is made after the expiration
of six (6) months of the current license year, the license for the remainder of
the year shall be issued upon payment of one- half (½) of the annual fee;
provided, that the applicant has not previously held a license of the same type
and class for which application is made.
(1980 Code § 23-6)
4-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on April 30, where no provision to the
contrary is made.
(1980 Code § 23-7)
4-1-7: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
No license shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any person be
authorized to do business or act under such license but the person to whom it
is granted or his administrator or executor, or at any other place than that
specified therein, nor shall any license authorize any person to act under it
at more than one place; provided, that any licensee conducting any business or
occupation required to be licensed who shall change the location of such place
of business before the expiration of the license, upon written notice to the
City Clerk of the change in location, may continue the business at the new
location under the license previously issued unless otherwise restricted by
ordinance or law.
(1980 Code § 23-9)
4-1-8: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for the
business at all times.
(1980 Code § 23-12)
4-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the City.
   B.   No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
the performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning
ordinance or any other ordinance of the City.
(1980 Code § 23-8)
4-1-10: NUISANCE BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to
a nuisance in fact.
(1980 Code § 23-10)
4-1-11: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
City who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable
time that admission is requested.
   B.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provisions or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is
governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
City requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for
such analysis upon request.
   C.   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may
revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the
City who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make
such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate
sample of the commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while
in the performance of his duty in making the inspection. Provided, that no
license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the
licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the City, stating
that the inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the
inspection or obtain the sample.
(1980 Code § 23-13)
4-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Any license or permit may be revoked by the Mayor at any time during the life
of the license or permit for any violation by the licensee or permittee of the
ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of
the license or permit, or the premises occupied. Such revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed.
(1980 Code § 23-11)
4-1-13: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined as set fort in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Upon the conviction of a licensee of any such violation,
the Mayor, in his discretion, may forfeit and cancel the license of the
licensee.
(1980 Code § 23-14; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Administrative Officials
4-2-3: Licenses And Compliance Required
4-2-4: Ineligibility For License; Location Description Required
4-2-5: Application For License
4-2-5-1: Applications For Supplemental Licenses
4-2-6: Selection Of Licensees
4-2-7: Classification Of Licenses
4-2-8: Number Of Licenses
4-2-9: License Fees
4-2-10: Privilege Granted By License
4-2-11: Termination Of License
4-2-12: Conditions On Certain Licenses
4-2-13: Sanitary Conditions
4-2-14: Closing Hours
4-2-15: Change Of Location
4-2-16: Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited
4-2-17: Underage Persons
4-2-18: Additional Prohibitions
4-2-19: Inspections; Entry Powers
4-2-20: Complaints By Residents
4-2-21: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Fine In Lieu
4-2-22: Appeals
4-2-23: Violations; Penalties
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except as herein otherwise defined, the terms herein used shall have the same
definitions and meanings as under the statutes of the State of Illinois
relating to dram shops.
(1980 Code § 22-2)
4-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS:
   A.   Liquor Control Commissioner:
      1.   Mayor Serve As: The Mayor shall constitute and be the Liquor Control
Commissioner of the City.
(1980 Code § 22-24)
      2.   Powers: The Mayor, as Liquor Control Commissioner, shall have the
following powers:
         a.   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or
revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons or premises within his
jurisdiction.
         b.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the statutes or any rules or regulations adopted by the Liquor
Control Commissioner or by the State Commission have been or are being violated
and, at such time, to examine the premises of the licensee in connection
therewith.
         c.   To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction
that any of the provisions of the statutes or any rules or regulations adopted
pursuant hereto have been or are being violated, and to act upon such
complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.
         d.   To levy fines in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
         e.   To have such other powers relating to liquor control as may be or
may hereafter be given by ordinance or law.
(1980 Code § 22-19)
   B.   Liquor Committee: The Mayor shall appoint three (3) Alderpersons who,
together with the Mayor, shall constitute the Liquor Committee of the City
Council. The Liquor Committee shall advise and assist the Liquor Control
Commissioner in the administration of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever
in this Code reference is made to a Liquor Control Committee or a Committee on
Liquor Licenses, it shall be deemed to refer to the Liquor Committee.
(1980 Code § 22-25)
4-2-3: LICENSES AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail, or
outside of one’s personal residence to permit the consumption of, any alcoholic
liquor in the City:
   A.   Without a State of Illinois liquor license;
   B.   Without a Watseka liquor license;
   C.   At a location, place, or premises other than as described in the liquor
license; or
   D.   In violation of the terms of the liquor license.
(Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017)
4-2-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE; LOCATION DESCRIPTION REQUIRED:
A. No license shall be issued to any person who does not own the premises for
which a license is sought or does not have a valid lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued, who is not of good character and
reputation in the City, who is in any manner disqualified from obtaining a
State retail liquor dealer's license under the law of this State now in force
relating to alcoholic liquors or the nature of whose business or proposed
business is such, in the opinion of the Liquor Committee, and that the sale of
liquor in connection therewith will not be for the public good and convenience.
The license shall describe the location of the place of business to be operated
by the licensee, and the location shall be changed only by written permission
of the Mayor and the approval of the Liquor Committee, if the new location is a
proper one under the laws of the State.
(1980 Code § 22-5)
   B.   No license shall be issued to any person who is delinquent in the
payment of any obligation due the City for any charge, cost, fine, expense,
license fee, water bill, sewer bill, or any other fee imposed under this Code.
In the event any such obligation is delinquent on the effective date of the
license, or becomes delinquent after the effective date of the license, then
the license shall be subject to suspension or revocation under the provisions
of section
4-2-21 of this chapter.
   C.   No license shall be issued to any corporation in its own right, or to
any corporation any of whose principal officers, directors, or shareholders
owning more than a five percent (5%) interest therein are delinquent in the
payment of any obligation due the City for any charge, cost, fine, expense,
license fee, water bill, sewer bill, or any other fee imposed under this Code.
In the event any such obligation is delinquent on the effective date of the
license, or becomes delinquent after the effective date of the license, then
the license shall be subject to suspension or revocation under the provisions
of section
4-2-21 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2287, 4-28-2009)
4-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for City liquor licenses shall be made to the Mayor in writing,
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof
if a corporation, verified under oath, and shall include:
   A.   Such information as will allow the Mayor to investigate and determine
that no grounds exist for the denial thereof pursuant to sections 6-2, 6-11, 6-
12, or 6-25 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (the “act”), as amended from time
to time (235 ILCS 5/6-2, 5/6-11, 5/6-12 or 5/6-25);
   B.   Proof of dram shop liability insurance having the limits prescribed by
section 6-21 of the act (235 ILCS 5/6-21); and
   C.   Such other information or documentation as may be required to qualify
for such license.
(Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017)
4-2-5-1: APPLICATIONS FOR SUPPLEMENTAL LICENSES:
   A.   Class I License: Any applicant desirous of supplementing its on-
premises license with a Class I license shall submit to the Mayor the following
information in addition to that information required by the underlying license:
      1.   Proof that:
         a.   Outdoor operations will not disturb the lawful use and quiet
enjoyment of nearby properties;
         b.   The Class I premises will be operated in strict accordance with
applicable Health, Building, Fire, and Life Safety Codes;
         c.   Adequate safeguards are in place for security, crowd control,
lighting control, and protection of minors;
         d.   The licensee has previously maintained adequate control and
supervision of the licensed premises and has consistently operated the licensed
premises in substantial compliance with this chapter; and
         e.   That the Class I premises can be made to comply with the
conditions and limitations of the Class I license;
      2.   Information identifying the date and hours the Class I premises will
be in use, the purpose of the event, and the number of attendees expected; and
      3.   An executed contract with a private security company that will be
providing security for the event.
   B.   Class O License: Any applicant desirous of supplementing its on-
premises license with a Class O license shall submit to the Mayor the following
information in addition to that information required by the underlying license:
      1.   Proof that:
         a.   Outdoor operations will not disturb the lawful use and quiet
enjoyment of nearby properties;
         b.   The Class O premises will be operated in strict accordance with
applicable Health, Building, Fire, and Life Safety Codes;
         c.   Adequate safeguards are in place for security, crowd control,
lighting control, and protection of minors;
         d.   The licensee has previously maintained adequate control and
supervision of the licensed premises and has consistently operated the licensed
premises in substantial compliance with this chapter; and
         e.   That the Class O premises can be made to comply with the
conditions and limitations of the Class O license; and
      2.   A scaled site plan showing the location for outside service of
alcoholic liquor in relation to the permanent structure on the premises,
fences, emergency exits, and any other fixed objects within that location, and
a detailed description of materials to be used as fencing and emergency exits.
Such matters shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Official; provided,
that they demonstrate that the fencing is satisfactory, in both height and
design, taking into account such factors as the location of the premises, the
primary nature of the business, the proximity and nature of surrounding
business, the zoning of adjacent properties, the safety of the patrons and
public, the degree of permanency of the Class O premises, the number of
employees permanently stationed in the area or otherwise charged with
supervision over the area, and if recorded or live music or entertainment is to
be provided.
   C.   Class S License: Any applicant desirous of supplementing its Class A,
Class C, or Class D license with a Class S license shall submit to the Mayor
the following information in addition to that information required by the
underlying license:
      1.   An approved sidewalk café permit issued by the Building Official.
         a.   An applicant for a sidewalk café permit shall submit the
following information to the Building Official with its request for a sidewalk
café permit:
            (1)   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation, or
association applying for the permit;
            (2)   The residence and phone numbers of the applicant or partners
or, if a corporation or association, the residence and phone numbers of the
principal officers;
            (3)   The name of the business and the location for which the
permit is requested;
            (4)   A nonrefundable permit application processing fee in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00);
            (5)   A refundable, assuming the permit is not granted, permit fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot of sidewalk
space used; and
            (6)   A scaled site plan of the proposed sidewalk café, including
the location of the licensed premises, location of access points to the
sidewalk café, locations of tables and seating, locations of fences, and the
location of the curb cut and adjacent street or roadway. Measurements of the
size of the sidewalk café, its proximity to the licensed premises, and
proximity to any adjacent roadway shall be shown on the site plan.
         b.   The Building Official's decision to grant or deny the sidewalk
café permit shall be governed by the following standards:
            (1)   The sidewalk café shall be operated on a sidewalk adjacent to
the licensed premises, and no part thereof shall protrude past the building
lines of the licensed premises;
            (2)   No sidewalk café shall be located next to another premises
licensed for a sidewalk café;
            (3)   No sidewalk café shall be located adjacent to a designated
bus stop;
            (4)   No sidewalk café shall be located within fifteen feet (15')
of any street corner or twenty five feet (25') of a street corner if the
intersection is not controlled by a traffic control device at each direction of
travel, as measured from the intersection of the curb line;
            (5)   The sidewalk on which the sidewalk café is to be located must
have a minimum width of twelve feet (12');
            (6)   No sidewalk café shall reduce the paved pedestrianway to less
than five feet (5');
            (7)   The sidewalk café, with the exception of the entranceway
thereto which shall be no larger than six feet (6') in width, shall be
separated from the sidewalk and pedestrian traffic by a wrought iron fence or
other approved divider of at least three feet (3') but no greater than four
feet (4') in height on all sides;
            (8)   The sidewalk café shall be situated on the sidewalk nearest
the licensed premises and shall leave that portion of the sidewalk closest to
the street unobstructed; and
            (9)   Tables and seats proposed should be heavy enough to withstand
significant wind gusts.
      2.   A bond issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Illinois in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with
the City’s name as obligee, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
provisions of this Code; and
      3.   Proof of commercial public liability insurance in the amount of
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per person, five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, and twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) in property damage, and the City shall be named an additional
insured on a primary and noncontributory basis with respect to claims. The
applicant shall also provide a waiver of subrogation on their liability policy
in favor of the City. Liability coverage should be written by a carrier
licensed to do business in Illinois and have an AM Bests rating of A-VII or
better. Coverages shall be written on an occurrence basis. Claims-made coverage
is not acceptable. The applicant shall, upon the request of the City, furnish
said insurance policy or certificates evidencing coverage, which policies or
certificates shall provide that the insurance coverage shall not be reduced,
canceled, or allowed to expire without at least thirty (30) days' written
notice to the City. Failure to provide evidence of insurance in no way will be
deemed a waiver of the insurance requirements.
(Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017)
4-2-6: SELECTION OF LICENSEES:
In case applications for any class of retail liquor dealers’ licenses are
received from qualified applicants with respect to proper premises in greater
number than the number allowed by this chapter, the Mayor shall, from the moral
character and standing of the applicants, their financial integrity and
business reputation, the character of the respective business to be run, with
the assistance of the Liquor Committee, determine which of the applicants are
more likely to conduct the business more consistent with the public good and
convenience and make his choice accordingly.
(1980 Code § 22-18)
4-2-7: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Liquor licenses shall be and are hereby divided into the following classes:
   A.   Class A, Premises, Beer And Wine: A Class A license shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine only, for consumption on-premises.
   B.   Class A-1, Mixed: A Class A-1 license shall authorize the retail sale
of beer and wine only, for consumption on-premises and the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in packaged quantities for consumption off-premises.
(Ord., 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 2541, 5-28-2019)
   C.   Class B, Package: A Class B license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption off-premises. Class B licenses shall be
divided into two (2) subclasses: a Class B-1 license, which shall authorize the
retail sale of any alcoholic liquor in package quantities; and a Class B-
2 license, which shall authorize the sale of beer and wine only, in package
quantities.
   D.   Class C, General Premises: A Class C license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on-premises and the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in packaged quantities for consumption off-premises.
   E.   Class D, Club: A Class D license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on-premises. A Class D club license shall only
be issued to clubs or fraternal orders of restricted membership having a
charter from a state or national organization or operating under and by the
authority or society that is statewide or national in scope.
   F.   Class E, Banquet Hall: A Class E license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on-premises, being a banquet hall. A
“banquet hall” shall mean a business or facility the whole or part of which is
rented and food and beverage are offered to persons attending an organized
function. A Class E license shall not authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor at times other than that of an organized function.
   G.   Class, F Nonprofit Special Event: A Class F license shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine only, for consumption on-premises at special
events sponsored by not-for-profit organizations or entities. A Class F license
shall designate the location and dates of validity.
   H.   Class G, For Profit Special Event Supplemental: A Class G license shall
supplement a Class A license, Class C license, Class D License, or Class E
License, and shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only, for
consumption on-premises. A Class F license shall designate a location other
than the underlying licensed premises and the dates of validity.
   I.   Class H, Artistic Special Event: A Class H license shall authorize the
consumption of beer and wine only, on the licensed premises, but not the retail
sale, delivery, or distribution of any alcoholic liquor by the holder. A Class
H license shall designate the location, dates, and times of validity, which
shall correspond to the dates and times the licensed premises is being used for
instruction related to an artistic/culinary experience or event involving
customer/patron participation. The consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be
limited to those brought to the licensed premises by customers/patrons
participating in an artistic or culinary experience event.
   J.   Class I, Invitation Only Special Event Supplemental: A Class I license
shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption outside of
the Class I premises, but on the same lot as, a permanent structure otherwise
being a licensed premises, on the date and time identified in the Class I
license, which shall correspond to the date and time the licensed premises is
being used for an invitation-only event. No more than four (4) Class I licenses
shall be issued to the same underlying liquor licensee in a calendar year.
   K.   Class O, Outdoor Supplemental: A Class O license shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption outside of the Class O
premises, but on the same lot as, a permanent structure otherwise being a
licensed premises, and only in conjunction with the sale of food for outdoor
dining (full kitchen).
   L.   Class S, Sidewalk Café Supplemental: A Class S license shall supplement
the Class A license, Class C license, or Class D license, and shall authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption in a sidewalk café adjacent
to a permanent structure otherwise being a licensed premises, and only in
conjunction with the sale of food for outdoor dining (full kitchen). A Class S
license shall only be valid from May-October of the calendar year.
   M.   Class SE, Special Event: A Class SE license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on-premises in conjunction with a
special event for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days. The type
of alcoholic beverages to be served, the place of service, and the hours of
service, shall be established by the Liquor Control Commissioner and identified
in the license; provided, however, no special event liquor license shall be
issued for an event at a residence or on a residential lot, nor shall more than
three (3) special event liquor licenses be issued to the same licensee or
licensed premises within the same license year.
   N.   Class SG, Single Glass: A Class SG license shall authorize the retail
sale or complimentary distribution of the beer, wine and champagne, by single
glass only, for consumption on the licensed premises only, when the principal
business on the licensed premises is a spa, beauty salon or barber shop, or at
an art gallery, art studio, or other place of business while instructing an
artistic/culinary experience event involving customer/patron participation. The
sale, service and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to those
supplied by the licensee to customers/patrons of the principal business use
while receiving such services or while participating in an artistic or culinary
experience event.
(Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017; amd. Ord., 3-27-2018; Ord. 2517, 7-30-2018; Ord. 2541,
5-28-2019; Ord. 2677, 2-28-2023)
4-2-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses available for each class herein described are limited as
follows:
Class A   5
Class A-1 7
Class B-1 9
Class B-2 9
Class C   12
Class D   1
Class E   1
Class F   No limit
Class G   No limit
Class H   No limit
Class I   No limit
Class O   Same as underlying class
Class S   Same as underlying class
Class SE  No limit
Class SG  1
 
(Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017; amd. Ord., 3-27-2018; Ord. 2517, 7-30-2018; Ord. 2541,
5-28-2019; Ord. 2603A, 3-23-2021; Ord. 2677, 2-28-2023)
4-2-9: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: The annual fees and special event fees for licenses
under this chapter shall be as follows:
Class A   $250.00
Class A-1 1,200.00
Class B-1 450.00
Class B-2 200.00
Class C   1,200.00
Class D   800.00
Class E   600.00
Class F   15.00 per event
Class G   50.00 per day
Class H   15.00 per day
Class I   30.00 per day
Class O   75.00
Class S   75.00
Class SE  50.00 per day
Class SG  350.00
 
   B.   Payment And Disposition Of Fees: All fees shall be paid to the Mayor or
the City Clerk at the time application is made, and shall be forthwith turned
over to the City Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the
fee shall be returned to the applicant; but if the license is granted, then the
fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other funds as
shall have been designated by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 22-10; amd. Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017; Ord., 3-27-2018; amd. Ord. 2517,
7-30-2018; amd. Ord. 2541, 5-28-2019; Ord. 2677, 2-28-2023)
4-2-10: PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance, unless sooner revoked as is in this chapter provided, and shall
not constitute property nor shall it be the subject to attachment, garnishment
or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, nor subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that the executor or the
administrator of the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
beverages, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic beverages under
the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the
deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or
such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not
longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee.
(1980 Code § 22-14)
4-2-11: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
Each license issued under this chapter shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight April 30 following its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(1980 Code § 22-15)
4-2-12: CONDITIONS ON CERTAIN LICENSES:
The following conditions and limitations are placed on the following licenses:
   A.   Class H License:
      1.   A Class H license shall permit the consumption of beer and wine
only, during the principal business hours, no earlier than nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and no later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Monday through Saturday
of each week, and no earlier than eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and no later than
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday of each week.
      2.   A Class H license holder shall clear the premises of all customers/
patrons at or prior to eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. unless such patrons
are engaged in legal commercial activity that does not involve the consumption
of alcoholic liquor.
      3.   No video gaming or video gaming terminals shall be permitted or
allowed in or on a Class H licensed premises.
      4.   No food shall be prepared in or on a Class H licensed premises
except in conjunction with a culinary experience event through which customers/
patrons participate by preparing food for their own consumption.
      5.   No advertisement, sign, or any other external indicia of the Class H
licensee, the Class H licensed premises, or the primary business use shall
contain an express or implicit reference to alcoholic liquor.
      6.   No person or premises holding or having a liquor license of any
other class shall be permitted to simultaneously hold, or have applicable to
it, a Class H license.
   B.   Class I License:
      1.   Class I premises shall be closed no later than the time identified
on the Class I license.
      2.   Live or recorded entertainment, music, or any other natural or
amplified sound shall be permitted in a Class I premises; provided, however,
the sound level of any entertainment, music, or any other sound shall not
exceed sixty (60) decibels at any time, as measured at any property line.
      3.   No smoking shall be permitted in or within five feet (5') of a Class
I premises.
      4.   No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made to any person on
adjoining properties, streets, sidewalks, or alleys.
      5.   Access to the Class I premises shall be through the permanent
structure constituting the licensed premises, except for emergency exits
required by this Code or the Fire Department.
      6.   The Class I premises shall be secured on all sides (excepting a
portion abutting the structure constituting the licensed premises) with
temporary plastic or wooden fencing, at least four feet (4') high, erected on
the Class I premises.
      7.   All temporary fencing erected around the Class I premises shall be
removed no later than twenty four (24) hours after the event licensed.
      8.   No customer, employee, or other person shall remove alcoholic liquor
from the Class I premises, except for persons carrying the same directly
between the Class I premises and the licensed premises.
      9.   The Class I license holder shall provide, at its own cost and
expense, one security guard from a professional security company per forty (40)
persons in attendance at an event to be held on a Class I premises.
   C.   Class O License:
      1.   Class O premises shall be closed no later than then nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M., Sunday through Thursday, and no later than eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. on Friday and Saturday.
      2.   Live or recorded entertainment, music, or any other natural or
amplified sound shall be permitted in a Class O premises; provided, however,
the sound level of any entertainment, music or other sound shall not exceed
sixty (60) decibels at any time, as measured at any property line.
      3.   No smoking shall be permitted in or within five feet (5') of a Class
O premises.
      4.   No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made to any person on
adjoining properties, streets, sidewalks, or alleys.
      5.   Access to the Class O premises shall be through the permanent
structure constituting the licensed premises, except for emergency exits
required by this Code or the Fire Department.
      6.   The Class O premises shall be secure and inaccessible to customers
or the public when not in operation.
      7.   No customer, employee, or other person shall remove alcoholic liquor
from the Class O premises, except for persons carrying the same directly
between the Class O premises and the licensed premises.
   D.   Class S License:
      1.   Sidewalk cafes shall be closed no later than then nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M., Sunday through Thursday, and no later than eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. on Friday and Saturday.
      2.   No live entertainment or amplified sound or music shall be permitted
in a sidewalk café.
      3.   No smoking shall be permitted in or within five feet (5') of a
sidewalk café.
      4.   No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made to any person on
adjoining properties, streets, sidewalks, or alleys.
      5.   Any sidewalk café being operated on the side of the building located
on a corner lot shall be accessible from a side door of the licensed premises
only.
      6.   No customer, employee, or other person shall remove alcoholic liquor
from the area designated as a sidewalk café, except for persons carrying
alcoholic liquor directly between the sidewalk café and the licensed premises.
The licensee shall be responsible to see that no person is served or consumes
alcoholic liquor in the sidewalk café unless seated in the seated area
provided, in accordance with site plans approved for the sidewalk café permit.
      7.   Licensees shall be responsible for the cleanliness of the sidewalk
within fifty feet (50') of the approved location.
      8.   Licensees shall stack tables and chairs together and secure them
with a lock at the end of each day's operation.
      9.   Licensees shall sweep and remove any garbage or debris from the
sidewalk café at the end of each day's operation and shall also hose the area
of the sidewalk upon which the sidewalk café is located.
      10.   Sweeping or placement of garbage, debris, or other materials into
streets, storm sewers or any adjacent paved pedestrianway is prohibited.
   E.   Class SG License:
      1.   A Class SG licensee shall permit the sale, delivery or consumption
of beer, wine and champagne during the principal business' hours, but in no
event earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and no later than eleven o'clock
(11 :00) P.M. on Monday through Saturday of each week, and no earlier than
eleven o'clock (11 :00) A.M. and no later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on
Sunday of each week.
      2.   A class SG license holder shall clear the premises of all customers/
patrons at or prior to eleven thirty (11:30) P.M. unless such patrons are
engaged in legal commercial activity that does not involve the sale, delivery
or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
      3.   No video gaming or video gaming terminal shall be permitted or
allowed in or on a Class SG licensed premises.
      4.   No food shall be prepared in or on a Class SG licensed premises
except in conjunction with a culinary experience event through which customers/
patrons participate by preparing food for their own consumption.
      5.   No advertisement, sign or any other external indicia of the Class SG
licensee, the Class SG Licensed premises, or the primary business use, shall
contain an express or implicit reference to alcoholic beverages being sold,
delivered, or available for consumption.
      6.   No person or premises holding or having a liquor license of any
other class shall be permitted to simultaneously hold or have applicable to it
a Class SG license.
(Ord. 2481, 9-26-2017; amd. Ord. 2677, 2-28-2023)
4-2-13: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or for the storage
of such beverages for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage of food or sale of food for
human consumption.
(1980 Code § 22-13)
4-2-14: CLOSING HOURS:
No holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall sell
any alcoholic liquor between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. and six
o’clock (6:00) A.M. on any day. During such closed hours, it shall be unlawful
to sell or consume, or permit the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors on
any licensed premises.
(1980 Code § 22-11) (Ord. 2620, 9-28-2021)
4-2-15: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages
only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change, issued by the
Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted, unless
the proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic liquor
under the laws of this State and the ordinances of the City.
(1980 Code § 22-12)
4-2-16: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall sell, give, or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any minor,
or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-16.1.
(1980 Code § 22-16)
4-2-17: UNDERAGE PERSONS:
   A.   Definition: Whenever the term MINOR is used in this section, it shall
mean a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, unless the State Statutes
shall, with relation to the age of persons who may or may not be served
intoxicating liquors, prescribe a different age, in which event, a person
described as a MINOR in this chapter shall be a person under the age prescribed
by statute.
   B.   Purchase By, Accepting Gift, Possession Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for a minor to purchase or obtain any alcoholic
liquor in any tavern or other place in the City where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(1980 Code § 22-17)
      2.   Any person to whom the sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic
liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession.
(1980 Code § 22-17; amd. 2019 Code)
      3.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this section.
      4.   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any minor is forbidden.
(1980 Code §§ 22-5, 22-17)
   C.   ID Requirements; False ID:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for a minor to misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other
place in the City where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(1980 Code § 22-17; amd. 2019 Code)
      2.   In every tavern or other place in the City where alcoholic liquor is
sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed
card which shall be supplied by the City Clerk and which shall read
substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO MINORS
      You are subject to a fine up to Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) under Title
4, Chapter 2 of the Watseka City Code if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
(1980 Code § 22-17)
      3.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believe or have reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
      4.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.
(1980 Code §§ 22-5, 22-17)
   D.   Sales For, Delivery To, Gifting Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any minor.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is an adult to purchase or
buy any alcoholic liquor for the purpose of reselling the same to a minor or
for the purpose of giving or delivering the same to any such minor.
      3.   The sale of intoxicating liquor to any minor, the gift of
intoxicating liquor to any minor, and the purchase of intoxicating liquor by,
for or in behalf of any minor person within the City is hereby prohibited.
(1980 Code § 22-17)
   E.   Presence On Premises:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class C retail liquor
dealer’s license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any
minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or
situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided
that this subsection E1 shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his
or her parent or guardian, or spouse of legal age, or any licensed premises for
which a “restaurant” subclass license has been issued; and provided, that this
subsection E1 shall not apply to any licensed recreational center to or in
which center alcoholic liquor is not served or sold.
(1980 Code § 22-17; amd. 2019 Code)
      2.   In this subsection, a “licensed recreational center” shall mean an
area standing apart from the immediate bar area, in which various forms of
entertainment are provided for the public. Such recreational areas shall
include regulation size or sanctioned bowling alleys, three (3) or more
regulation size billiard or pool tables, or such forms of entertainment as from
time to time shall be approved by the City Council. The annual license fee for
each recreational center shall be ten dollars ($10.00). All applications for
licensed recreational centers shall be made in accordance with the general
provisions of the title on licenses, and when approved by the Mayor and Liquor
Committee, the license shall be issued by the City Clerk.
      3.   At every tavern or other place in the City where the principal
business is the sale of alcoholic liquor, there shall be displayed at all times
in a prominent place near every entrance and placed so as to be clearly visible
to all entrants, a sign which shall be provided by the City Clerk and which
shall read substantially as follows:
   MINORS NOT PERMITTED
   Under Title 4, chapter 2 of the City Code of the City of Watseka, minors are
not permitted on these premises, except when accompanied by parent, guardian,
or spouse of legal age. All entrants must have legal proof of age.
      4.   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Mayor may suspend
or revoke the retail liquor dealer’s license for any violation of the
provisions of this subsection.
(1980 Code § 22-17)
   F.   Employment:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell any alcoholic liquor in
any Class B licensed retail establishment; except, that minors eighteen (18)
years old and older may sell alcoholic liquor in any Class B establishment in
which the minor is employed, on the condition that an employee of the
establishment is present on the premises in a supervisory capacity and is not
less than the age of twenty one (21) years.
(Ord. 2441, 5-26-2015)
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any minor to draw, pour, mix or serve any
alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises; except, that minors over the
age of eighteen (18) years may serve alcoholic liquor at Class A or C subclass
“restaurant establishments”; provided, however, that this exception shall apply
only on the conditions that:
(1980 Code § 22-17)
         a.   A person over the age of twenty one (21) years shall be present
in a supervisory capacity; and
(1980 Code § 22-17; amd. 2019 Code)
         b.   Such service shall be solely in the capacity of waiting tables in
a dining area and not in a lounge area or a bar room.
   G.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for any
parent or guardian to permit any minor child of whom he or she may be the
parent or guardian to violate any of the provisions of this section.
(1980 Code § 22-17)
   H.   Penalties:
      1.   Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each conviction thereof.
      2.   Any adult convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be penalized pursuant to subsection
4-2-23B of this chapter.
(1980 Code §§ 22-5, 22-17)
4-2-18: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
A. Consumption In Public (see also section
7-8-1 of this Code): No person shall carry, possess, or consume any alcoholic
liquor on any street, sidewalk, alley, or any other public way within the
limits of the City, unless the alcoholic liquor is in its original container
with the seal unbroken.
(Ord. 2247, 11-13-2007)
   B.   Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any license holder to permit any
person to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any building,
tent, or other structure used for any of the purposes for which a license is
issued under this chapter. In the event of a violation of this subsection, the
license shall be subject to suspension or revocation under the provisions of
subsection
4-2-21A of this chapter.
(Ord. 2287, 4-28-2009)
4-2-19: INSPECTIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
By acceptance of a liquor license under this chapter, each licensee shall be
deemed to consent to entry on the licensed premises by the Liquor Control
Commissioner, his agents, or any law enforcement officer to determine whether
any of the provisions of the statutes or any rules or regulations adopted by
the Liquor Control Commissioner or by the State Commission have been or are
being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith. Refusal to permit such entry by the licensee or
employees, or agents of the licensee, shall be a violation of this chapter and
subject to the penalties herein prescribed.
(1980 Code § 22-19(a))
4-2-20: COMPLAINTS BY RESIDENTS:
Any five (5) residents of the City shall have the right to file a complaint in
writing with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, stating that any licensee
of the City has been or is violating the provisions of this chapter, which
complaint shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The
complaint shall state the particular provision of this chapter believed to have
been violated and the facts, in detail, upon which the belief is based. If the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially
charges a violation and that from the facts as alleged, there is reasonable
cause of such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve
notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the
particular charge in the complaint.
(1980 Code § 22-22)
4-2-21: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINE IN LIEU:
   A.   Grounds: In case any rioting, brawling, fighting, display of deadly
weapons, lewd misconduct, violation of the laws of this State, or violation of
any of the ordinances of the City, or of this chapter takes place within, upon,
or adjacent to the premises licensed, the Mayor, with the consent of the Liquor
Control Committee, may revoke the license of said licensee, or he may suspend
the license for such period as shall be agreed upon by the Mayor and the Liquor
Control Committee. During the time the license shall be suspended, the
licensee, his agents, servants, and employees, shall make no sale of any
alcoholic beverages at retail in or upon the premises described in the license.
In case of revocation or suspension for cause, the licensee shall not be
entitled to a refund of any license fees.
(1980 Code § 22-20)
   B.   Hearing: No license shall be revoked or suspended, except after a
public hearing by the Liquor Control Commissioner, with a three-day written
notice to the licensee, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend. Such notice, if practicable, shall be served personally upon the
licensee, but if the licensee has left the City or cannot be found, a seven-day
notice sent through the United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to
the licensee at his last known address, may be used in place of personal
service. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to
writing and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings. The Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five (5) days after the hearing, if
he determines after such hearing that the license shall be revoked or
suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written
order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order, within
the five (5) days, upon the licensee.
(1980 Code § 22-21)
   C.   Fine In Lieu Of Suspension Or Revocation: In addition to suspension,
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such
violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for a first violation within a twelve-month period, one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve-month period, and
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent
violation within a twelve-month period. Each day on which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in fines under this subsection may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into
the Municipal Treasury.
(1980 Code § 22-21)
4-2-22: APPEALS:
Pursuant to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9, it is hereby resolved and
ordained by the City Council that, as provided for home rule municipalities,
the appeal from an order or action of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of such
Local Liquor Control Commissioner. On appeal, a certified official record of
the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter shall be filed
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within five (5) days after notice of
the filing of such appeal.
(1980 Code § 22-27)
4-2-23: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Responsibility For Violations: Every act or omission of whatever nature
constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any
manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to
be the act of such employer or licensee, and the employer or licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by him personally.
(1980 Code § 22-23)
   B.   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, for which violation no specific penalty has been
provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 22-28; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 3: VIDEO GAMING
Section
4-3-1: Licenses Required
4-3-2: Applications For Licenses
4-3-3: License Fees
4-3-4: Expiration Of Licenses
4-3-5: Display Of License
4-3-6: Revocation Of License
4-3-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   The owner of a “video gaming terminal”, as defined in 230 ILCS Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/5 shall obtain a license for such device issued by the
City.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep, maintain, or use,
or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use, upon his or her
premises, any video gaming terminal unless a valid license issued under this
chapter for the video gaming terminal is in effect.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver video gaming terminals
within the City for use by any other person for gain or profit from the
operation thereof unless a license therefor has been issued by the City, and
the license fee has been paid for the then current year.
(Ord. 2378, 8-28-2012)
4-3-2: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Applications for the licenses required by this chapter shall be filed with the
City Clerk and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address, and date of birth of the owner of the video gaming
terminal and of the owner of the establishment where the video gaming terminal
is to be located. If the owner of the video gaming terminal is a corporation or
an LLC, the application must be signed by the president of the corporation or
the manager of the LLC, who shall provide all of the information required by
this section as to such person.
   B.   Prior convictions of the owner of the video gaming terminal and the
owner of the establishment, if any.
   C.   The place where the video gaming terminal is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that location.
   D.   A description of the video gaming terminal to be covered by the
license.
   E.   Evidence that a license has been issued by the Illinois Gaming Board to
the owner of the video gaming terminal and the owner of the establishment.
(Ord. 2378, 8-28-2012)
4-3-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for each license required by this chapter shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). The fee shall be nonrefundable and shall not be prorated.
(Ord. 2486, 9-26-2017)
4-3-4: EXPIRATION OF LICENSES:
Each license issued under this chapter shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight on April 30 following its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(Ord. 2378, 8-28-2012)
4-3-5: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license required by this chapter shall be prominently displayed next to the
video gaming terminal.
(Ord. 2378, 8-28-2012)
4-3-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The Mayor, upon receiving information that a violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.)
by an owner or licensee of a video gaming terminal may have occurred, shall
notify such owner or licensee of any charge of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or of the Video Gaming Act in connection with the
operation of any video gaming terminal.
   B.   Upon five (5) days notice of a hearing to the owner or licensee, which
hearing shall be before the Mayor with the opportunity of such owner or
licensee to be heard, the Mayor may order the revocation of the license upon a
finding that a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the Video
Gaming Act has occurred, and the license shall thereupon be terminated.
(Ord. 2378, 8-28-2012)
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS
Section
4-4-1: Scope
4-4-2: License Required; Exemptions
4-4-3: Applications For Licenses; Fees
4-4-4: Order And Conduct
4-4-5: Interference With Aisles And Passageways
4-4-6: Exit Signs And Lights
4-4-7: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-4-8: Slot Machines And Coin-Operated Machines
4-4-9: Medicine Shows
4-4-10: Exemptions From Provisions
4-4-11: Penalty
4-4-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to
all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the City,
whether specifically licensed in this title or not. (1980 Code § 23-30)
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the
public and for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license therefor; provided, that the provisions of this section shall
not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any
other ordinance of the City.
(1980 Code § 23-31)
4-4-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES; FEES:
Applications for licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall comply with
all of the general provisions of this title relating to applications. For such
licenses, the following fees shall be paid:
 
Menageries                       $ 5.00 per day
Carnivals and circuses           20.00 per day
Exhibitions of inanimate objects 5.00 per day
Other amusements                 10.00 per day
 
4-4-4: ORDER AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Order Preserved: It shall be the duty of every proprietor or lessee of
any theater or public hall, and of every person giving or conducting any show
or amusement within the City, to preserve good order in and about his place of
exhibition or amusement, and if necessary for that purpose, he shall employ at
his own expense a sufficient number of auxiliary police officers. The Chief of
Police, upon the failure of the licensee to furnish a auxiliary police officer
for maintaining good order, may close the show, entertainment, or amusement
until the licensee makes adequate provisions for maintaining good order.
(1980 Code § 23-35)
   B.   Conduct Of Audience:
      1.   The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly
and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such
amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other
risks.
(1980 Code § 23-37)
   C.   Riots: It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of
any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance.
(1980 Code § 23-38)
4-4-5: INTERFERENCE WITH AISLES AND PASSAGEWAYS:
No chairs, stools or seats of any description shall be placed or permitted to
remain in the aisles or passageways in any theater, hall or other public
building when the same is occupied by the public or any audience. It shall be
the duty of the Chief of Police and all members of the police force to see that
this section is strictly observed; and in case of any violation hereof, to
proceed forthwith to clear any obstructed aisle or passageway, and to arrest
the offender or offenders.
(1980 Code § 23-36; amd. 2019 Code)
4-4-6: EXIT SIGNS AND LIGHTS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building, hall
or other enclosure used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one hundred
(100) persons or more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures, and
other entertainment is offered, operated or presented to provide and place a
sign on which the word “Exit” shall appear in letters at least six inches (6")
high over every door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress
therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over
such sign, which light shall be kept burning during the entire period that the
hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall.
(1980 Code § 23-41)
4-4-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Street Shows: No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival,
exhibition, show or other amusement to be given on any public street or
sidewalk or in any place that the only main accommodation for the public or the
audience will be in a public place, except on the order of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 23-32)
   B.   Indecent, Immoral Entertainments: No person, firm or corporation,
whether licensed or not, shall give, produce, present, conduct or offer, either
publicly or privately, with or without charging an admission fee, any indecent,
immoral, lewd or impure play, exhibition, entertainment, performance,
apparatus, or production, or any play, exhibition, entertainment, performance,
apparatus or production suggestive of anything indecent, immoral, lewd or
impure, within the City.
(1980 Code § 23-33; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Smoking:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or
pipe in any building, tent, or other structure used for any of the purposes for
which a license is issued under this chapter.
(1980 Code § 23-39)
      2.   It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises, or of the
occupant in charge, to provide and place printed signs on which the words “No
Smoking” shall appear in letters at least four inches (4") high, in conspicuous
places on the premises.
(1980 Code § 23-40)
4-4-8: SLOT MACHINES AND COIN-OPERATED MACHINES:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to maintain or expose for public
use any coin-operated machine or any slot machine, operated with a slug or
coin, for the use or operation of which a fee is charged, without having first
obtained a license therefor.
   B.   License Fee: The annual fee for such licenses shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per gaming/video machine.
   C.   Definition: As used in this section, the term SLOT MACHINE shall mean
and include any device not a gambling device, operated by means of slugs or
coins, which show pictures, numbers or symbols, singly or in combinations, as a
result of operation, and shall include coin-operated pool tables.
   D.   Interpretation: A coin-operated machine shall include machines operated
by the insertion of paper currency, but shall not include coin-operated
machines otherwise licensed in this Code.
(1980 Code § 23-42)
4-4-9: MEDICINE SHOWS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to give or conduct any medicine
show or performance in connection with or for the purpose of attracting
prospective buyers of, or crowds for the purpose of lectures on or
demonstrations of any tonic, medicine, remedy specific for human ailments,
without having first secured a license therefor.
   B.   Application For License: Applications for such licenses shall state
thereon the name, nature and contents of the article to be promoted or offered
for sale. Such applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police.
   C.   Review Of Applications; Restrictions On Issuance: No license shall be
issued where the tonic, medicine, or remedy is harmful for use without the
advice of a physician or consists in whole or part of harmful habit-forming
drugs or narcotics.
(1980 Code § 23-43)
4-4-10: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not require the taking out of a license or the payment of
license fees by citizens or residents of the City for the production of
theatricals, musical entertainments, cantatas, lectures, church or band fairs,
balls or like entertainments, where such entertainments shall be under the
auspices of local organizations or persons, wholly or in the greater part
consisting of local talent, and for the benefit of religious, charitable or
educational organizations, or where the proceeds of such entertainment shall go
to the general funds for the maintenance of local organizations, churches,
schools, bands, lodges, hospitals or for like purposes, such entertainments
being produced only for a period not exceeding one week in any one month by any
one organization.
(1980 Code § 23-34)
4-4-11: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, each person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 23-190; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 5: RAFFLES
Section
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Raffle Licensing Commissioner
4-5-3: License Required
4-5-4: Qualifications Of Licensee; Ineligibility For License
4-5-5: Application For License; Fee
4-5-6: Contents Of License
4-5-7: Term Of License
4-5-8: Display Of License
4-5-9: Conduct Of Raffles
4-5-10: Inspections
4-5-11: Raffles Manager
4-5-12: Records And Reports
4-5-13: Issuance, Suspension And Revocation Of License
4-5-14: Responsibility For Violations
4-5-15: Penalties
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by
government.
LICENSEE: Any person or club holding a license under the provisions of this
chapter.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of the raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
RAFFLE: A form of “lottery”, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012, as amended (720 ILCS 5/28-2(b), conducted by an
organization licensed under this chapter, in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
presented and differentiated by a number, or by any combination of numbers, or
by some other medium, one or more of which chance is to be designated the
winning chance.
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by other
method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RAFFLE does not include a savings promotion raffle authorized under section 5g
of the Illinois Banking Act, section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act, section 42.7
of the Illinois Credit Union Act, section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12
USC 25a) or section 4 of the Home Owners’ Loan Act (12 USC 1463).
RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS ACT: The Act of the General Assembly of Illinois
entitled "Raffles and Poker Runs Act", which was approved August 5, 1980, as
amended, and cited as 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 et. seq.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-2: RAFFLE LICENSING COMMISSIONER:
The Mayor of the City or his designee shall be the Raffle Licensing
Commissioner.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
There is hereby authorized the issuance of licenses for the purpose of
conducting raffles in the City in conformance with the “Raffles and Poker Runs
Act” of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE; INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   A license pursuant to this chapter shall be issued only to a bona fide
fraternal organization that operates without profit to their members and has
been in existence continuously for a period of at least five (5) years
immediately before making application for a license and which has had, during
that entire five-year period, a bona fide membership, engaged in carrying out
their objects, and as further defined in the Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs
Act (230 ILCS 15/12b).
   B.   The following persons or entities are ineligible for any license under
this chapter:
      1.   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person’s ability
to engage in the licensed position;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B1,
B2 or B3 of this section has a proprietary, legal or equitable interest in, or
which the person is active or employed;
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or
B3 of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not.
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or
B3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
RAFFLE, as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
   C.   Applicant Convictions.
    
      1.   The licensing authority shall not require applicants to report the
following information and shall not consider the following criminal history
records in connection with an application for licensure:
         a.   Juvenile adjudications of delinquent minors as defined in section
5-105 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, subject to the restrictions set forth
in section 5-130 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
         b.   Law enforcement records, court records, and conviction records of
an individual who was 17 years old at the time of the offense and before
January 1, 2014, unless the nature of the offense required the individual to be
tried as an adult.
         c.   Records of arrest not followed by a conviction.
         d.   Convictions overturned by a higher court.
         e.   Convictions or arrests that have been sealed or expunged.
      2.   The licensing authority, upon a finding that an applicant for a
license was previously convicted of a felony shall consider any evidence of
rehabilitation and mitigating factors contained in the applicant’s record,
including any of the following factors and evidence, to determine if the
conviction will impair the ability of the applicant to engage in the position
for which a license is sought:
         a.   The lack of direct relation of the offense for which the
applicant was previously convicted to the duties, functions, and
responsibilities of the position for which a license is sought;
         b.   Whether five (5) years since a felony conviction or three (3)
years since release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later,
have passed without a subsequent conviction;
         c.   If the applicant was previously licensed or employed in this
State or other states or jurisdictions, then the lack of prior misconduct
arising from or related to the licensed position or position of employment;
         d.   The age of the person at the time of the criminal offense;
         e.   Successful completion of sentence and, for applicants serving a
term of parole or probation, a progress report provided by the applicant’s
probation or parole officer that documents the applicant’s compliance with
conditions of supervision;
         f.   Evidence of the applicant’s present fitness and professional
character;
         g.   Evidence of rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort during or
after incarceration, or during or after a term of supervision, including, but
not limited to, a certificate of good conduct under section 5-5.5-25 of the
Unified Code of Corrections or a certificate of relief from disabilities under
section 5-5.5-10 of the Unified Code of Corrections; and
         h.   Any other mitigating factors that contribute to the person’s
potential and current ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position for which a license or employment is sought.
      3.   If the licensing authority refuses to issue a license to an
applicant, then the applicant shall be notified of the denial in writing with
the following included in the notice of denial:
         a.   A statement about the decision to refuse to issue a license;
         b.   A list of the convictions that the licensing authority determined
will impair the applicant’s ability to engage in the position for which a
license is sought;
         c.   A list of convictions that formed the sole or partial basis for
the refusal to issue a license; and
         d.   A summary of the appeal process or the earliest the applicant may
reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
      4.   No later than May 1 of each year, the licensing authority must
prepare, publicly announce, and publish a report of summary statistical
information relating to new and renewal license applications during the
preceding calendar year. Each report shall show, at a minimum:
         a.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license within the
previous calendar year;
         b.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license within the
previous calendar year who had any criminal conviction;
         c.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license in the
previous calendar year who were granted a license;
         d.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a
criminal conviction who were granted a license within the previous calendar
year;
         e.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license within the
previous calendar year who were denied a license; and
         f.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a
criminal conviction who were denied a license in the previous calendar year in
whole or in part because of a prior conviction.
(230 ILCS 15/3.1)
4-5-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Any applicant for a license shall apply for the license in writing and
file the application with the City Clerk. The filing fee for each license shall
be five dollars ($5.00) and shall be paid at the time of filing the
application. Any funds received as a result of the application shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the City.
   B.   The application for license shall specify the location in which raffle
chances will be sold or issued, the time and determination of winning chances
and location or locations at which winning chances will be determined, the
nature and number of ....... The application for license must be completed in
its entirety and must include a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit
character of the prospective license organization, signed by the presiding
officer and the secretary of the organization, and must include authorization
to conduct a background check including credit information and criminal
history.
   C.   The application shall also contain a written agreement signed by the
applicant or authorized officer of the applicant, hereby holding the City, its
officers, Alderpersons, employees, attorneys and all other agents harmless from
any claim or cause of action (whether State or Federal) for injury or damages
arising out of, or in any way related to, the subject raffle or to any property
(real and/or personal) conveyed by the applicant pursuant to the subject
raffle.
   D.   The Raffle Commissioner shall review the applications and shall act
upon the application within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any additional
information which may be required and requested shall extend the time for
answering to thirty (30) days from the response to said request.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-6: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall state the
name and address of the licensee, a description of the premises for which the
license is granted and the dates of its issuance and expiration.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for not more than one
year and for the number of raffles specified in the application and license.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Upon issuance, the license shall be displayed at the site where the winning
chances will be determined.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-9: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of a raffle.
   D.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this chapter and Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
   E.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license for a raffle.
   F.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances only with permission of a parent or guardian.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) may be within the area where winning
chances in a raffle are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or
guardian.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-10: INSPECTIONS:
Licensees shall make all premises named in the license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter available for inspection by the local Raffle
Commissioner, Alderperson of the City, duly appointed police officers of the
City and other officers designated by the Mayor to conduct inspections and
observations pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-11: RAFFLES MANAGER:
All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of
a single raffles manager designated by the organization.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-12: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning games are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, description of the
purchased item of service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo receipts,
if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant
to a license therefor being issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the Raffle
Licensing Commissioner, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceed from
raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this
section.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and the organization shall make available their records relating to the
operation of raffles for public inspection at a reasonable time and place.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-13: ISSUANCE, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The Raffle Licensing Commissioner may issue, revoke, or suspend any
license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or on the basis or
provisions of any State of Illinois law pertaining to raffles.
   B.   Any raffle license may be suspended or revoked for any violation of
this chapter, or any other City ordinance, or any violation of the Illinois
Raffles and Poker Runs Act, or any other applicable State Statutes.
   C.   When any licensee shall have its license revoked for any cause, no
license shall be granted for a period of one year thereafter.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or
other agent of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the
same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
   B.   Any person or organization who is licensed by the City for the purposes
of selling raffle chances shall be deemed to be licensed within the City for
the purposes of selling or offering for sale any raffle chance.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
4-5-15: PENALTIES:
Any person or organization that is convicted of violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day
any person or organization violates or continues to violate any provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Suspension or revocation of a
license may be in addition to the imposition of a fine or other such penalty
for the conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and
suspension or revocation shall be no defense to a prosecution for such
violations.
(Ord. 2439, 4-28-2015)
CHAPTER 6: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Permit Required
4-6-3: Application For Permit
4-6-4: Permit And Badge Fees
4-6-5: Review Of Application; Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
4-6-6: Contents And Expiration Of Permit
4-6-7: Canvassers Exempt From Permit Requirements
4-6-8: Uninvited Soliciting, Peddling Or Canvassing
4-6-9: Permitted Hours
4-6-10: Handbills And Flyers
4-6-11: Street Solicitations Prohibited
4-6-12: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
4-6-13: Appeals
4-6-14: Claims Of Exemptions
4-6-15: Penalty
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in
this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER: Any person who attempts to make personal contact with another
(except on premises where that person is employed or resides) for the primary
purpose of: a) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular
religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue, or candidate, even if
incidental to the purpose, the canvasser accepts contributions for or against
such cause; and/or b) distributes a handbill, flyer, pamphlet, or any other
type of literature advertising a noncommercial event, service or ideal.
CANVASSER shall also include any person who seeks charitable contributions for
a patriotic, philanthropic, religious, social, health, welfare, benevolent,
educational, civic, cultural or fraternal cause or ideology.
CANVASSING ACTIVITIES: The actions of a canvasser.
CITY: The City of Watseka.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Watseka or his/her assigns.
CONTRIBUTIONS: Mean and include alms, money, subscriptions, property, or any
other types of donations.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The City Council of the City of Watseka.
PEDDLER: Any person who, not having been invited by another, carries or
transports goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and
offers the same for sale (except on premises where that person is employed or
resides). A PEDDLER shall also include any person who solicits orders and, as a
separate transaction, makes a subsequent delivery to a purchaser.
PEDDLING ACTIVITIES: The actions of a peddler.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization.
SOLICITING ACTIVITIES: The actions of a solicitor.
SOLICITOR: Any person who, not having been invited by another (except on
premises where that person is employed or resides), takes or attempts to take
orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of
any nature for future delivery, or for services performed in the future. A
SOLICITOR shall also include any person who distributes handbills and flyers
advertising a commercial event or service.
STREET: Any public street, highway or other thoroughfare primarily intended for
use by motor vehicles. STREET shall mean the entire area between a curb cut,
including, but not limited to, any and all medians and crosswalks.
STREET SOLICITATION: The act of soliciting, peddling or canvassing in and on a
City street or highway.
(2019 Code)
4-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or solicitation
activities within the City without first obtaining a permit issued by the City
Clerk.
(2019 Code)
4-6-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person who desires to engage in peddling or solicitation activities shall
file with the City Clerk an application in writing, on a form to be furnished
by the City Clerk, which shall consist of the following information:
   A.   Name, address, age and telephone number of the applicant, which shall
be confirmed through the applicant’s driver’s license or State identification
card, articles of incorporation, or other legally recognized form of
identification;
   B.   A brief description of the business or activity;
   C.   If acting as an employee of an employer, the name, address and
telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address
and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with
credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of
the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
   D.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense, and the
date of the conviction or plea;
   E.   A statement as to whether the applicant has had a permit denied,
suspended or revoked for noncompliance with this chapter in the past; and
   F.   Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under Federal,
State or local law, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the
proposed business, or which, under any such law, would exempt the applicant
from the permit requirements of this chapter.
(2019 Code)
4-6-4: PERMIT AND BADGE FEES:
At the time the application is filed with the City Clerk, the applicant shall
pay a fee to cover the cost of processing the application and investigating the
facts stated therein. The permit fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each
solicitor and peddler.
(2019 Code)
4-6-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Review Of Application; Issuance Of Permit: Upon receipt of an
application, the City Clerk shall review the application to determine if all of
the information required by this chapter is present. If the application has
listed all of the information necessary, and there exists no reason to deny the
permit for the reasons set forth in subsection F2 of this section, the City
Clerk shall issue the permit to the applicant.
   B.   Contents Of Permit: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
contain the name and address of the permittee, the name of any employer or
principal, the class of permit issued, the date of issuance and the date of
expiration.
   C.   Time Limit For Review; Temporary Permit: The City Clerk shall make a
good faith effort to complete an application review and advise an applicant of
his/her decision within seventy two (72) hours of receipt of the application,
excepting weekends and holidays. An applicant may obtain his/her permit from
City Hall once advised that a decision to grant the permit has been issued by
the City Clerk.
   D.   Notice Of Issuance Or Denial: The City Clerk shall notify the applicant
of his/her decision to grant or deny a permit by the telephone number listed on
the application. The City Clerk shall advise the applicant of the basis for the
denial.
   E.   Incomplete Application: If an application is incomplete, the City Clerk
shall allow the applicant an opportunity to provide the information necessary
for his/her review.
   F.   Denial Of Permit:
      1.   In the case of a denial, the City Clerk shall issue a written
decision advising the applicant why the permit was denied. The written decision
shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. mail at the address contained on the
application. The written decision shall be postmarked no later than three (3)
business days subsequent to the expiration of the seventy two (72) hour review
period or the oral advisement of a denial of a permit, whichever is later.
      2.   The City Clerk may refuse to issue a permit for any of the following
reasons:
         a.   The location and time of solicitation or peddling referenced on
the application is otherwise prohibited by this chapter;
         b.   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information
on the application;
         c.   The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony
or misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances,
crimes of dishonesty (e.g., theft, fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, etc.), or
any violent acts against persons or property within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application;
         d.   The applicant's failure to provide proof of authority to act on
behalf of an employer or principal; or
         e.   The applicant’s denial of a permit issued under this chapter
within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show that the
basis for the previous denial no longer exists.
      3.   The City Clerk's denial and the reasons for disapproval shall be
noted on the application.
      4.   A denial of a permit may be appealed in the manner provided in
section
4-6-15 of this chapter.
   G.   Record Of Permits: A record of all permits issued and denied pursuant
to this chapter shall be maintained by the City Clerk for a period of two (2)
years.
(2019 Code)
4-6-6: CONTENTS AND EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
All permits shall list the number of days and dates upon which a solicitor or
peddler is authorized to conduct his/her activities. The permit shall expire on
the date requested by the solicitor or peddler. Provided, however, no permit
shall be valid for more than one year after the date of issuance. No person
shall engage in soliciting/peddling activities without a valid permit.
(2019 Code)
4-6-7: CANVASSERS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Canvassers shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter.
Canvassers shall be subject to all other time, place and manner restrictions
provided in this chapter.
(2019 Code)
4-6-8: UNINVITED SOLICITING, PEDDLING OR CANVASSING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to enter
upon any private premises in the City which has posted at the entry to the
premises or at the entry to the principal building on the premises a sign
bearing the words “No Peddlers” or “No Solicitors”, or words of similar import.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to remain
on any private premises once requested to leave by an occupant. Once requested
to leave, a solicitor, peddler or canvasser must do so immediately and
peacefully.
(2019 Code)
4-6-9: PERMITTED HOURS:
Permitted hours for canvassing activities, peddling activities, and soliciting
activities are Monday through Saturday between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and Sunday between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. No person shall engage in
canvassing activities, peddling activities, and soliciting activities other
than during permitted hours.
(2019 Code)
4-6-10: HANDBILLS AND FLYERS:
It shall be unlawful to leave a handbill or flyer upon any premises which is
not securely attached thereto or placed in such a manner to prevent litter.
Provided, however, it shall be unlawful to damage any property in an attempt to
securely attach any handbill or flyer to a premises.
(2019 Code)
4-6-11: STREET SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED:
Street solicitation is not permitted in or on any street or highway in the
City.
(2019 Code)
4-6-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Any permit may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in an
application;
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in
the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;
      3.   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the
provisions contained in the permit or this chapter;
      4.   A conviction of any crime which would otherwise be a basis for
denying a permit application; or
      5.   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner so
as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace, or endanger
the health, safety or welfare of the public.
   B.   Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
City Clerk after notice and a hearing for any basis identified in subsection A
of this section. Notice and a hearing prior to a suspension or revocation shall
not be given if the City Clerk determines that an immediate suspension or
revocation is necessary. In such cases, a post-deprivation hearing will be
provided.
   C.   The City Clerk shall provide notice to the permittee via U.S. mail
setting forth the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall consist of
the charges for which the permit's suspension or revocation is being
considered. The notice shall contain the date(s) on which any charge is alleged
to have occurred along with the name(s) of any witness(es) that will testify at
the hearing. Any written or tangible evidence of the occurrence shall be
identified in the notice.
   D.   A hearing pursuant to this section shall occur no earlier than seven
(7) days nor later than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice of hearing
is postmarked.
   E.   The permittee shall be responsible for obtaining a court reporter in
order to preserve the record for appeal.
   F.   After the hearing, the City Clerk shall orally advise the permittee of
his/her decision to suspend or revoke a permit under this chapter. After the
decision has been orally related to the permittee, the City Clerk shall issue a
written decision setting forth his/her decision and the basis for the ruling.
The written decision shall be mailed to the permittee via U.S. mail at the
address contained in the application. The written decision shall be postmarked
no later than three (3) business days subsequent to the hearing.
(2019 Code)
4-6-13: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the City Clerk to
deny, suspend or revoke a permit shall have the right to appeal such action to
the Corporate Authorities within fourteen (14) days from the date on which the
City Clerk’s decision has been mailed to the applicant/permittee. This date
shall be determined by the date on which the written decision was postmarked.
In the event the City Clerk fails to issue a written decision, the appellant
shall have seventeen (17) days from the date on which he/she was orally
informed of the City Clerk's decision to deny, suspend or revoke a permit to
appeal that decision.
   B.   An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written statement with the
City Clerk setting forth the grounds for the appeal. If a written decision was
provided to the appellant from the City Clerk, a copy of that decision shall be
attached to the appellant’s written statement. After the receipt of said
appeal, the City Clerk shall schedule the appeal for the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Corporate Authorities. Provided, however, if the
appeal is received within ninety six (96) hours of a regularly scheduled
meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the following regularly scheduled
meeting.
   C.   A hearing shall be set no later than thirty (30) days from the date on
which an appeal is received.
   D.   Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing shall be given to
the appellant via U.S. mail at the address provided on the person's
application.
   E.   An appellant shall be given notice of the hearing at least seventy two
(72) hours before the hearing.
   F.   A decision to affirm or reverse the decision of the City Clerk
concerning the suspension or revocation of a permit shall be limited to the
record generated at the hearing in front of the City Clerk.
   G.   The decision of the Corporate Authorities shall be final and binding on
all parties concerned.
   H.   A decision to affirm or reverse a decision of the City Clerk shall be
made by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities present at the meeting.
(2019 Code)
4-6-14: CLAIMS OF EXEMPTIONS:
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the application of this chapter
shall cite to the City Clerk the legal authority under which the exemption is
claimed and shall present to the City Clerk proof of qualification for the
exemption.
(2019 Code)
4-6-15: PENALTY:
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be fined
as set fort in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 7: JEWELRY STORES AND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS
Section
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Record Of Transactions
4-7-3: Descriptions, Photographs Of Articles
4-7-4: Issuance Of Signed Receipt
4-7-5: Waiting Period
4-7-6: Report Of Lost Or Stolen Articles To Police
4-7-7: Return Of Stolen Property
4-7-8: Inspections
4-7-9: Exemptions From Provisions
4-7-10: Penalty
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE ARTICLES: Articles that are individually identifiable
by a serial number; or other applied numbers, letters, characters or markings;
or other unique features that serve to distinguish it from any other similar
article and can be used to establish ownership of the article.
JEWELRY STORE: A business where every owner, operator or employee is engaged in
the purchase, sale, trade or barter of jewelry, including, but not limited to,
jewelry and/or precious metals and stones, whether the dealer operates from a
fixed storefront business, or is conducting business on a temporary, short-term
basis from a nonfixed location.
PRECIOUS METALS: Articles consisting primarily of the elements gold (chemical
symbol Au), silver (chemical symbol Ag), platinum (chemical symbol Pt) or
palladium (chemical symbol Pd), but not including articles merely plated with
these metals or articles similar in color to these metals but not actually
consisting of them.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-2: RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS:
Every jewelry store shall collect the below listed information for each and
every transaction conducted during each day they were open for business by the
end of that business day and must fax or otherwise provide the Police
Department with the below listed information by the end of that same business
day:
   A.   The name, current address, and date of birth of the seller;
   B.   A digital photographic or scanned image of a photo ID card of the
seller, sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID to be read. The
photo ID must be a currently valid (not expired) card issued by a government
entity of a state or of the United States, and must include the seller’s first
and last name, current address, date of birth, and physical description; and
   C.   The date and time of the transaction.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-3: DESCRIPTIONS, PHOTOGRAPHS OF ARTICLES:
   A.   Individual Descriptions: Each individually identifiable item of jewelry
and/or precious metals and stones brought into a jewelry store by a seller for
sale, barter, or trade, during a single transaction, shall be itemized
separately. The jewelry store shall not lump such articles together (e.g.,
“five gold monogrammed rings”), but must instead provide a complete and
thorough description of each item to include the following:
      1.   Type of article;
      2.   Brand name/make/manufacturer (if applicable);
      3.   Color/finish; and
      4.   Any other identifying marks, writing, engraving, etc.
   B.   Photograph: A digital photograph(s) shall be taken of each individually
identifiable article, sufficiently detailed to allow reasonable identification
of the article. The digital photograph(s) shall capture any identifying
numbers, marks, writing, engraving, etc., or any other distinguishing
characteristics of each item.
   C.   Nonindividually Identifiable Articles: Articles that cannot be
distinguished from any other similar articles may be described in groups of
similar types of articles, but only within the same transaction made by the
same seller. The jewelry store shall provide reasonable descriptions of the
number and types of items within each group to enable the Police Department to
determine if they may have been stolen during a particular crime.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-4: ISSUANCE OF SIGNED RECEIPT:
Every jewelry store operator shall, at the time of receiving any item of
jewelry and/or precious metals and stones, deliver to the person selling,
delivering, bartering, or trading any such property a receipt signed by him/her
containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all
jewelry and/or precious metals and stones, goods, articles or other things so
sold, delivered, bartered, or traded.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-5: WAITING PERIOD:
No jewelry and/or precious metals and stones received by a jewelry store shall
be permitted to be resold, transferred, bartered, exchanged, or otherwise
disposed of for a period of seventy two (72) hours after the delivery of the
signed receipt and the delivery of the record of transactions to the City
Police Department as provided herein.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-6: REPORT OF LOST OR STOLEN ARTICLES TO POLICE:
Every jewelry store who shall receive or be in possession of any goods,
articles or things under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to
conclude that they have been lost or stolen, or which have been alleged or
supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall immediately notify the City Police
Department of such receipt and forthwith, on demand, exhibit the same to any
member of the Police Department.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-7: RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY:
When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been
obtained by a jewelry store, such property shall be returned to the owner
thereof without the payment of the money paid by the jewelry store therefor or
any costs or charges of any kind which the jewelry store may have placed upon
the same.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-8: INSPECTIONS:
The Police Chief, or any officer designated by him, shall have general
supervision over all jewelry stores, and shall also have the power to inspect
their respective places of business and all articles or things kept therein
whenever he shall deem it necessary to do so to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to charitable organizations that accept donated
goods for resale, nor shall it apply to persons selling jewelry and/or precious
metals and stones belonging to them or family members, on a temporary basis,
from their own residential property in the form of a “garage sale” or “yard
sale”.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
4-7-10: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter may be punished as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2416, 5-27-2014)
CHAPTER 8: GARAGE AND YARD SALES
Section
4-8-1: State Certificate Or Local Permit Required
4-8-2: Posting Permit
4-8-3: Number Of Sales And Days Of Sales
4-8-4: Removal Of Permit And Advertisements
4-8-5: Record Of Permits
4-8-6: Inclement Weather; Reissuance Of Permit
4-8-7: Penalty
4-8-1: STATE CERTIFICATE OR LOCAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity within the City shall conduct
sales commonly referred to and known as garage sales, porch sales, basement
sales, yard sales and similar types of sales, and not holding a valid
certificate of registration issued pursuant to the provision of 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 120/2a (retailers’ occupation tax certificate) must first
obtain a permit therefor by applying to the City Clerk not less than five (5)
days prior to the commencement of such sale.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
4-8-2: POSTING PERMIT:
The permit referred to in section
4-8-1 of this chapter must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
permitted for such sale, visible from the street, no more than three (3) days
prior to the date of the sale.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
4-8-3: NUMBER OF SALES AND DAYS OF SALES:
   A.   No person shall conduct a garage sale, yard sale, basement sale, or
personal property sale, as defined in section
4-8-1 of this chapter, more than twice during any consecutive twelve-month
period from the same residential address.
   B.   Any such sale or holding for sale shall be limited to any two (2)
consecutive calendar days only.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
4-8-4: REMOVAL OF PERMIT AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
The permit and any signs, notices, or any other document advertising such sale
posted anywhere within the City must be promptly removed within four (4) hours
after the sale is completed.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
4-8-5: RECORD OF PERMITS:
The City Clerk shall keep a log or record of all permits issued hereunder,
indicating thereon the name of the permittee, the address of the sale premises,
and the date or dates of sale.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
4-8-6: INCLEMENT WEATHER; REISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
In the event that a permit has been issued and inclement weather occurs over a
substantial portion of those days permitted for the sale, such permittee, upon
due proof of same and within ten (10) days from the last day of the sale
permitted, may make a renewed application to the City Clerk for reissuance of
such defeated permit, and upon such proof and issuance, there shall be no
charge for the reissuance of the renewed permit.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
4-8-7: PENALTY:
Any person who sells or endeavors to sell any merchandise at such sale in
violation of the terms of this chapter shall be subject to section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2327, 7-27-2010)
CHAPTER 9: TOBACCO AND RELATED PRODUCTS
Section
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: License Required
4-9-3: Application For License
4-9-4: Acts Prohibited
4-9-5: Purpose And Possession By Certain Persons Prohibited
4-9-6: Vending Machines
4-9-7: Responsibility For Agent And Employees
4-9-8: Penalty
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
ADULT-ONLY FACILITY: A facility or restricted area (whether open-air or
enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such
as by checking identification as required under State law, or by checking the
identification of any person appearing to be under the age of 30) that no
person under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need not be
permanently restricted to persons under 21 years of age to constitute an adult-
only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to
believe that no person under twenty one (21) years of age is present during the
event or time period in question.
AGE RESTRICTED AREA: A signed designated area in a retail establishment to
which persons under twenty one (21) years of age are not permitted access
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT does not include:
cigarettes as defined in section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco
products as defined in section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995;
TOBACCO PRODUCT and ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE as defined in this section; or any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to
heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for
inhalation; any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to
be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or any solution or
substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the device.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine
delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any components
or parts that can be used to build the product or device. ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE
does not include: cigarettes as defined in section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act
and tobacco products as defined in section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act
of 1995; TOBACCO PRODUCT and ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT as defined in this
section; any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that
condition and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or
any therapeutic product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
LINE OF SIGHT: Visible to a cashier or other employee.
LUNCH WAGON: A mobile vehicle designed and constructed to transport food and
from which food is sold to the general public.
NICOTINE: Any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or complex,
regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically derived.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who
establishes for operation by another, or leases or distributes for the purpose
of operation for another, any device or machine for the vending of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco
accessories or smoking herbs whether or not such establishment for operation,
leasing or distribution be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of the
division of the income obtained from said machine.
OWNER: An operator who has acquired possession and control of a vending machine
by purchase, lease or otherwise.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or
chewing.
SMOKING HERBS: All substances of plant origin and their derivatives, including
but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops, ginseng,
lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion flower and
wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as smoking
materials.
TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of
all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items, designed primarily for
the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal
under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter, or exchange is
made unlawful hereunder.
TOBACCO DEALER: Any person, at wholesale or retail, selling, offering for sale,
furnishing or offering to furnish, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs. TOBACCO
DEALER include operators of vending machines.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product containing or made from tobacco that is intended
for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco,
snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product which contains tobacco
that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and intended to be placed in the
oral cavity. TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not
include: an electronic cigarette and alternative nicotine product as defined in
this section; or any product that has been approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for that approved purpose.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, at retail, to give away,
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine
products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the City without having
first obtained a tobacco dealer’s license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
The annual fee for a tobacco license shall be forty dollars ($40.00). Such
license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a tobacco dealer license shall be made in writing to the City
Collector. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the location
to be used, time period covered and the fee to be paid, and each applicant
shall obtain such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of the City officials in issuing the said license. All licenses issued
shall be annual licenses, terminating on the last day of the fiscal year of the
City.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-4: ACTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, to give away,
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the City without having
first obtained a tobacco dealer’s license.
   B.   No person, including any tobacco dealer, shall sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years.
   C.   No tobacco dealer or any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee under sixteen (16) years of age may sell any
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco
accessory or smoking herb in a licensed premises. This subsection does not
apply to a sales clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the
sales clerk is in fact a son or daughter of the owner.
   D.   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb to another person, the person selling, offering for sale,
giving, or furnishing the tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, smoking accessory or smoking herb shall verify that the
person is at least twenty one (21) years of age by examining from any person
that appears to be under thirty (30) years of age a government-issued
photographic identification that establishes the person to be twenty one (21)
years of age or older.
   E.   The sale or distribution by any person of a tobacco product, including
but not limited to a single or loose cigarette, that is not contained within a
sealed container, pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer, which
container, pack, or package bears the health warning required by federal law,
is prohibited.
   F.   All single packs of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking herbs must be
sold from behind the counter or in an age restricted area or in a sealed
display case. Any other tobacco products must be sold in line of sight. The
restrictions described in this subsection do not apply to a retail tobacco
store that derives at least ninety percent (90%) of its revenue from tobacco
and tobacco related products; does not permit persons under the age of twenty
one (21) to enter the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian; and posts a sign on the main entrance way stating that persons under
the age of twenty one (21) are prohibited from entering unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian. This subsection does not prohibit the sale of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco
accessories and smoking herbs from vending machines if the location of the
vending machines are otherwise in compliance with the provision of this
chapter.
   G.   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco
product or alterative nicotine product within one hundred feet (100') of any
school, child care facility or other building used for education or
recreational programs for persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
   H.   No person shall distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herbs to any other person, regardless of age. This subsection does
not apply to the distribution of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb sample in any
adult-only facility.
   I.   No person, including shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver
any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product,
tobacco accessory or smoking herb without posting at or near every display of
such products, or upon every vending machine which offers those products for
sale, a sign stating the following:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE
(21) YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; the
letters to be at least one inch high. Such signs shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises or vending machine as the case may be.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-5: PURCHASE AND POSSESSION BY CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise expressly permitted by State law, no person under twenty one
(21) years of age shall buy, purchase, or possess any tobacco product,
electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or
smoking herb.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-6: VENDING MACHINES:
No tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco
accessory or smoking herb may be sold through a vending machine except if such
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco
accessory or smoking herb is not placed together with any non-tobacco product,
other than matches, and only if the vending machine is in any of the following
locations: places to which persons under twenty one (21) years of age are not
permitted access at any time; or places where alcoholic beverages are sold and
consumed on the premises and vending machine operation is under the direct
supervision of the owner or manager.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any vendor; and such vendor shall be deemed and held to be
the act of such vendor; such vendor shall be punishable in the same manner as
if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the vendor personally.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
4-9-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   B.   Any tobacco dealer licensee found in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to
license suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
   C.   Violations of this chapter may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 1-4A.
(Ord. 2545, 7-30-2019)
CHAPTER 10: JUNK DEALERS AND MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING YARDS
Section
4-10-1: Licenses Required
4-10-2: License Fees
4-10-3: Stolen Goods
4-10-4: Penalty
4-10-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Junk Dealers: It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business
of a junk dealer or to keep any junk shop, store or place for the purchase or
sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper or
empty bottles without having obtained a license therefor.
(1980 Code § 23-50)
   B.   Motor Vehicle Wrecking Yards: It shall be unlawful to operate or carry
on any motor vehicle wrecking store or yard, where motor vehicles are wrecked
and dismantled for the purpose of salvaging and selling such parts thereof as
may still be usable, and of disposing of as junk other portions thereof,
without having obtained a license therefor.
(1980 Code § 23-51)
4-10-2: LICENSE FEES:
The fee to be paid for such licenses, as an annual license and tax, shall be
the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); and an additional fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) shall be paid for each vehicle used in the City in the conduct
of the business; provided, that a junk dealer not maintaining a store or yard
in the City shall pay only ten dollars ($10.00) per vehicle used.
(1980 Code § 23-52)
4-10-3: STOLEN GOODS:
Every keeper of a junk shop, who shall receive or be in possession of any
goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen, shall,
upon demand, produce such articles or things to any member of the Police
Department for examination.
(1980 Code § 23-53)
4-10-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 23-55; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 11: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
Section
4-11-1: Definition
4-11-2: Registration Required; Application
4-11-3: Registration Fee And Year
4-11-4: Regulations
4-11-5: Out Of Town Contractors
4-11-6: Penalty
4-11-1: DEFINITION:
The term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR, as used in this chapter, is defined as any
person engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract,
electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity for light, heat, or
power. The term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR shall not include the installing or
altering of: a) radio apparatus, or equipment for wireless reception of sounds
and signals; or b) apparatus, conductors or other equipment installed for or by
public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction
of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as public
utilities. Nor shall the term include the employees employed by an electrical
contractor to do or supervise his work.
(1980 Code § 40-2)
4-11-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of electrical
contractor without having first obtained a certificate of registration
therefor. Applications for such certificates shall be made to the City Clerk,
and a list of all contractors registered shall be given by the Clerk to the
Electrical Inspector. The application for such certificate shall be verified,
and before the certificate may issue, it must appear to the Clerk, from the
application and from other information furnished the Clerk, that the applicant
has had at least five (5) years’ experience as a journeyman electrician
installing, altering and servicing electrical equipment. Each applicant shall
furnish the names and addresses of former employers, period of time employed,
and in what capacity, or show that he has previously been registered as an
electrical contractor, giving the date and place of such registration.
(1980 Code § 40-1)
4-11-3: REGISTRATION FEE AND YEAR:
The annual fee for registering as an electrical contractor shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00). The register year shall correspond with the license year.
(1980 Code § 40-3)
4-11-4: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provisions of this
chapter to install any electrical appliances, wiring or fixtures without strict
compliance with the ordinances relating to such fixtures (see title 11, chapter
7 of this Code). And it shall be unlawful for any such person, firm or
corporation to do any such work without having first obtained the permits as
may be required by law.
(1980 Code § 40-4)
4-11-5: OUT OF TOWN CONTRACTORS:
Any electrical contractor who is registered as such in any other city or
village in this State shall not be required to be registered in the City, but
every out-of-town person, firm or corporation doing business in the City as an
electrical contractor shall, while doing business in the City, carry on his
person a valid certificate of registration issued by such other city or
village.
(1980 Code § 40-5)
4-11-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 40-7)
CHAPTER 12: CABLE AND VIDEO PROVIDERS
Section
4-12-1: Definitions
4-12-2: Authorization Required
4-12-3: Customer Service Obligations
4-12-4: Facilities In Public Ways
4-12-5: Service Provider Fee
4-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
APPLICABLE LAW: Any Federal, State, County or local law, statute, ordinance,
rule, regulation, order and decree of any court or administrative body or
tribunal, order or determination of any governmental authority that in any
manner affects or governs cable operators, cable systems, or cable services
including, but not limited to: the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended by the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996; the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007
(220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.); the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law (220
ILCS 5/22-501 et seq.); the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.);
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.); and applicable
ordinances of the City of Watseka, whether or not codified and made a part of
the City of Watseka Code.
CABLE ACT OR ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by
the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC section 521 et seq., as the same may be
amended from time to time.
CABLE OPERATOR OR HOLDER: Any person or group of persons who provides cable
service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns
a significant interest in such cable system; or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a
cable system, and includes those entities that have received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
CABLE SERVICE OR SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service. The term includes the provision of cable service or video
service to subscribers by, and the interaction of subscribers with, the person
or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the Commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
401.
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: Has the meaning set forth in 47 USC section 522 of the
Cable Act, and means a holder's facilities, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City, but
such term does not include: a) a facility that serves only to re-transmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; b) a facility
that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; c) a facility of
a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of
title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended; except, that such a
facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section
621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of
such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; d) an open video
system that complies with section 653 of the Cable Act; or e) any facilities of
any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
COMMISSION: The Illinois Commerce Commission.
CUSTOMER OR SUBSCRIBER: A person who lawfully receives and pays for cable
service with the cable operator's express permission.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity
thereto.
GROSS REVENUES:
   A.   All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation,
cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for
the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video
service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within the
City.
   B.   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
   1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
      2.   Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay- per-view and video-on-demand charges;
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
      4.    Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges;
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments;
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
City. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the City
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement;
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition;
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   C.   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders;
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’s
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the City and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a municipality, the State of Illinois, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   D.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the revenue of an
affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to
the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than
the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the
cable service or video service.
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE: Information that a cable operator makes available to
all subscribers generally.
PERSON: Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or
not-for-profit, but shall not mean the City.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES OR PEG:
   A.   Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental
use; and
   B.   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface of, and the space above and below, any street, alley,
other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or other similar purposes, including, but not limited to, public
utility easements and other easements dedicated for compatible uses, now or
hereafter held by the City, to the extent that the City has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate, or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the City. PUBLIC WAY shall not include any real or personal
property of the City that is not specifically described in this definition and
shall not include City buildings, fixtures, and other structures and
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public way.
VIDEO SERVICE, VIDEO PROGRAMMING OR PROGRAMMING: Video programming and
subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of
such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline
facilities located at least in part in the public right-of- way without regard
to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition
does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service
provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided
solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content,
information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public
Internet.
(Ord. 2503, 5-22-2018)
4-12-2: AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
No person may construct or operate a cable system within the City without first
having obtained a franchise authorizing the same, unless that person has
obtained a State-issued authorization pursuant to the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007.
(Ord. 2503, 5-22-2018)
4-12-3: CUSTOMER SERVICE OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   State Regulations Adopted:
      1.   The Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/22-501 et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted by reference.
      2.   A material breach of subsection A1 of this section shall be
punishable by a fine in the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each day of a material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   B.   Enforcement: The City shall enforce all customer service and privacy
protection standards of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, and
process complaints received from residents of the City.
   C.   Customer Credits: The schedule of customer credits for violations shall
be as provided in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(s), and applied on
the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following a
violation. The cable operator is responsible for providing the credits, and the
customer shall be under no obligation to request such credit.
(Ord. 2503, 5-22-2018)
4-12-4: FACILITIES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
The installation, construction, maintenance and operation of facilities in the
public way shall be subject to and governed by title 9, chapter 4 of this Code.
(Ord. 2503, 5-22-2018)
4-12-5: SERVICE PROVIDER FEE:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable or
video service in the City at a rate of five percent (5%) of the holder's gross
revenues therefrom.
   B.   Holder’s Liability; Payment Date: A holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the City on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days
after the close of each calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee shall be
considered paid on the date it is properly postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. The
holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar
month following thirty (30) days after its receipt of the ordinance adopting
this chapter.
   C.   Accounting Principles: All determinations and calculations relative to
the service provider fee shall be computed in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles.
   D.   Responsibility For Taxes And Other Charges: Nothing herein shall be
construed to exempt a holder from any other tax or charge that is or may later
be imposed by the City.
   E.   Audit Required: Each holder providing cable or video service in the
City shall be subject to audit of its books and records in the manner
applicable to those cable operators governed by a franchise agreement. If none,
audits shall be subject to and governed by the provisions of section
11-42-11.05 of the Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.05), and shall otherwise
be conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. The
City’s acceptance of amounts remitted shall not be construed as an accord that
the amounts paid are correct. Any additional amount deemed owing after an audit
shall be paid by the holder to the City within thirty (30) days after the City
submission of an invoice for the sum.
   F.   Late Payments: All fees due and payments which are past due shall be
governed by title 3, chapter 3 of this Code.
(Ord. 2503, 5-22-2018)
CHAPTER 13: YARD WASTE PERMITS
Section
4-13-1: Permit Required
4-13-2: Permit Fee
4-13-3: Foreign Waste
4-13-4: Exceptions
4-13-5: Rules
4-13-6: Penalty
4-13-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise excepted, no person, firm, corporation, and/or other entity
shall deposit organic yard waste into the City yard waste disposal facility
after May 1, 2019 in the absence of a valid and current yard waste disposal
permit issued by the City Clerk. Such permits shall be renewed annually, and
shall be valid from May 1 of each calendar year through April 30 of the
following calendar year.
(Ord. 2536, 3-26-2019)
4-13-2: PERMIT FEE:
   A.   The annual permit fee for those persons, firms, corporations, or other
entities in the business of tree removal, tree trimming, tree surgery, or other
business involving the cutting, pruning, and/or removal of tree branches within
the limits of the City shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   The annual permit fee for those persons, firms, corporations, or other
entities in the business of grounds maintenance, landscaping, lawn cutting,
leaf raking, or other business that accumulates yard waste in the course of its
services within the limits of the City at any time shall be six hundred dollars
($600.00).
(Ord. 2536, 3-26-2019)
4-13-3: FOREIGN WASTE:
No organic yard waste from locations outside of the City shall be deposited in
the City yard waste disposal facility.
(Ord. 2536, 3-26-2019)
4-13-4: EXCEPTIONS:
No permit shall be required for any person, firm, corporation, and/or other
entity to deposit organic yard waste into the City yard waste disposal facility
that is not engaged in a business identified in section
4-14-2 provided such yard waste is generated from his/its own real property
located within the City.
(Ord. 2536, 3-26-2019)
4-13-5: RULES:
All persons, firms, corporations, or other entities depositing organic yard
waste into the City yard waste disposal facility shall abide by and follow such
rules as may be posted for the use thereof, and failure to do so may result in
the suspension/revocation of privileges and/or permits.
(Ord. 2536, 3-26-2019)
4-13-6: PENALTY:
Any person or entity found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each violation of this chapter or day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2536, 3-26-2019)
CHAPTER 14: CANNABIS ORGANIZATIONS
Section
4-14-1: License Required; Fee
4-14-2: Requirements
4-14-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate a cannabis organization in the
city without first having secured a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions of Article I of this Chapter. The license fee for a cannabis
organization shall be $2,500 annually. The license fee shall be non-refundable
and shall not be prorated.
(Ord. 2557, 1-28-2020)
4-14-2: REQUIREMENTS:
Each cannabis organization shall be required to obtain and maintain its proper
licensure through the State of Illinois to operate and shall otherwise comply
with all applicable state and local laws.
(Ord. 2557, 1-28-2020)
TITLE 5: HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS
Section
5-1-1: Expectorating In Public
5-1-2: Water Pollution
5-1-3: Stagnant Pools Of Water
5-1-4: Unlawful Burials
5-1-1: EXPECTORATING IN PUBLIC:
   It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public ways or property
or any place frequented by the public or where the public is invited.
(1980 Code § 29-61)
5-1-2: WATER POLLUTION:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to
obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the City.
(1980 Code § 29-52)
5-1-3: STAGNANT POOLS OF WATER:
Any stagnant pool of water in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any such
nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or its control.
(1980 Code § 29-53)
5-1-4: UNLAWFUL BURIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish a
cemetery within the City or to bury any person within the City limits or within
a mile thereof, except in an established cemetery.
(1980 Code § 29-55)
CHAPTER 2: ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Section
5-2-1: Environmental Impact Reports Required
5-2-2: Environmental Assessments
5-2-3: Environmental Impact Report Procedures
5-2-1: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Public Projects: The City Council shall cause to be prepared an
environmental impact report on any project that it intends to carry out which
may have a significant effect on the environment, and it shall cause said
report to be filed with the Plan Commission for its consideration and report
thereon to the City Council. Such projects include:
      1.   Acquisition of property by the City; and
      2.   Construction to be performed by the City or let to contractors
pursuant to the applicable bidding and purchasing statutes and ordinances (see
title 3, chapter 2 of this Code).
(1980 Code § 26-1)
   B.   Private Projects: With respect to new private projects which may have a
significant effect on the environment of the City, the City Plan Commission
shall have jurisdiction to investigate said projects, to hold hearings thereon,
to make findings of fact thereon and to report its conclusions in writing to
the City Council. For the purpose of holding hearings, the commission shall
have the power to adopt and publish all reasonable rules and regulations for
the conduct of the hearings.
(1980 Code § 26-2)
5-2-2: ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Considerations: When an environmental impact report may be required,
there shall be considered in its making an environmental assessment of whether
or not the action or activity under consideration involves:
      1.   A large-scale alteration of existing environmental components
including, but not limited to, air, water, and configuration, plant or animal
food chains and habitats.
      2.   Disruption of existing neighborhoods or communities.
      3.   An impact to a measurable degree upon rare or endangered plant or
animal species.
      4.   Substantial alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological
properties of the air, water or land in a manner contrary to the promotion of
the health, safety or welfare of a substantial number of persons, or to the
balance of an ecological resource.
      5.   Reasonable probability of irrevocable harm to the aesthetic
amenities of an area or resource.
      6.   A substantial change in existing uses of an area or resource.
      7.   A disruption or alteration of the appearance or surroundings of a
historical or archaeological site.
      8.   The growth-inducing impact of the proposed action.
      9.   The boundaries of the area which may be significantly affected by
the proposed action.
(1980 Code § 26-3)
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Public notices of hearings on environmental
assessments shall consist of the words “Notice of Hearing on Environmental
Assessments to Determine Whether an Environmental Impact Report Shall Be
Required” and shall set forth the location of the property, the nature of the
proposed activity and the time and place for hearing.
(1980 Code § 26-4)
   C.   Hearing Held: Within twenty (20) but not less than ten (10) days before
making its final environmental assessment on any one particular project, the
Plan Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, and notice
thereof shall be given once by publication in a local newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
(1980 Code § 26-5)
   D.   Appeals:
      1.   Right To Appeal: Any person or persons, individually or jointly, may
appeal the decision of the Plan Commission in the environmental assessment to
the City Council. The decision of the Plan Commission as made in the
environmental assessment report shall be final eight (8) days from and
including the day of filing it with the City Clerk, unless, prior to the
expiration thereof, a written appeal is filed with the City Clerk setting forth
the grounds of appeal.
(1980 Code § 26-6)
      2.   Hearing: Within not less than ten (10) days nor more than forty (40)
days following the filing of an appeal as authorized by subsection D1 of this
section, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the matter, public
notice of which shall be given in the same manner as required to be given by
the Plan Commission in subsections B and C of this section. In the event that
more than one notice of appeal is filed, the time provision of this subsection
D2 shall commence to run from the date of filing of the first such notice.
(1980 Code § 26-7)
      3.   Records To Council: Upon filing of such an appeal to the City
Council as herein provided, the Plan Commission shall forthwith transmit to the
City Clerk for the use of the City Council the Plan Commission record in the
matter.
(1980 Code § 26-8)
      4.   Council Decision: Within ten (10) days following the hearing on the
appeal from the decision of the Plan Commission on an environmental assessment,
the City Council shall announce its decision, in writing, and cause the same to
be filed with the City Clerk. Upon receipt of such filing, the City Clerk shall
give written notice of such decision to the appellant or appellants, as the
case may be, at the address shown on the appeal to the City Council.
(1980 Code § 26-9)
5-2-3: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Contents: Any environmental impact report required pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall include a detailed statement setting forth the
following:
      1.   The environmental impact of the proposed action.
      2.   Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided if the
proposal is implemented.
      3.   Mitigation measures proposed to minimize the impact.
      4.   Alternatives to the proposed action.
      5.   The relationship between local short-term uses of man’s environment
and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity.
      6.   Any irreversible environmental changes which would be involved in
the proposed action should it be implemented.
      7.   The growth-inducing impact of the proposed action.
      8.   The boundaries of the area which may be significantly affected by
the proposed action.
(1980 Code § 26-10)
   B.   Notice Of Report:
      1.   In any case in which an environmental impact report is required,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the City shall, within ten (10)
days after completion of the environmental assessment, cause to be published,
at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice
that such a report is in the process of preparation by the City.
(1980 Code § 26-11)
      2.   The notice required under subsection B1 of this section shall
consist of the words, “Notice of Preparation of Environmental Impact Report”
and shall contain:
         a.   A general description of the proposed action or project.
         b.   The location thereof.
         c.   A brief statement that written comments on such action or project
from members of the public will be considered and must be addressed to the Plan
Commission and received by it ten (10) days after publication of the notice.
(1980 Code § 26-12)
   C.   Public Input: The Plan Commission shall incorporate by reference or
narrative summary in an environmental impact report written comments from the
public received pursuant to and in accordance with the notice in subsection B2
of this section and shall consider such comments received from the public in
the preparation of the environmental impact report, and the Plan Commission and
the City Council shall consider such comments in rendering a decision on any
action or project for which the report is made.
(1980 Code § 26-13)
   D.   Time For Completion Of Report: The environmental impact report shall be
completed and filed with the Plan Commission within sixty (60) days after
publication as required by subsection B1 of this section.
(1980 Code § 26-14)
CHAPTER 3: NUISANCES
Section
5-3-1: Public Nuisances Enumerated
5-3-2: Other Nuisances Enumerated
5-3-3: Nuisances Unlawful; Abatement
5-3-4: Abatement Procedures
5-3-5: Penalties
5-3-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance:
   A.   Common Law Nuisances: To commit any offense which is a nuisance
according to the common law or which is made such by the Statutes of the State
of Illinois.
   B.   Disposal Of Offensive Substances: To cause or suffer the carcass of any
animal or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or deposited or
to remain any place, to the prejudice of others.
   C.   Deposits On Premises Of Another: To dump, deposit or place any garbage,
rubbish, trash or refuse upon any real estate owned by another without the
consent of the owner or person in possession of such real property.
   D.   Offensive Conditions And Premises:
      1.   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer, street or public highway.
      2.   To suffer or permit any structure, building or premises under one’s
control to become infested with rats, mice, rodents or other vermin or snakes.
      3.   To suffer or permit any premises used as a residence, leased for
sleeping quarters, or used for the sale or dispensing of food products to
become infested with cockroaches, bed bugs, or any other insect which might or
would create a health hazard.
      4.   For any owner or occupant, or the agent of any owner or occupant, of
any premises within the City to permit the premises to become or remain
unsanitary or a fire menace by allowing any offensive or unsafe or combustible
material to grow, accumulate or otherwise occupy and remain upon the premises.
      5.   To maintain an unsightly yard in any residential area where junked,
wrecked, disabled or abandoned motor vehicles, trucks, equipment, machinery or
other materials are allowed to accumulate.
   E.   Water Pollution: To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water
of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   F.   Obstructing Waterways: To obstruct or impede, without legal authority,
the passage of any navigable river or waters.
   G.   Obstructing Public Ways And Places:
      1.   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places.
      2.   To loiter, stand or idle about, to sit or lie down in, or to
congregate in or about any street, sidewalk, or public place or way in such a
manner that other members of the general public desiring to pass through and
make use of said street, sidewalk, or public place or way are unable to do so,
it being the declared policy of the City that all members of the public have an
equal right of access to and use of the streets, sidewalks, and public places
or ways of the City.
      3.   To interfere with or obstruct any gutter, conduit, sewer or outlet
for water or the natural drainage of any public or private property.
   H.   Prohibited Deposits On Public Ways: To deposit in any street or public
way without the prior authority of the City any earth, stone, gravel, rock,
cement, or other like material which is not removed within twenty four (24)
hours of its deposit, or to spill, drop, scatter or deposit upon the paved
portion of any street any earth, stone, gravel, rock, cement, broken glass,
glass bottles, garbage, fertilizer, manure, refuse, boards, nails, merchandise,
petroleum products, acids, chemicals, or other like materials in sufficient
quantities so as to constitute and be a risk, hazard or danger to the public
using such street, unless the person causing the spill, dropping, scattering,
or depositing promptly removes said material from the street.
   I.   Merchandise On Public Ways: To make use of the streets or sidewalks for
the display or sale of merchandise or goods, without first having secured the
permit or authority of the Corporate Authorities for such display or sale.
   J.   Noxious Odors: To erect, continue or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public.
   K.   Construction Hazards: For any builder, contractor, owner, contract
vendor, contract purchaser, or other person, or their agent or agents, whether
in the building of a new house or structure of other kind or in the remodeling
or repair of a house or other building or structure, to conduct said building,
repair or remodeling operations in such a manner that the operations create a
definite hazard to the life or safety of members of the general public lawfully
in the vicinity of said operations or endanger the property of adjoining
owners.
   L.   Land Fills: In the filling of any lot or site, whether the fill be blow
sand or some other type of fill, to fail promptly to cover and secure said fill
so that it will not be blown by the winds upon the lands of adjoining property
owners.
   M.   Fire Hazards: To cause or suffer any grass, leaves, corn cobs,
underbrush or other combustible matter to be collected, deposited or remain on
any premises in such quantities so as to create a fire hazard, or to throw,
deposit or burn any of the above named materials upon any paved portion of any
street.
   N.   Unlawful Advertising: To advertise wares or occupations by painting
notices of the same on or affixing them to fences or other private property, or
on rocks or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in
the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities.
   O.   Wells For Oil, Gas Or Salt Water:
      1.   To permit any well drilled for oil, gas, saltwater disposal or any
other purposes in connection with the production of oil and gas, to remain
unplugged, after such well is no longer used for the purpose for which it was
drilled.
      2.   To construct or operate any saltwater pit or oil field refuse pit,
commonly called a “burn out pit”, so that salt water, brine or oil field refuse
or other waste liquids may escape therefrom in any manner except by the
evaporation of such salt water or brine or by the burning of such oil field
waste or refuse.
      3.   To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery and materials to
remain around any oil or gas well, or to fail to fill any holes, cellars, slush
pits and other excavations made in connection with any such well or to restore
the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to its condition before the
drilling of any such well, upon abandonment of any such oil or gas well.
      4.   To permit any salt water, oil, gas or other wastes from any well
drilled for oil, gas, or exploratory purposes to escape to the surface, or into
a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water supply, or from one
underground stratum to another.
   P.   Gunpowder And Explosives:
      1.   To carry on the business of manufacturing gunpowder, nitroglycerine,
or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or grinding the materials
therefor, in any building within one hundred ten (110) yards of any building
erected at the time such business may be commenced.
      2.   To establish powder magazines at a point different from that
appointed according to law by the Corporate Authorities of the City or within
two hundred seventy five (275) yards of any occupied dwelling house.
   Q.   Real Estate Harassment: To harass, intimidate or threaten any person
who is about to sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real
property or is about to buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or
other real property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a
person's attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or
refers to a person's sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real
property.
   R.   Use Of Property For Immoral, Indecent Uses: To make, engage in, permit,
allow, or contribute to a condition or use of property which greatly offends
the public morals or decency.
   S.   Trains Blocking Crossings:
      1.   For any railroad company repeatedly to obstruct with its trains,
engines, equipment or cars, or for any railroad company repeatedly to obstruct
with trains, engines, equipment or railroad cars under its control, public
travel at any railroad highway grade crossing within the City for a period of
time in excess of that permitted by State Statute, or for any lessee of
railroad equipment or for any official, officer, engineer, conductor, employee
or agent of any railroad company, through the use of trains, engines, equipment
or railroad cars under his or its control, to obstruct repeatedly, for a period
of time in excess of that permitted by State Statute, public travel at any
railroad highway grade crossing in the City.
      2.   For any railroad company or any of its officials, officers,
engineers, conductors, employees or agents, when notified that a train under
his or its control is blocking all railroad highway grade crossings in the City
on the railroad tracks then being used by the train and when further notified
that an emergency exists wherein an ambulance or other emergency vehicle, a
fire truck or other firefighting equipment, or a police car needs to cross the
tracks immediately, to fail or refuse to make a break in the train and permit
the crossing immediately. The City defines this conduct as a nuisance, being
mindful of the fact that the Iroquois Memorial Hospital, which serves a
substantial portion of Iroquois County, is situated in the City of Watseka,
that State Highway Route No. 1 and U.S. Highway Route No. 24 intersect within
the City of Watseka, that it is commonplace for motor vehicle traffic to be
backed up in the City from one-half (½) mile to one mile in distance on each
side of railroad tracks because the railroad crossings are obstructed by trains
or railroad cars, that on said occasions, all railroad crossings on the
railroad track have been blocked and obstructed, making it impossible for an
ambulance, emergency vehicle, fire truck or police vehicle promptly to pass
from one side of the tracks in the City to the other to attend emergencies,
that on various occasions railroad employees have failed or refused to
cooperate when such an emergency has existed, and that irreparable injury,
mischief and damage has and will occur on account of said obstructions.
(1980 Code § 17-6)
5-3-2: OTHER NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Business Nuisances: No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted
or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
(1980 Code § 17-1)
   B.   Deposit Of Garbage, Refuse And Animal Carcasses: REFUSE is defined as
any waste, rubbish, garbage, trash, or any material of any kind that has been
discarded, rejected, cast aside, or thrown away as worthless, except body
wastes. GARBAGE is defined as all animal and vegetable waste, such as, but not
limited to, waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery
stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, motels, rooming houses,
boarding houses, and all other deleterious substances.
(1980 Code § 17-3)
   C.   Harboring Rats:
      1.   The storing or placing of ashes, garbage, refuse, old bricks,
concrete, branches, brush, or trash, or the storing or placing of any materials
which may harbor rats, at any place in the City, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
      2.   The maintenance in the City of any premises, house, building or
structure in such a condition that in fact it has become infested with rats is
hereby declared to be nuisance. When any such condition exists as is herein
declared to be nuisance, a notice to abate said nuisance may be given on behalf
of the City by the Chief of Police or Building Official to the owners of and
all persons in possession of the premises on which the nuisance exists.
      3.   If the nuisance is not abated within fifteen (15) days after the
giving of notice, the City, upon court approval, may abate the nuisance, and
the cost and expense of abating the nuisance shall be filed as a lien against
the premises in accordance with section
11-20-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(1980 Code § 17-18)
   D.   Landfills: The placing or disposal of garbage or refuse of any kind,
waste materials, debris, tin cans, trash, junk, wastepaper, discarded
appliances or other discarded items in any landfill within the corporate limits
of the City or outside of and within one-half (½) mile of the corporate limits
of the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a hazard to public health
and safety, and the same is hereby prohibited.
(1980 Code § 17-19)
   E.   Privies:
      1.   Whoever shall erect or maintain any privy within one hundred feet
(100') of any line of a City sanitary sewer shall be deemed guilty of
maintaining a nuisance.
(1980 Code § 17-7)
      2.   All wooden privies now standing upon any ground or hereafter to be
erected within the fire limits of the City are hereby declared to be public
nuisances, and the same are ordered to be removed and abated. In the event of
the failure of the owners of such premises within the fire limits to abate and
remove the privies and fill up any vault or vaults on which the privies were
located, within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice from the City to do
so, then it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to take charge of
the abatement of the nuisance, the removal of the privies and the careful
filling up of any vaults without endangering the public health of the
inhabitants of the City. The costs of such abatement shall be charged to the
property owner.
(1980 Code § 17-8)
   F.   Open Sewage: It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to
maintain, permit, cause, create, or contribute to, in any way, an open drain,
sewer, or cesspool, and it shall also be unlawful and a nuisance for any person
on any premises under his control to permit, create, cause or contribute to any
unsightly, nauseous, or unhealthful condition by failing promptly to dispose of
any such sewage or refuse, both within the limits of the City and at any point
within one-half (½) mile of the City limits.
(1980 Code § 17-9)
   G.   Obstructing Public Ways: All obstructions to streets, alleys, crossings
and sidewalks of the City and all excavations in or under the same, which are
by ordinance prohibited or which may be made without the permission or
authority of the Corporate Authorities, are hereby declared to be nuisances.
(1980 Code § 17-10)
   H.   Dangerous Billboards: Any billboard or signboard, which is dangerous
because of insecure construction or fastening or which is a fire hazard and in
fact a nuisance, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as such.
(1980 Code § 17-11)
   I.   Sirens, Etc.: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to
carry or use upon any vehicle, other than Police or Fire Department vehicles or
emergency vehicles, any gong, siren or whistle similar to that used on
ambulances or vehicles of the Police and Fire Departments.
(1980 Code § 17-21)
   J.   Dust: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within
the City limits of the City to use its property, or permit the same to be used,
in such a manner as to create, allow, or permit excessive dust from any act or
omission of the owner or its invitees on such property.
(1980 Code § 17-25)
   K.   Discharging Guns And Combustible Materials: No discharging of guns or
fireworks is allowed at any time. The provisions of this subsection do not
apply to a police officer or other peace officer discharging a gun while in the
discharge of his official duties.
(1980 Code § 17-20)
5-3-3: NUISANCES UNLAWFUL; ABATEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit or maintain
the existence of any nuisance on any property under his, her or its control.
(1980 Code § 17-2)
5-3-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
   A.   Duty To Abate: It is hereby made the duty, jointly and severally, of
every person creating or causing any nuisance, and of every owner of property,
and of every person in possession or control of any premises, upon which any
nuisance may be found or maintained, to immediately abate the same.
(1980 Code § 17-12)
   B.   Abatement By City: If any person, after being served with a forty eight
(48) hour notice, shall not, within the time specified, abate the nuisance, the
nuisance shall be abated by the officers of the City; and an accurate account
of the expense shall be made, and suit shall forthwith be brought against the
person or persons to recover the expense of abatement. In abating a nuisance,
the City may seek a court action in order to abate the nuisance, or it may take
such other action as may be authorized by ordinance or may be necessary under
the circumstances.
(1980 Code § 17-13)
5-3-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, including articles A, B and C, shall, upon conviction, be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   In addition to the penalties provided in subsection A of this section,
the City may seek the abatement of any nuisance by a suit or action in court
for an injunction or other appropriate remedy.
(1980 Code § 17-90; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE A: NUISANCES RELATING TO ANIMALS
Section
5-3A-1: Responsibility Of Owner
5-3A-2: Number Of Dogs And Cats
5-3A-3: Domestic Animals At Large
5-3A-4: Noisy Animals
5-3A-5: Dogs Disturbing The Peace
5-3A-6: Dog And Cat Excreta
5-3A-7: Animal Houses
5-3A-8: Failure To Provide Proper Care And Treatment
5-3A-1: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or harborer to fail to
exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a
public nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, molesting
passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking persons or other domestic
animals, trespassing upon school grounds, or trespassing upon private property
in such manner as to damage property, shall be deemed nuisances.
(1980 Code § 17-83)
5-3A-2: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the
keeping of more dogs or cats than are permitted in this section within the
corporate limits of the City, as this poses health, safety and public welfare
risks and is therefore deemed a public nuisance.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it shall be
unlawful to keep, own or harbor more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats over
the age of five (5) months, or more than one litter of puppies and one litter
of kittens per year on any property consisting of two (2) contiguous acres or
less.
   C.   This section shall not apply to the following:
      1.   A licensed and inspected dog dealer or kennel operator, veterinary
clinic or animal hospital when operated by a veterinarian licensed under the
Illinois Veterinary Medicine and Surgical Practice Act of 2004 (225 ILCS 115/
1 et seq.), cat dealer or cattery operator, pet shop, animal control facility
or animal shelter as defined in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 605/2. Nor shall
this chapter apply to an owner of a dog obedience training facility or to the
property where an animal show is being conducted where animals are not kept for
more than two (2) continuous days.
      2.   Individuals or households engaged in the business of pet shop
operator, dog dealer, kennel operator, daycare operator, dog breeder, cat
breeder, operator of a guard dog service, an animal control facility or animal
shelter, as defined by the Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq.) The City
may request verified financial reports from a certified accountant or tax
professional providing sufficient information and detail to establish that
individuals or members of the household are engaged in the professions outlined
above. The City may request proof of a current license issued by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture pursuant to the Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605/3).
   D.   Inability to produce appropriate financial records or a State license
will be considered prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 2344, 6-28-2011)
5-3A-3: DOMESTIC ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
HARBORER: Any person who provides food or shelter for any domesticated animal,
who keeps an animal, or who has an animal in his care or custody, or who
knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
OWNER: Any person having right of property in any animal, who keeps an animal,
who has an animal in his care or custody, or who knowingly permits an animal to
remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
   B.   Responsibility Of Owner Or Harborer: It shall be unlawful and a
nuisance for the owner or harborer of any dog, cat or other domestic animal to
cause or permit such animal to perform, create or engage in any nuisance. When
any such animal is involved in any activity which is herein defined as an
animal nuisance, or which otherwise shall be a nuisance, its owner or harborer
shall be subject to prosecution therefor.
   C.   Nuisance Created: An animal nuisance is created when an animal owner or
harborer permits his animal to run uncontrolled upon the public streets and
ways or upon the properties of others without first having obtained the consent
of the one in possession of the property.
(Ord. 2354, 9-27-2011)
5-3A-4: NOISY ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to harbor or keep any animals or
poultry which disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
(1980 Code § 17-80)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, possess or
maintain any dog, which dog, by long or continued barking, howling or other
noises, shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person, family or
neighborhood. Any such disturbance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(1980 Code § 17-23)
5-3A-5: DOGS DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person owning or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking, making other loud
or unusual noises, or by running through or across yards, cultivated gardens or
fields of persons other than the owner or harborer of the dog. Such prohibited
activity shall constitute a nuisance, for which the owner or harborer shall be
responsible for the abatement thereof.
(1980 Code § 17-81)
5-3A-6: DOG AND CAT EXCRETA:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any owner, keeper or
walker of any dog or cat to permit his or her dog or cat to discharge such
animal’s excreta upon any public or private property, other than the property
of the owner or keeper of any such dog or cat, within the City, if such owner,
keeper or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and clean up the
animal’s excreta from the public or private property and dispose of it on his
own property.
(1980 Code § 17-4)
5-3A-7: ANIMAL HOUSES:
No poultry is allowed in the City.
(1980 Code § 17-84)
5-3A-8: FAILURE TO PROVIDE PROPER CARE AND TREATMENT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or harborer to fail
to provide animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper
shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering, and humane care and treatment.
   B.   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any owner or other person to
beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse any
animal, or cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat
between animals or between animals and humans.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to crop a dog’s ears except when a
licensed veterinarian issues a signed certificate that the operation is
necessary for the dog’s health or comfort, and in no event shall any person
except a licensed veterinarian perform such an operation.
(1980 Code § 17-83)
ARTICLE B: NUISANCES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Section
5-3B-1: Definition
5-3B-2: Exterior Storage Of Nonoperating Vehicles
5-3B-3: Duty To Maintain Property
5-3B-4: Enforcement
5-3B-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this article, the term NUISANCE is defined to mean any
condition or use of any premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental
to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial
diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which the
premises is located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the
depositing on, or the scattering over, the premises of any of the following:
   A.   Lumber, junk, trash, or debris.
   B.   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment, such as
automobiles, motor vehicles, farm machinery, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans, or containers.
(1980 Code § 17-40)
5-3B-2: EXTERIOR STORAGE OF NONOPERATING VEHICLES:
No person in charge of or in control of any premises, whether as owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, wrecked,
junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicle to remain on such
property longer than ten (10) days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle
on any property within the City for a longer time than ten (10) days; except,
that this section shall not apply with regard to any vehicle in an enclosed
building. This article shall further not apply with regard to any vehicle on
the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place, other than in
a residential district, and operated in a lawful manner, when the keeping or
maintenance of such vehicle is necessary to the operation of the business
enterprise; or with regard to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the City or any other
public agency or entity.
(Ord. 2058, 5-20-2002)
5-3B-3: DUTY TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY:
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall
maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or
maintain the premises in a manner causing substantial diminution of the value
of the other property in the neighborhood in which the premises is located.
(1980 Code § 17-41)
5-3B-4: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of this article may be accomplished by the City in any manner
authorized by law, and in addition, any person who, by reason of another's
violation of any provision of this article, suffers special damage to himself
different from that suffered by other property owners throughout the City
generally, may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing
violation.
(1980 Code § 17-43)
ARTICLE C: STORAGE OF UNSHELTERED PERSONALTY
Section
5-3C-1: Nuisance Declared
5-3C-2: Abatement Procedures
5-3C-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles
not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery,
implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no
longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, which
hereinafter are collectively described as “said personalty”, for a period of
thirty (30) days or more, except in licensed junkyards, within the corporate
limits of the City, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the
public safety.
(1980 Code § 17-50)
5-3C-2: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Abatement By Owners And Tenants: The owner, owners, tenants, lessees
and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of the City upon which
such storage is made, and also the owner, owners, and/or lessees of said
personalty involved in such storage, all of whom are hereinafter referred to
collectively as “owners”, shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the
prompt removal of said personalty into completely enclosed buildings authorized
to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the
City, or otherwise to remove it to a location without the corporate limits.
(1980 Code § 17-51)
   B.   Failure To Abate: If owners or persons in possession allow the nuisance
to exist or fail to abate the nuisance, they, and each of them, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which the nuisance is permitted to exist.
(1980 Code § 17-52; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Abatement By City; Costs: Whenever the owners or persons in possession
fail to abate the nuisance, the City shall remove said personalty to a location
of its selection. The expenses therefor are to be billed to the owners or
persons in possession, jointly and severally, the bill to be recoverable in a
suit at law.
   D.   Sale Of Property; Liability For Costs: When said personalty has been
removed and placed in storage by the City, as provided herein, said personalty
shall be sold by the City after the lapse of such time as is provided by law.
If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the costs of abatement, the
owners and persons in possession shall be liable to the City for the balance of
the costs, jointly and severally, to be recoverable in a suit at law. If the
proceeds are in excess of costs, the balance shall be paid to the owners or
deposited in the City Treasury for their use.
(1980 Code § 17-53)
CHAPTER 4: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
5-4-1: Definitions
5-4-2: Scavenger Services
5-4-3: Collection Fees
5-4-4: Other Scavenger Services Required
5-4-5: Yard Waste Burning
5-4-6: Penalty
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EXCLUDED WASTE: Excluded waste is any and all hazardous waste, special waste,
yard waste, bulk items (carpeting, furniture, appliances, etc.) and/or
construction debris.
GARBAGE AND REFUSE: Any combustible or noncombustible household waste, trash or
unwanted materials including, but not limited to, ashes, cans, cartons, metal
ware, glass, paper, boxes, crockery, bottles, wood, litter, and other forms of
mineral waste and rubbish. Garbage and refuse shall not include excluded waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any waste that is listed or characterized as such by the
Unites States Environmental Protection Agency or any state agency pursuant to
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (“RCRA”), as amended.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A dwelling where a person or group of people live. Each
dwelling unit of a multi-family residence be and constitute a residential unit.
SPECIAL WASTE: Any nonhazardous solid waste which, because of its physical
characteristics, chemical make-up, or biological nature requires special
handling, special disposal procedures including liquids for solidification at a
landfill, special documentation and/or regulatory authorization, or poses an
unusual threat to human health, equipment, property, or the environment.
Special waste includes, but is not limited to (a) waste generated by an
industrial process or a pollution control process; (b) waste which may contain
residue and debris from the cleanup of spilled petroleum, chemical or
commercial products or wastes, or contaminated residuals; (c) waste which is
nonhazardous as a result of proper treatment pursuant to Subtitle C of the
RCRA; (d) waste from the cleanup of a facility which generates, stores, treats,
recycles or disposes of chemical substances, commercial products or wastes; (e)
waste which may contain free liquids and requires liquid waste solidification;
(f) containers that once contained hazardous substances, chemicals, or
insecticides so long as such containers are “empty” as defined by RCRA; (g)
asbestos containing or asbestos bearing material that has been properly secured
under existing Applicable Law; (h) waste containing regulated polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) as defined in the Toxic  Substances Control Act; (i) waste
containing naturally occurring radioactive material and/or technologically-
enhanced NORM; and (j) waste that may have come into contact with any of the
foregoing.
YARD WASTE: Grass clippings, leaves, weeds, brush, tree limbs, shrubbery,
cuttings or other refuse attending to the care of lawns.
(Ord. 2596, 11-24-2020)
5-4-2: SCAVENGER SERVICES:
   A.   The City has designated a specific scavenger that shall have the
exclusive authority to collect and dispose of all garbage and refuse from all
single-family and multi-family (five (5) units or less) residences in the City.
   B.   Garbage and refuse shall be collected once each week on those days
scheduled by designated route. Residents will be given advanced notice of any
changes to route schedules. Collections shall be one (1) day later than the
normally-scheduled collection day in the event a collection day falls on any
one of the following holidays: New Years Day, President’s Day, Good Friday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day.
   C.   All garbage and refuse shall be drained, wrapped and stored in garbage
totes supplied by the City’s scavenger, only. Each dwelling unit shall receive
two (2) totes from the scavenger. Additional totes shall be supplied by the
scavenger to a dwelling unit upon request to the City. Any additional or
special collections required by a residential unit customer shall be made by
contract between the scavenger and residential unit customer.
   D.   No excluded waste shall be comingled with garbage and refuse for
disposal by the City’s scavenger.
   E.   Garbage and refuse totes shall be placed at the curb of the frontage of
a street (or alley, if applicable) of a residential unit no earlier than 12:00
p.m. on the day before a scheduled collection and shall be removed from the
curb by 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
(Ord. 2596, 11-24-2020)
5-4-3: COLLECTION FEES:
   A.   The following monthly uniform garbage collection fees are established
for and are payable by all residential unit customers whether the service is
utilized each week or not:
 
Period                  Two Totes Each Additional Tote
11/01/2020- 10/31/2021  $13.45    $6.50
11/01/2021 - 10/31/2022 $13.92    $6.73
11/01/2022- 10/31/2023  $14.41    $6.96
11/01/2023 -10/31/2024  $14.91    $7.21
11/01/2024-10/31/2025   $15.43    $7.46
 
   B.   The owner of the dwelling unit, the occupant, and any user of the
scavenger service shall be jointly and severally responsible to pay garbage
collection fees.
   C.   Garbage collection fees shall be billed in advance on the first or the
first business day of each month and shall be payable not more than thirty (30)
days after the date of said bill. In the event garbage collection fees are not
paid in a timely manner, a penalty in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the
unpaid portion shall be added thereto. Additionally, interest in the amount of
six (6%) shall accrue annually on all unpaid garbage collection fees.
(Ord. 2596, 11-24-2020)
5-4-4: OTHER SCAVENGER SERVICES REQUIRED:
   A.   Every owner of land containing a commercial, industrial, or multi-
family residential building (six (6) units or more) shall contract with a
scavenger to provide for the collection of garbage and refuse and yard waste
from the premises. Collection of garbage and refuse shall be provided not less
than one (1) time per week. Collection of yard waste shall be provided not less
one (1) time per week from April 1 through December 1 and only if the owner
does not have a landscape service maintain the property and haul away the
landscape waste.
   B.   There shall be located on every commercial, industrial, or multi-family
premises one (1) or more covered, metal refuse containers, commonly known as a
dumpster, as may be necessary for the proper storage of garbage and refuse
until collection. Dumpsters supplied shall be of sufficient capacity to prevent
overflow. Dumpsters provided to multi-family residences shall have a capacity
of not less than on-half (1/2) cubic yard per residential unit.
   C.   A tightly fitting metal or plastic cover for each dumpster shall be
kept in place and shut at all times the dumpster is not be loaded or unloaded.
The dumpster and surrounding area shall be maintained so that any spillage is
removed and the area is cleaned in a timely manner.
   D.   Owners, occupants and users of commercial, industrial and multi-family
properties shall store garbage and refuse for collection in authorized
dumpsters. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any item into a
dumpster that is provided for owners, occupants and users of the property.
(Ord. 2596, 11-24-2020)
5-4-5: YARD WASTE BURNING:
   A.   The owner or occupant of any single-family residence shall be
authorized to burn yard waste on his lot on the first full weekend of every
month except in November and March, when burning shall be permitted every
weekend. Burning shall be limited to yard waste generated at the residential
lot and no person shall be authorized to burn yard waste collected from other
properties.
   B.   Burning of yard waste shall be done in metal bins or containers only,
conducted in a safe manner, and in a fashion so as not to cause a danger or a
nuisance to nearby structures or persons.
   C.   The use of accelerants for yard waste burning is prohibited.
(Ord. 2596, 11-24-2020)
5-4-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day that said violation continues
shall be considered to be a separate offense.
   B.   Persons possessing licenses issued by the City found in violation of
any provision of this chapter may be have such licenses suspended or revoked in
addition to any monetary fine imposed.
(Ord. 2596, 11-24-2020)
CHAPTER 5: LITTER CONTROL
Section
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Littering On Public Ways And Places
5-5-3: Littering From Vehicles
5-5-4: Littering From Aircraft
5-5-5: Littering On Private Property
5-5-6: Depositing Litter Into Receptacles
5-5-7: Tampering With Receptacles Prohibited
5-5-8: Distributing Handbills
5-5-9: Posting Notices
5-5-10: Construction Sites
5-5-11: Loading And Unloading Docks
5-5-12: Parking Lots
5-5-13: Exemptions From Provisions
5-5-14: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the following meanings:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance, now known or hereafter invented, used or designed
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT shall include
helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A container of watertight construction with a
tightfitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within.
Such receptacles shall have handles or other means for safe and convenient
handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter
generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the
regulations promulgated by the City Council or any of its committees having
jurisdiction over the particular subject matter.
CONSTRUCTION SITES: Any private or public property upon which repairs to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing
structures is taking place.
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter of
literature which is not delivered by United States mail including, but not
limited to:
   A.   That which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing; or
   B.   That which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
   C.   That which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
LITTER: Garbage, refuse, and rubbish and all other waste matter which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
 
LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS: Any dock space or area used by any moving vehicle
for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares,
commodities and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river or land.
PRIVATE PREMISES: All property including, but not limited to, vacant land or
any land, building or other structure designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious purposes, together
with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox
and other structure appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways; lakes, rivers, watercourses or fountains; and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings.
PUBLIC RECEPTACLES: Any receptacles provided by or authorized by the City.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1980 Code § 49-1)
5-5-2: LITTERING ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES:
   A.   1.   Persons owning, occupying or in control of any public place or
private premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of
litter.
(1980 Code § 49-5)
      2.   Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of their premises free of litter.
   B.   Sweeping Into Gutters: No person shall sweep into or deposit in any
gutter, street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter
from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
(1980 Code § 49-15)
   C.   Merchant Duties:
      1.   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway.
      2.   Persons owning or occupying places of business within the City shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.
(1980 Code § 49-16)
   D.   Spilling Loads; Deposits From Tires: No person shall drive or move any
truck or other vehicle within the City unless such vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited
upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or
move any vehicle or truck within the City, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(1980 Code §§ 49-7, 49-18)
   E.   Littering In Parks (see also subsection
9-6-9C of this Code): No person shall deposit litter in any park within the
City except in receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any other public place or private premises. Where receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere in a lawful
manner.
(1980 Code § 49-9)
5-5-3: LITTERING FROM VEHICLES:
   A.   No person, while the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle, shall
deposit litter upon any public place or private premises.
(1980 Code § 49-7)
   B.   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit any litter upon any street or other public place within the City, or
upon private property.
(1980 Code § 49-17)
5-5-4: LITTERING FROM AIRCRAFT:
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any
litter.
(1980 Code § 49-8)
5-5-5: LITTERING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this
subsection shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
(1980 Code § 49-6, 49-21)
   B.   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not; except, that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection thereof in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
(1980 Code § 49-20)
   C.   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not.
(1980 Code § 49-22)
5-5-6: DEPOSITING LITTER INTO RECEPTACLES:
   A.   No person shall deposit any litter within the City except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in any duly
licensed disposal facility.
(1980 Code § 49-2)
   B.   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent said litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(1980 Code § 49-3)
5-5-7: TAMPERING WITH RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall upset or tamper with or set fire to a public or private
receptacle designed or used for the deposit of litter, or cause or permit its
contents to be deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private
premises.
(1980 Code § 49-4)
5-5-8: DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS:
   A.   Public Or Private Property:
      1.   Public Places: No person shall deposit any handbill in or upon any
public place or distribute the same therein against the will of the intended
receiver. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place
for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to a receiver any
handbill to any person willing to accept it.
      2.   Private Premises:
         a.   No person shall deposit or unlawfully distribute any handbill in
or upon private premises, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill
directly to the occupant of such private premises. Provided, however, that in
case of private premises which are not posted against the receiving of
handbills or similar material, such person, unless requested by anyone upon the
premises not to do so, may securely place any such handbill in a manner as to
prevent the handbill from being deposited by the elements upon any public place
or private premises; except mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by
Federal postal law or regulations.
(1980 Code § 49-10)
         b.   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing”,
“No Peddlers or Agents”, “No Advertisements”, or any similar notice, indicating
in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be bothered
or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left
upon the premises.
(1980 Code § 49-23)
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the
distribution upon private premises only of newspapers or political literature;
except, that newspapers and political literature shall be placed in such a
manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or private premises.
   B.   Vehicles: No person shall deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle
unless the occupant of a vehicle is willing to accept it.
(1980 Code § 49-10)
   C.   Cleanup: It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing
handbills to maintain the area which they are utilizing free of any litter
caused by or related to the handbill distribution.
(1980 Code §§ 49-10, 49-24)
5-5-9: POSTING NOTICES:
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, upon the following, except
as may be authorized or permitted by law:
   A.   Any public place or private premises.
   B.   Any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public
structure or building.
(1980 Code §§ 49-11, 49-19)
5-5-10: CONSTRUCTION SITES:
   A.   Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site in such a manner
that litter will be prevented from being carried therefrom or deposited by the
elements upon any other public place or private premises.
   B.   Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the result
of any construction process upon any public place or private premises, shall be
removed by the person responsible for the deposit of the litter or debris.
(1980 Code § 49-12)
5-5-11: LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS:
The person owning, operating or in control of a loading or unloading dock shall
maintain authorized private receptacles for collection of litter, and shall at
all times maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or private business or other premises in the City.
(1980 Code § 49-13)
5-5-12: PARKING LOTS:
   A.   Receptacles Required: Any public place or private premises containing
any provision for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter receptacles in
compliance with this section and the regulations promulgated by the Public
Works Committee. Such premises shall include, but not be limited to, such
places as shopping centers, outdoor theaters, drive-in restaurants, gasoline
service stations, apartment developments, parking lots, and any other place
where provisions are made for vehicles to stop or park in a designated area for
any purpose. In lieu of compliance with the receptacle requirements, the Public
Works Committee may approve a plan for litter control through an authorized
sweeping program or other means.
   B.   Number Of Receptacles: All premises having parking lots shall provide,
in an easily accessible location, a minimum of one refuse container for up to
twenty five (25) spaces and at least one additional refuse container for every
fifty (50) additional parking spaces.
   C.   Specifications: Litter receptacles shall have tightfitting lids or tops
and shall be weighted or attached to the ground or other fixed structures so as
to prevent spillage. A minimum litter container size of twenty (20) gallons
shall be used with all containers, which shall have an easily identifiable
color with proper markings indicating litter receptacles.
   D.   Cleanliness: Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall be
kept in a litter-free condition, and all litter shall be removed periodically
from the receptacles.
   E.   Duty To Use Receptacles: It shall be the duty and obligation of all
persons using parking areas to use the litter receptacles as herein provided
for the purposes intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons
to deposit upon any such parking lot any litter.
(1980 Code § 49-14)
5-5-13: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
distribution of newspapers, political pamphlets, religious literature, or other
constitutionally protected communications, as long as it is done in such a
manner as not to create a litter problem.
(1980 Code § 49-25)
5-5-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 49-35)
CHAPTER 6: VEGETATION CONTROL
Section
5-6-1: Trees, Plants, Weeds and Grass
5-6-2: Inspection And Determination
5-6-3: Public Nuisance
5-6-4: Notice To Owner
5-6-5: Abatement
5-6-6: Liability
5-6-7: Lien Procedures
5-6-8: Penalty
5-6-1: TREES, PLANTS, WEEDS AND GRASS:
   A.   Diseased or Infested Trees: It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of any premises in the City to permit any tree to remain on such
premises if any part is infected or infested with any of the following diseases
or insects: Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease, Asian long horned beetles,
emerald ash borers, gypsy moths, or any other disease or insect infestation
which is deemed a nuisance by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or the
United States Department of Agriculture.
   B.   Hazardous Trees: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
premises in the City to permit a tree, or portion thereof, that is
substantially dead, or which is in an unstable condition, to become hazardous
because its condition presents a reasonable likelihood of causing physical
damage to person or property.
   C.   Felled Trees. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
premises in the City to permit a tree, or significant portion thereof, that has
been felled naturally or by human means to remain thereon for more than ten
(10) days.
   D.   Overgrown Trees, Bushes and Shrubs: It shall be unlawful for the owner
or occupant of any premises in the City to permit a tree, bush or shrub, or any
portion thereof, to become overgrown or maintained in an untrimmed state such
that the same is unsightly, touching or rubbing (or threatening to touch or
rub) against man-made structures or public utility improvements, grown to a
state that it overhangs the property line of the premises on which it is
located, or contains dead branches.
   E.   Unlawful Weeds: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
premises in the City to permit any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed,
thistle, cockleburr or other weeds of a like kind, to grow or remain thereon.
   F.   Unlawful Bushes: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
premises in the City to plant or permit the grown of bush of the species of
tall, common or European barberry, also known as Barberis vulgaris or its
horticultural varieties.
   G.   Overgrown Weeds and Grass. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of any premises in the City to permit any weeds, grass or plants,
other than trees, bushes, flowers, shrubs, vines, ground cover, common garden
crops such as farm food, or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding six (6") inches anywhere in the City.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-2: INSPECTION AND DETERMINATION:
Representatives of the City are hereby authorized to enter on private property
on which there is located any tree having the appearance of or suspected of
being diseased, infested, or a hazard as described herein for the purpose of
inspecting said tree and/or removing samples or portions therefrom to assess
its condition or to be tested if necessary to establish whether said tree is
diseased and/or infested.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
All trees determined to be diseased, infested, or hazardous, and all unlawful
weeds, unlawful bushes, overgrown weeds, grass, trees, bushes or shrubs, and
all felled trees are hereby declared a public nuisance and shall constitute
nuisance greenery.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-4: NOTICE TO OWNER:
Upon making a determination that nuisance greenery exists on private property,
the City shall provide written notice (personal service or certified mail) to
the owner/occupant thereof identifying such nuisance greenery and advising that
the same has been declared a public nuisance. The notice shall provide the
owner with not less than ten (10) days (for diseased, infested, hazardous or
felled trees) or not less than three (3) days (for unlawful or overgrown weeds,
grass trees bushes and shrubs) to treat, remove and dispose of the nuisance
greenery, or portion thereof. The notice shall also advise the owner/occupant
that if he/she refuses or fails to treat, remove and dispose remove the
nuisance greenery in the time period prescribed in such notice that the City
may remove or abate the nuisance greenery and record a lien for its costs
against the property.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-5: ABATEMENT:
In the event the owner fails to remove or abate the nuisance greenery in the
time prescribed in the notice then the City may proceed to remove or abate such
nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense
shall be charged to the owner/occupant.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-6: LIABILITY:
The owner or occupant of any premises of which the City has incurred costs or
expenses to remove or abate nuisance greenery shall be responsible and shall
pay to the City the amount so incurred no later thirty (30) days after demand
therefor.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-7: LIEN PROCEDURES:
   A.   The City shall record a lien against any property for its cost to
remove or abate nuisance greenery therefrom should the owner or occupant of
such property fail to pay the City for the costs associated therewith within
thirty (30) days after demand therefor.
   B.   Any such lien notice shall be recorded in the office of the Iroquois
County Recorder of Deeds within one year after the removal or abatement costs
are incurred. Said lien notice shall include:
      1.   A description of the property that sufficiently identifies the
parcel;
      2.   The amount of the costs to remove or abate the nuisance greenery;
and
      3.   And the date or dates when the costs for removal or abatement of the
nuisance greenery was incurred by the City.
   C.   Notice shall be personally served, or sent by certified mail to, the
person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for
the taxable year preceding the removal or abatement of nuisance greenery. The
notice shall be delivered or sent after the removal or abatement of nuisance
greenery has been performed and it shall:
      1.   State the substance of this chapter;
      2.   Identify the underlying parcel by common description; and
      3.   Describe the removal or abatement activities.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
5-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each violation, or day said violation is
permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2645, 4-26-2022)
ARTICLE A: YARD WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY
Section
5-6A-1: Permit Required; Term
5-6A-2: Permit Fees
5-6A-3: Numbering Permits
5-6A-4: Revocation Of Permit
5-6A-5: Penalty
5-6A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; TERM:
Any person, firm, corporation and/or other entity depositing organic yard waste
into the City yard waste disposal facility after April 25, 2004, must have a
permit issued by the City Clerk. Said permit shall be valid for a period of
twelve (12) calendar months after issuance.
(Ord. 2115, 4-19-2004)
5-6A-2: PERMIT FEES:
Yard waste disposal facility permits shall only be issued upon payment of the
following fee(s):
   A.   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity in the business of tree
removal, tree trimming, tree surgery or other business involving the cutting,
pruning and/or removal of tree branches: Two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per year.
   B.   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity in the business of
grounds maintenance; landscaping, lawn cutting, leaf raking or other business
which accumulates yard waste in the course of its services at any time: Six
hundred dollars ($600.00) per year.
   C.   All persons within the City limits of Watseka and who are not in a
business (subsection A or B of this section): Free of charge.
(Ord. 2115, 4-19-2004)
5-6A-3: NUMBERING PERMITS:
Permits shall be numbered in sequential order as issued.
(Ord. 2115, 4-19-2004)
5-6A-4: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Permits may be revoked without refund of fees paid should the permittee not
strictly abide by all posted rules regarding use of the yard waste disposal
facility.
(Ord. 2115, 4-19-2004)
5-6A-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or entity described in this article and using the Watseka yard
waste disposal facility after April 25, 2004, without a permit is subject to a
fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2115, 4-19-2004)
CHAPTER 7: NOISE CONTROL
Section
5-7-1: Noisy Conditions Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
5-7-2: Prohibited Noises Enumerated
5-7-3: Exemptions From Provisions
5-7-4: Enforcement
5-7-5: Penalties
5-7-1: NOISY CONDITIONS PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any unnecessary, loud, or unusual noises in any area of the City,
which either annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others, or to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, whether in the
operation of any machine or in the exercise of any trade or calling or
otherwise, any noise which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, or safety of others, unless the making and continuing of the
same be necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the
health, safety, life or limb of some person, and the making of such noises is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 2303, 10-13-2009)
5-7-2: PROHIBITED NOISES ENUMERATED:
The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this chapter. This
list does not constitute an exclusive list.
   A.   Unreasonable Noises: The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and
unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or
unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or vibration in any boarding facility,
dwelling, place of business or other structure, or upon any public street,
park, or other place or building. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises,
commotion or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when
conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner
which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of residences or
which will not detrimentally affect the operators of other places of business
are exempted from this provision.
   B.   Nonemergency Signaling Devices: Sounding or permitting the sounding of
any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device,
intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than ten
(10) consecutive seconds in any hourly period. The reasonable sounding of such
devices by houses of religious worship, seasonal contribution solicitors, or by
the City for traffic control purposes are exempt from this provision.
   C.   Emergency Signaling Devices: The intentional sounding or permitting the
sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire, burglar,
civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device,
except in an emergency or except as follows: Testing of an emergency signaling
device shall occur between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall
such test time exceed five (5) minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling
system shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Local, State, and
Federal governments are exempt from this prohibition.
   D.   Radios, Televisions, Boom Boxes, Stereos, Musical Instruments And
Similar Devices:
      1.   The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo,
musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a
manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or
operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the
sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of
neighbors and passersby, or is plainly audible at a distance of seventy five
feet (75') from any person in a commercial or industrial area or public space.
      2.   The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo,
musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a
manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or
operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the
sound, and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in
residential or noise sensitive areas, including multi-family or single-family
dwellings.
      3.   This subsection shall not apply to violations of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-611.
   E.   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems And Similar Devices:
The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier,
public address system, or other device for producing or reproducing sound in
the following areas:
      1.   Within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas.
      2.   Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real
property line of the public space from which the sound emanates, and is
unreasonably loud and raucous.
   F.   Yelling, Shouting And Similar Activities: Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing in residential or noise-sensitive areas or in public
places at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort,
or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities.
   G.   Building Construction; Excavations (see also sections
11-11-13 and
13-7-1D of this Code): The construction, demolition, alteration or repair of
any building or the excavation of streets and highways shall be done between
sunrise and sunset. Local, State, and Federal governments are exempt from this
prohibition. In cases of emergency, construction or repair noises are exempt
from this provision. In nonemergency situations, the following shall apply:
      1.   The Building Inspector may, at his discretion, issue written
permission, upon application, if he determines that the public health and
safety, as affected by loud and raucous noise caused by construction or repair
of buildings between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. of the following day, will not be impaired, and if he further
determines that loss or inconvenience would not result to a party in interest.
The written permission shall grant permission in nonemergency cases for a
period of not more than three (3) days. The permit may be renewed once for a
period of three (3) days or less.
      2.   The Director of Public Works may, at his discretion, issue written
permission, upon application, if he determines that the public health and
safety, as affected by loud and raucous noise caused by construction or
excavation of roadways and sidewalks between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, will not be impaired,
and if he further determines that loss or inconvenience would not result to a
party in interest. The written permission shall grant permission in
nonemergency cases for a period of not more than three (3) days. The permit may
be renewed once for a period of three (3) days or less.
   H.   Noise-Sensitive Areas (Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals And Similar
Institutions): The creation of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise adjacent
to any noise-sensitive area while it is in use, which unreasonably interferes
with the workings of the institution or which unreasonably disturbs the persons
in these institutions.
   I.   Blowers, Internal Combustion Engines: In residential or noise-sensitive
areas, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M, of the following day, the operation of any noise-creating blower, power
fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due
to the explosion of operating gases, fuels, or fluids; provided, that the noise
is unreasonably loud and raucous and can be heard across the property line of
the property from which it emanates. This subsection shall not apply to snow
blowers and other snow removal machinery.
   J.   Commercial Establishments: Unreasonably loud and raucous noise from the
premises of any commercial establishment, including any outdoor area which is
part of or under the control of the establishment, which is plainly audible at
a distance of fifty feet (50') from any residential property.
(Ord. 2303, 10-13-2009)
5-7-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Repairs of utility structures which are damaged, in disrepair, or out
of service, and such condition poses a clear and immediate danger to life,
health, or significant loss of property.
   B.   Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or
other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police
activity, or imminent danger; provided, that the prohibition(s) in this chapter
continues to apply.
   C.   Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf
of the City of Watseka, the State of Illinois, or the Federal government,
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
the following day, when public welfare and convenience renders it impractical
to perform the work between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M.
   D.   Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or
private school grounds which are conducted in accordance with the manner in
which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school
athletic and school entertainment events.
   E.   Any event that is sponsored by and directly controlled by the City or
its designee.
   F.   Outdoor church activities that cannot be heard from a distance of more
than one hundred feet (100') beyond the church property boundaries; except,
that a church may sound chapel bells periodically so long as each said ringing
does not continue for an unreasonable amount of time.
(Ord. 2303, 10-13-2009)
5-7-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Chief of Police, or his designees, will have primary responsibility
for the enforcement of the noise regulations herein. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the Police Chief, or his designees, from obtaining voluntary
compliance by way of warning, notice, or education.
   B.   If a person’s conduct would otherwise violate this chapter and consists
of any of the following: 1) speech or communication protected by the
Constitution of the United States or the State of Illinois; 2) a gathering with
others to hear or observe speech or communication protected by the Constitution
of the United States or the State of Illinois; or 3) or a gathering with others
to lawfully picket or otherwise express, in a nonviolent manner, a position on
a social, economic, political, or religious question, then the person must be
ordered to, and have the opportunity to, move, disperse, or otherwise remedy
the violation prior to arrest or a citation being issued.
(Ord. 2303, 10-13-2009)
5-7-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a ticket
or citation carrying a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). However, this subsection shall not be construed as requiring the
City Police Department to cite a person for violation of this chapter if, in
its discretion, the Department determines that it is in the best interest of
the community to utilize other lawful means to gain compliance.
   B.   A subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person, which
occurred within thirty (30) days of receiving a previous ticket, is punishable
by a ticket carrying a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter or, in the case of
continuous violations, each day a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a
separate offense and may be punishable separately.
(Ord. 2303, 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 8: SMOKE FREE REGULATIONS
Section
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Nonsmoking Areas Designated
5-8-3: Authority To Designate Other Nonsmoking Areas
5-8-4: Posting Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays
5-8-5: Permitting Smoking Prohibited
5-8-6: Exemptions From Provisions
5-8-7: Discrimination Prohibited
5-8-8: Violation; Penalties
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%)of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. BAR
includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult
entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a Municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: “Gaming equipment/supplies” as defined in the
Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming
and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. HEALTHCARE FACILITY includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
OUTDOOR VENUE: Any outdoor or exterior area within the public right-of-way, but
under the control of a private employer through the permission, authorization,
or license of any governmental body, through which employees may enter, leave,
or pass through during the course of employment, including a minimum distance
of five feet (5') surrounding such areas. OUTDOOR VENUE includes, but is not
limited to, outdoor seating areas, patios, and sidewalk cafes.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and
classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private
residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care,
foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises,
is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT, nor are enclosed laboratories, not open to the
public, in an accredited university or government facility where the activity
of smoking is exclusively conducted for the purpose of medical or scientific
health-related research.
PRIVATE CLUB: A not-for-profit association that: a) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to January 1, 2008,
whether incorporated or not; b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building
or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times; c) is
operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and d) only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this
definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both, to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of Federal
income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE:
   A.   That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public,
regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by
private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, or any other public entity
and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum
distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and
ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
   B.   A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless the private
residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar
social service care on the premises.
   C.   A PUBLIC PLACE includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants,
retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters,
libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities,
nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas,
meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling
places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and
facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the
State or State subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping
centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational
facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting
areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas,
and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodations that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT:
   A.   An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops,
cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that
gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees; and
   B.   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere.
   C.   RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE:
   A.   A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of
its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars,
cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related
smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental.
   B.   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE includes an enclosed workplace that manufactures,
imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products when, as a necessary and
integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing, or
distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of that tobacco or
tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco
product is tested; provided, that the involved business entity: 1) maintains a
specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the
heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a
facility that permits smoking throughout; 2) satisfies the eighty percent (80%)
requirement related to gross sales; and 3) delivers tobacco products to
consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of
its business.
   C.   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or section
of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of
liquor, food or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment. SMOKE or SMOKING does not include smoking that is
associated with a native recognized religious ceremony, ritual, or activity by
American Indians that is in accordance with the Federal American Indian
Religious Freedom Act, 42 USC 1996 and 1996a.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-2: NONSMOKING AREAS DESIGNATED:
   A.   No person shall smoke in a public place, place of employment, or
outdoor venue within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or
place of employment.
   B.   No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the
City.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is
prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited
to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and
hallways of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is
owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of
higher education.
   D.   Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by section
5-8-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-3: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place, place of employment, or outdoor venue may designate a nonenclosed area
of a public place, place of employment, or outdoor venue not otherwise governed
by this chapter, as an area where smoking is also prohibited; provided, that
such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs
prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection
5-8-4A of this chapter.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-4: POSTING SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
   A.   Signs Posted: “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking”
symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted in each public place, place of employment, or outdoor
venue where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of that place. Each public place, place of
employment, and outdoor venue where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall
have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking
is prohibited.
   B.   Removal Of Ashtrays: All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where
smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other
person having control of the area.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-5: PERMITTING SMOKING PROHIBITED:
No person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who owns,
operates, or otherwise controls a public place, place of employment, or outdoor
venue shall permit or suffer to occur smoking therein or thereon, and shall
reasonably assure that smoking is prohibited, unless specifically exempted by
section
5-9-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking may be allowed in
the following areas:
   A.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare,
adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home-based business open to
the public;
   B.   Retail tobacco stores, as defined section
5-8-1 of this chapter, in operation prior to January 1, 2008. Any retail
tobacco store that begins operation after January 1, 2008, may only qualify for
an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the
business, and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited;
   C.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided, that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous, and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms;
   D.   Enclosed laboratories that are excluded from the definition of PLACE OF
EMPLOYMENT in section
5-8-1 of this chapter; and
   E.   Common smoking rooms in long-term care facilities operated under the
authority of the Illinois Department of Veterans’ Affairs or licensed under the
Nursing Home Care Act (210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.) that are accessible only to
residents who are smokers and have requested in writing to have access to the
common smoking room where smoking is permitted, and the smoke shall not
infiltrate other areas of the long-term care facility.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-7: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
5-8-8: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation: Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity who violates any section of this chapter shall be fined as provided
herein. Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   B.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under
this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and not more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each subsequent offense.
      2.   Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity
who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place, place of employment,
or outdoor venue that violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined: a)
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation; b)
not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within
one year after the first violation; and c) not less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one year after
the first violation.
   C.   Administration Of Citations: Citations issued for violating this
chapter may be administered through title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code.
(Ord. 2512, 6-26-2018)
TITLE 6: PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
6-1-1: Definition Of Member
6-1-2: Department Created
6-1-3: Department Personnel
6-1-4: Chief Of Police
6-1-5: Departmental Positions: Deputy Chief Of Police: Corporal
6-1-6: Powers And Duties Of Department
6-1-7: Rules And Regulations
6-1-8: Auxiliary Police
6-1-9: Police Pension Fund
6-1-1: DEFINITION OF MEMBER:
When used in this chapter, the term MEMBER means any person who is a member of
the Police Department, regardless of rank, and is regularly employed and,
except where exempted hereunder, has been appointed by the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners.
(2019 Code)
6-1-2: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of the
City.
(2019 Code)
6-1-3: DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
The classified service ranks and maximum number of full-time police officers in
each rank is established as follows: one (1) Chief of Police; one (1) captain;
one (1) lieutenant; three (3) sergeants; and five (5) patrol officers. The
number of personnel above are the maximum and not the minimum number required
to be employed. If a person leaves the services of the Police Department or is
promoted, a vacancy shall not exist in any rank, and no employee shall be hired
or promoted until such time as the City Council authorizes the vacancy to be
filled.
(2019 Code; amd. Ord. 2639, 3-22-2022)
6-1-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
Chief of Police, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the Police
Department, shall be the keeper of the City Jail, and shall have custody of all
persons incarcerated therein.
      2.   The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports
concerning the activities of the Police Department as may be required by
statute, ordinance, or at the request of the Mayor or City Council.
      3.   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the performance of the
Police Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the
department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
      4.   The Chief of Police shall, with the consent of the City of Council,
prescribe the property uniform and badge for all members of the Police
Department, and shall make suitable regulations under which they shall be
required to wear an appropriate uniform and badge, by which they shall be known
and designated at all times.
(2019 Code)
6-1-5: DEPARTMENTAL POSITIONS: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE: CORPORAL:
   A.   Deputy Chief of Police: There is hereby established the position of
Deputy Chief of the Police Department. The Deputy Chief is an exempt rank
immediately below that of the Chief of Police. The Deputy Chief shall be
appointed by the Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the City Council,
from any full-time member of the Police Department holding the rank of sergeant
or above. The Deputy Chief shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police
and may be suspended or removed from the position at the discretion of the
Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the City Council. The Deputy Chief
shall be considered on furlough from the rank held prior to the appointment and
will revert to his prior rank upon resignation or discharge as Deputy Chief.
   The Deputy Chief shall be second in command of the Police Department and
shall have the duties and responsibilities as prescribed by the Chief of
Police. In the absence of the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief shall be
charged with the general oversight of the activities of the Police Department
and shall be the direct supervisor over the captain, lieutenant, sergeants, and
other members.
   B.   Corporal: There is hereby established the position of Corporal. The
Corporal shall be appointed by the Chief of Police from the rank of patrol
officer, subject to the approval of the City Council. The Corporal will serve
at the discretion of the Chief of Police and may be suspended or removed from
the position at the discretion of the Chief of Police. A Corporal shall be the
ranking officer in the absence of a sergeant or other supervisory officer.
(Ord. 2639, 3-22-2022)
6-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   The several members of the Police Department shall have all powers as
may be authorized by law, or which are incidental thereto, including the power
of arrest.
   B.   All members of the Police Department shall devote their time to the
discharge of their duties, according to the provisions of this Code and the
rules and regulations as the Chief of Police, City Council, and Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners may adopt and prescribe.
   C.   It shall be the duty of each member of the Police Department to
preserve order, preserve peace and quiet, and enforce the law.
   D.   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to report
to the Chief of Police at such times and places as he may require, and at all
times obey the orders and instructions of the Chief of Police.
(2019 Code)
6-1-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the general rules of
conduct of the Police Department.
   B.   The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations
for the conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he
shall deem advisable, and such rules, when approved with the consent of the
City Council, shall be binding on such members. The respective rank and grade
of the members, as to superiority within the Police Department, may be
prescribed by regulation.
   C.   Rules and regulations prescribed by the Chief of Police shall yield in
favor of those prescribed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. The
rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall yield
to those prescribed by the City Council.
(2019 Code)
6-1-8: AUXILIARY POLICE:
   A.   Position Created: There is hereby established within the Police
Department the position of auxiliary police officer.
   B.   Appointment: Auxiliary police officers shall be appointed by the
Auxiliary Police Director, with the approval of the Chief of Police.
   C.   Not Regular Police: Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of
the Police Department. Auxiliary police officers shall not supplement members
of the regular Police Department in the performance of their assigned and
normal duties, except as otherwise provided in herein.
   D.   Supervision: Auxiliary police officers shall at all times during the
performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of the
Chief of Police.
   E.   Residency: Auxiliary police officers need not be residents of the City.
   F.   Fingerprints: Before the appointment of an auxiliary police officer,
the person's fingerprints shall be taken, and no person shall be appointed as
an auxiliary police officer if that person has been convicted of a felony or
other crime involving moral turpitude.
   G.   Training: Auxiliary police officers, before entering upon any of their
duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other
police procedures appropriate for the exercise of the powers conferred upon
them. The training and course of study shall be determined and provided by the
City Council. Before being permitted to carry a firearm, however, an auxiliary
police officer must have the same course of training as required of peace
officers under section 2 of the Peace Officer and Probation Officer Firearm
Training Act (50 ILCS 710/2).
   H.   Duties:
      1.   Auxiliary police officers shall only be assigned to perform the
following duties: a) to aid or direct traffic within the City; b) to aid in
control of natural or manmade disasters; and c) to aid in case of civil
disorder as directed by the Chief of Police.
      2.   When it is impractical for members of the regular Police Department
to perform those normal and regular police duties, however, the Chief of Police
may assign auxiliary police officers to perform those normal and regular police
duties.
   I.   Firearms: Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except
with the permission of the Chief of Police and while in uniform and in the
performance of their duties. Auxiliary police officers, when on duty, shall
also be conservators of the peace and shall have the powers specified in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-15-25.
   J.   Identification: Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police
officers shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the
Police Department.
   K.   Uniform And Equipment Allowances; Compensation: Auxiliary police
officers shall receive such uniform and equipment allowance and compensation
for services performed as may from time to time be determined by the City
Council.
(2019 Code; amd. Ord. 2639, 3-22-2022)
6-1-9: POLICE PENSION FUND:
   A.   Fund Created: There shall be a Police Pension Fund established in the
City as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 8-1)
   B.   Board Of Trustees Of Fund: The Police Pension Fund shall be
administered by a Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees of said fund shall
consist of five (5) members, of which two (2) trustees shall be appointed by
the Mayor, two (2) trustees shall be elected by members of the Police
Department, and one trustee shall be elected by the beneficiaries of the
Pension Fund. The election shall be held on the second Monday in April, and the
term of each member shall be for two (2) years; except, that on the initial
appointment and election of trustees, where more than one trustee is to be
appointed or elected, one shall be appointed or elected for a one-year term and
one shall be appointed or elected for a two-year term. The Pension Board shall
meet at least quarterly, and shall hold such additional meetings as shall be
called by the President of the Pension Board.
(Ord. 2424, 9-23-2014)
   C.   Contributions To Fund: There shall be deposited in the Pension Fund the
sums required by law, which for the present includes 9.91% of the salary per
month deducted from the salary of each member of the police force, and the
proceeds of an annual tax to be levied upon all the taxable property in the
City at the rate one dollar ($1.00) on all such taxable property, which annual
tax shall produce an amount which, when added to the deductions from the
salaries or wages of the police officers and the receipts available from all
other sources, will equal a sum sufficient to meet the annual requirements of
the Pension Fund. If the Pension Funds on hand equal or exceed the reserve
required by law, no annual tax need be levied.
(1980 Code § 8-3)
   D.   Extension Of Benefits Of Fund: All members of the City Police
Department, who are appointed or appointable by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, shall be entitled to the benefits of the Police Pension Fund
under the following conditions:
      1.   Those members who, under statutory provisions, appear not to be
entitled to the benefits of said fund shall, nevertheless, by this section,
have and receive the same pension benefits and make the same pension
contributions as the other members of the police force receive and make, who,
under statute, are entitled to the benefits of the Police Pension Fund.
      2.   It is the intention of this section to waive the age requirements of
the statute as to those police officers who, under the statute and on account
of age, would not be entitled to the benefits of the Police Pension Fund.
      3.   The benefits of the police officers covered by this Code shall be
governed by the Statutes of the State of Illinois, excepting, however, those
statutory provisions which deny pension benefits on account of the age of the
police officer when employed.
      4.   As to those police officers now employed who appear not to be
entitled to the benefits of the Police Pension Fund, no contributions shall be
required of them on their services rendered prior to the date of the adoption
of this Code. The first contribution to be required of them shall be for the
first pay period accruing after the date of the adoption of this Code.
      5.   The police officers whose pension coverage is provided by this Code,
shall have, however, the option and privilege to pay into the Police Pension
Fund, within three (3) years from the date hereof, contributions, without
interest, on one or more years past service, so as to provide such pension
coverage as they may wish at the time of their retirement.
(1980 Code § 8-4)
CHAPTER 2: BURGLAR, FIRE AND PROTECTIVE ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
6-2-1: Operation Of Systems
6-2-2: False Alarms
6-2-3: Enforcement
6-2-1: OPERATION OF SYSTEMS:
The City Council shall decide all questions arising as to the use and operation
of the burglar, fire, and protective alarm systems, through the City-owned
electric control board.
(1980 Code § 6-69)
6-2-2: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Generally: In connection with the automatic fire alarm service
installed, the owner and/or lessee of the fire alarm system shall reimburse the
City for any expense incurred by the City by reason of the Watseka Fire
Department responding to a “false fire alarm” which shall have originated in or
shall have been caused by the fire alarm system. A “false fire alarm” is one
that is caused by a mechanical defect or improper operation of the system
installed by the owner and/or lessee or by the fault of the personnel of the
owner and/or lessee in connection with the system where no fire exists. The fee
for any such false alarm shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   B.   Nonemergency Activation: Any person who intentionally activates any
alarm when no need for emergency response exists or to test an alarm without
first advising the 911 Communications Center shall be deemed to have violated
this article. Persons who intentionally activate an alarm under conditions set
forth in this subsection shall not use the defense that the intentional
activation was one of the allowable four (4) false alarms as set forth in
subsection E of this section.
   C.   Failure/Refusal To Respond To Premises:
      1.   A responsible party or his designee will be allowed twenty (20)
minutes to respond to the location of the alarm from the time they receive
notification from the 911 Communications Center. Failure to respond within
twenty (20) minutes will be regarded as a refusal to respond. Any failure or
refusal to respond shall be deemed a violation of this article.
      2.   If a responsible party or his designee fails or refuses to respond
to the location of the alarm within the time allowed by subsection B1 of this
section, the responsible party shall not hold the City, Police Department, Fire
Department, or any of their agents responsible for the security of the
premises, and any emergency personnel at the premises will be returned to duty.
The premises will not be responded to again until the alarm at the premises has
been reset and/or the building has been secured.
   D.   Notice Of False Alarms: The Chief of Police shall notify the
responsible party, in writing, of each occurrence of a false alarm. The notice
may include, but not necessarily be limited to: the date of the false alarm;
the number of the false alarm for the year; the nature of the false alarm if
ascertainable, such as human error or system malfunction; a statement that the
responsible party must take corrective action to ensure that a false alarm
based upon the same circumstances does not recur; and the amount of the false
alarm service charge, if any, incurred by the responsible party for the
response to the false alarm.
   E.   Failure To Take Corrective Action: The failure of the responsible party
to take corrective action as directed by the false alarm notice shall be a
violation of this article.
(1980 Code § 6-65) (Ord. 2423, 7-22-2014)
Cross-reference:
   See also sections
6-3-11 and
7-6-3 A of this Code
6-2-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article to the end that the burglar, fire, and protective alarm systems may be
unified and operated through one control board.
(1980 Code § 6-68)
CHAPTER 3: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
6-3-1: Department Created; Composition And Appointment
6-3-2: Fire Chief
6-3-3: Assistant Fire Chief
6-3-4: Functions, Powers And Duties Of Department
6-3-5: Mandatory Retirement Age
6-3-6: Rules And Regulations
6-3-7: Fire Protection Outside City Limits
6-3-8: Spectators Near Or At Fires
6-3-9: Authority To Destroy Structures At Fires
6-3-10: Entering Firehouses Restricted
6-3-11: False Alarms
6-3-12: Penalty
6-3-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT:
   A.   There is hereby created the Fire Department of the City whose
membership shall consist of volunteer/paid-on-call firefighters.
(1980 Code § 10-1)
   B.   The personnel of the City Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief
and not more than thirty five (35) other members, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor on the advice of the Public Safety Committee and by the consent and
approval of the City Council, at the beginning of each fiscal year, provided
that any vacancy may be filled at any time by a like appointment. Appointees
shall serve for the current fiscal year and until their successors are
appointed. A retirement age of sixty five (65) years is hereby established for
the members of the Fire Department, and no person who has attained his or her
65th birthday shall be eligible for membership in said Department.
(1980 Code § 10-19) (Ord. 2549, 10-22-2019)
   C.   The power to appoint the nonfull-time members of the Fire Department is
vested in the Mayor, with the advice and the consent of the Alderpersons.
Pursuant to its home rule powers, the City exempts itself from the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/10-3-2.
(Ord. 2517, 8-28-2018)
6-3-2: FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of Fire
Chief, an executive office of the City. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by
the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 10-2)
   B.   Oath And Bond: The Fire Chief shall qualify by taking the oath of
office and by furnishing a bond for one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties as herein set out.
(1980 Code § 10-20)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Fire Chief shall be Chief of the Fire Department, and
shall be responsible for the care of the apparatus belonging thereto, and the
performance of the duties by the members of the department. He shall keep such
records and make such reports as may be required by law and by the City
Council, regarding the activities of the department.
(1980 Code § 10-3)
      2.   Smoke Alarm Inspections: In addition to other duties herein
specified, the Fire Chief or his designee shall be responsible for the
inspection of smoke alarms in the City. Any person wishing a smoke alarm
inspection to be made by the Fire Chief shall pay to the City Collector a fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) prior to the inspection and issuance of the
report.
(1980 Code § 10-27)
6-3-3: ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   In the absence of the Fire Chief, it shall be the duty of the Assistant
Fire Chief to take charge of the work of the department, and he shall have and
exercise the duties and powers of the Fire Chief.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the Assistant Fire Chief, if in his power, to
attend all fires within the City.
(1980 Code § 10-6)
6-3-4: FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   It shall be the function of the Fire Department, and the duty of
members thereof, to prevent and extinguish any accidental or destructive fire
occurring in the City and to enforce all ordinances relating to fire hazards.
(1980 Code § 10-4)
   B.   It shall be the duty of all officers of the Fire Department and all
police officers of the City to see that the provisions of this chapter are
enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of
the provisions of this chapter or who shall hinder, resist, or refuse to obey
any such officer in the discharge of his duty, and to that end, all such
officers are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of police
officers.
(1980 Code § 10-21)
   C.   The Fire Chief and members of the Fire Department shall have the power
to arrest any person at or near the scene of an accident or destructive fire
for interference with the Fire Department in the performance of its duties, or
for the commission of any crime or ordinance violation in connection therewith.
(1980 Code § 10-17)
6-3-5: MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE:
A retirement age of sixty five (65) years is hereby established for the members
of the Fire Department, and no person who has attained his sixty fifth birthday
shall be eligible for membership in the department.
(1980 Code § 10-19)
6-3-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the department as he
may deem desirable, and such rules, when approved by the City Council, shall be
binding on such members. He shall also have the power to designate what
firefighter or person shall have the command of the Fire Department during the
temporary absence of both the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief.
(1980 Code § 10-18)
6-3-7: FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Nothing in this Code shall obligate the City or its Fire Department to
furnish fire protection to any property outside the corporate limits of the
City, except as to such properties as the City, by valid contract, is bound to
furnish fire protection, and the Fire Department, in its discretion, may give
or refuse to give fire protection outside the corporate limits of the City,
unless, by valid contract, the City is bound to furnish fire protection. For
each fire attended by the Fire Department outside the corporate limits of the
City, there shall be a charge of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall
pay for the first hour or fraction thereof of service, and an additional charge
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each hour or fraction of an hour over and
above the first hour of service required in attending the fire, all of which
charge shall be payable by the owner and/or lessee of the premises on which the
fire occurred or by the person requesting the service or by any person
receiving a benefit from the service, and all of which charges shall be payable
immediately to the City at the Office of the City Collector.
   B.   The Fire Department may enter into mutual assistance agreements with
the fire departments of other nearby cities and municipalities and fire
protection districts; provided, that the agreements are first approved by the
City Council.
(1980 Code § 10-23)
   C.   The City shall furnish firefighting equipment and personnel for use
outside its boundaries, as provided in any mutual fire aid program agreed to as
provided herein, to any municipality or fire protection district that has
agreed to conform to the program and has assumed the obligations imposed upon
it thereby.
(1980 Code § 10-24)
6-3-8: SPECTATORS NEAR OR AT FIRES:
   A.   Obedience To Department Orders:
      1.   It shall be the duty of all spectators at fires to obey all the
orders of the members of the Fire Department on duty there, with respect to
keeping away from the scene of the fire or the handling of or interference with
the apparatus of the department.
(1980 Code § 10-5)
      2.   Every person who shall be present at any fire or emergency shall be
subject and obedient to the orders of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or
any command officer in extinguishing the fire and the removal and protection of
property; provided, that no person not a member of the Fire Department shall be
bound to obey any of the officers, unless the officers shall bear their
respective badges of office or their official character shall be known to him,
and the officer shall have the power to arrest any person or persons so
refusing to obey such lawful orders.
(1980 Code § 10-13)
   B.   Cordoned Area: The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or any member in
command may prescribe limits in the vicinity of any fire, within which no
person excepting those who reside therein, firefighters and police officers,
and those admitted by order of any officer of the Fire Department, shall be
permitted to come.
(1980 Code § 10-7)
   C.   Obstructing Department; Damaging Equipment; Driving Over Hose: Any
person who shall wilfully resist, obstruct, or hinder or interfere with any
member of the Fire Department in the performance of his duty connected with the
Fire Department, or shall wilfully or negligently or in any manner injure,
break or deface any engine, hose, truck, cart, or other fire apparatus
belonging to the City, or belonging to any other fire department, or shall
wilfully or negligently drive any mode of conveyance across or upon any fire
hose, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(1980 Code § 10-9; amd. 2019 Code)
   D.   Following Fire Apparatus: No person or persons driving any automobile,
truck, motorcycle, or motor vehicle of any kind shall follow within five
hundred feet (500') of any fire engine, fire truck, cart or other fire
apparatus while said engine, truck, cart or apparatus is proceeding to a fire,
and any person or persons violating the provisions of this subsection shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(1980 Code § 10-10)
6-3-9: AUTHORITY TO DESTROY STRUCTURES AT FIRES:
The Fire Chief, or in his absence the officer in command at any fire or in case
of the absence of such officers, the Mayor, or any two (2) members of the City
Council, may direct the members of the Fire Department to cut down and remove
any building, erection or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire; and the Fire Chief, or other officer in command, shall have the power to
blow up or cause to be blown up, with powder or otherwise, any building or
erection during the progress of any fire for the purpose of extinguishing or
checking the same.
(1980 Code § 10-12)
6-3-10: ENTERING FIREHOUSES RESTRICTED
It shall be and hereby is declared unlawful for any person or persons, unless
invited by Fire Department personnel, to enter the Fire Department house or any
place where the equipment and apparatus of the Fire Department is stored, at
any time, except on business pertaining to the Fire Department or other City
business without consent of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 10-22)
6-3-11: FALSE ALARMS:
Any person who shall intentionally give or make a false alarm of fire shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
(1980 Code § 10-8; amd. 2019 Code)
Cross-reference:
   See also sections
6-2-2 and
7-6-3 A of this Code
6-3-12: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter, or failing to comply with the same, where no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(1980 Code § 10-25)
ARTICLE A: RAPID ENTRY SYSTEM
Section
6-3A-1: Definitions
6-3A-2: Application Of Provisions; Exemptions
6-3A-3: Means Of Accessibility To Secured Systems And Premises
6-3A-4: Construction Sites
6-3A-5: Key Box Contents
6-3A-6: Alert Decals
6-3A-7: Penalties
6-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The normal fire protection area, both incorporated and
unincorporated, covered by the Watseka Fire Department.
FIRE OFFICIAL: The Fire Chief or his designee.
KEY BOX: A UL “Listed” box, size and style, approved by the Fire Official that
meets the requirements and uses the same security key code adopted by the Fire
Department.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: The person(s) charged with the responsibility for the
occupancy, building or business owner.
SECURITY CAP: A Fire Department connection (FDC) plug and cap approved for use
in the City of Watseka by the Fire Official utilizing two and one-half inch
(21/2") National Standard thread pattern.
SECURITY PADLOCK: A padlock approved by the Fire Official that utilizes the
approved key code utilized by the Fire Department.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
6-3A-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions; Costs: All newly constructed buildings, not
yet occupied, or buildings currently under construction, and all buildings or
businesses applying for a certificate of occupancy and/or building permits will
be required to comply with this article. The cost of purchasing and installing
the required equipment, along with any cost associated with implementation of
the program at a specific property, will be borne by the responsible party.
   B.   Exemptions From Provisions: This article shall not apply to owner-
occupied single- and two-family dwellings. Owners of single- and two-family
dwellings are encouraged to participate voluntarily utilizing a residential
security box.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
6-3A-3: MEANS OF ACCESSIBILITY TO SECURED SYSTEMS AND PREMISES:
   A.   Mandatory Key Boxes:
      1.   Fire Suppression And Standpipe: When a new or remodeled building
within the Fire District is protected by an automatic fire suppression and/or
standpipe system, it shall be equipped with a key box, installed at a location
approved by the Fire Official.
      2.   Automatic Alarm Systems: When a new or remodeled building is
protected by an automatic alarm system and/or access to or within a building,
or an area within that building, is unduly difficult because of secured
openings, and where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or
firefighting purposes, it shall be equipped with a key box, to be installed at
a location approved by the Fire Official.
   B.   Hazardous Materials Storage Cabinets: In occupancies storing or
dispensing hazardous materials, a hazardous materials cabinet may be required.
This cabinet will serve to store materials safety data sheets and other
information as required.
   C.   Key Switch For Automatic Gates: When a property is accessed through a
gate or cross arm that impedes ingress through required fire lanes by means of
a key or swipe card, it shall be equipped with a key switch to be installed at
a location approved by the Fire Official.
   D.   Accessible Security Padlocks: When a property is protected by a locked
fence or gate and where immediate access to the property is necessary for
lifesaving and firefighting purposes, it shall be equipped with a security
padlock to be installed at a location approved by the Fire Official. It shall
then be the responsibility of the responsible party to see that the fence or
gate is secured properly so that the security padlock is accessible.
   E.   Security Caps To Exposed Fire Department Connections: When a building
is protected by an automatic sprinkler and/or standpipe system and the Fire
Department connection is exposed to vandalism, the Fire Official may require
that a security cap be installed.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
6-3A-4: CONSTRUCTION SITES:
   A.   When a construction site is to be secured by a locked fence or gate,
that site will fall under subsection
6-3A-3D of this article during the duration of construction or until said fence
or gate is removed.
   B.   If needed, at the discretion of the Fire Chief, a security padlock will
be obtained by placing a security deposit with the City Clerk in an amount set
to cover replacement of the security padlock should it be lost or damaged. Once
the deposit has been made, the Fire Official will come to the construction site
and explain the use of the security padlock. It shall then be the
responsibility of the construction company to see that the fence or gate is
secured properly so that the security padlock is accessible.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
6-3A-5: KEY BOX CONTENTS:
The key boxes shall contain, but not be limited to, the following items as
designated by the Fire Official:
   A.   Labeled keys to locked points of egress, whether in the interior or
exterior of the buildings.
   B.   Labeled keys to the locked mechanical rooms.
   C.   Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas not covered in subsection
6-3A-3C or D or section
6-3A-4 of this article.
   D.   Labeled keys to any other areas that may be required by the Fire
Official.
   E.   A card containing the emergency contact people and phone numbers for
each occupancy.
   F.   Floor plans of the rooms within the building may also be required,
showing locations of shutoffs.
   G.   Hazardous materials safety data sheets as required.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
6-3A-6: ALERT DECALS:
Alert decals, approved by the Fire Official, to alert fire companies of the
presence of security features covered by this article will be displayed on any
outside doors or windows as designated by the Fire Official.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
6-3A-7: PENALTIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this article is punishable by a fine not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Continued noncompliance may
result in revocation of the certificate of occupancy by the Building Official.
(Ord. 2389, 12-18-2012)
CHAPTER 4: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
6-4-1: Accumulation Of Combustible Materials
6-4-2: Open Burning
6-4-3: Fires Near Buildings, On Public Ways
6-4-4: Fireworks
6-4-5: Explosives
6-4-6: Life Safety Code
6-4-7: Smoke And Carbon Monoxide Detector Inspections
6-4-8: Emergency Response And Recovery Fees
6-4-1: ACCUMULATION OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit or
allow the accumulation of combustible or inflammable materials on any premises
within the fire limits of the City in such quantities so as to create a
dangerous fire hazard. Upon complaint made to him, the City Fire Chief shall
inspect any such premises, and if such a dangerous fire hazard is found to
exist, shall order its removal within twenty four (24) hours time. Refusal to
permit said inspection or failure to comply with said order shall, upon
conviction, subject the offender to a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(1980 Code § 10-16)
   B.   1.   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in
such a way as to create a fire hazard or to store or throw away any refuse of
any kind in an alley, street or public way in the City.
      2.   Accumulations of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or
combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to
remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space, or upon
any public street, sidewalk, easement or alley abutting thereon. All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when the same endangers property or is liable to
catch on fire, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property, including all weeds, grass, vines or other growth growing in or upon
any public street, sidewalk, easement or alley abutting said property.
(1980 Code § 53-39)
      3.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifteen
dollars ($15.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a
violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
6-4-2: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Prohibited Burning; Burning Landscape Waste:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to burn or attempt to burn on any premises in
the City any wastepaper, boxes, cartons, brush, leaves, or other waste or
inflammable materials, unless: Landscape waste (exclusive of any other waste)
is burned on Saturday and/or Sunday of the months of March and November of each
year during daylight hours and/or the first weekend of each month of all months
other than March and November of each year during daylight hours, and burning
is constantly attended by an adult person over the age of eighteen (18) years,
with the means to expeditiously and appropriately extinguish such fire.
      2.   Landscape waste may be burned by City employees at the City
landscape waste area at times when the wind and other conditions are
appropriate for such burning.
   B.   Recreational Fires: Recreational fires shall be allowed only upon a
written permit issued by the City for a specific date.
   C.   Location And Conditions Of Fires:
      1.   All outdoor fires allowed hereinabove must be contained upon private
property, and all such permitted burning is strictly prohibited upon public
streets, gutters, sidewalks, berms, or approaches, and further, no fires
permitted hereinabove nor smoke therefrom shall obstruct the vision of
pedestrians and/or motor vehicle operators upon the sidewalks and/or public
roadways.
      2.   No person shall permit outdoor fires at such time when the Police
Chief or the Fire Chief determines conditions are unsafe for outdoor burning.
   D.   Nuisance Fires:
      1.   Notwithstanding anything herein provided, any outdoor fires may be
declared a nuisance if the smoke, sparks, heat, or ash therefrom unreasonably
interferes with the rights of adjoining or adjacent property owners to
peacefully enjoy the occupation of their real estate.
      2.   In the event a nuisance is declared, the first such instance of a
nuisance by a particular offender shall invoke issuance of a warning by a City
official to such offender; the second nuisance made by a particular offender
shall invoke an immediate order to cease and desist the burning in progress;
the third instance of a nuisance by a particular offender shall cause the City
to revoke said offenders privilege to engage in permitted burning under this
section at any time in the future.
   E.   Penalty: Any unpermitted burning within the City shall be a violation
of City ordinance punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per occurrence.
(Ord. 2093, 10-20-2003)
6-4-3: FIRES NEAR BUILDINGS, ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any building
or other structure as to endanger such building or structure or on any public
street or sidewalk pavement.
(1980 Code § 53-27)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifteen dollars
($15.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
6-4-4: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases, as used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Products
Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, and classified
as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States Department of Transportation
under 49 CFR 172.101. CONSUMER FIREWORKS shall not include snake or glow worm
pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “booby
traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads”, and “auto burglar
alarms”; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of
explosive compound is used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20)
grain of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all
times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY OR CONSUMER DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in
the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act (225 ILCS 227/1 et seq.)
FLAME EFFECT: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gases,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual, or
audible effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with the National Fire Protection
Association 160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic
Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, state, municipality, or political
subdivision of a state or any agency, department, or instrumentality of the
United States and any officer, agent, or employee of these entities.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic
Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.
SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS: Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical,
or other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as “intended for indoor use”. SPECIAL EFFECTS
FIREWORKS are classified as fireworks UN0431 or UN0432 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
   B.   Prohibitions: Excepting pyrotechnic and consumer displays permitted by
the City (see subsection
5-4-2K of this Code for permitted dates), no person, firm, co-partnership, or
corporation shall knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at
retail, or use or explode any display fireworks, flame effects, or consumer
fireworks within the corporate limits of the City.
   C.   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each act or product in violation of this
section shall constitute a separate and different offense.
   D.   Administrative Adjudication: Citations issued for violating this
section shall be administered through title 1, chapter 4, article A of this
Code.
(Ord. 2508, 6-26-2018)
6-4-5: EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Dynamite: It shall be unlawful to keep or store any dynamite in the
City in excess of five (5) pounds on any one premises or in any one building.
(1980 Code § 23-62)
   B.   Nitroglycerine (TNT): It shall be unlawful to keep or store any
nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as TNT in the City in any
quantities, excepting for medical or laboratory purposes, and for such purposes
no more than one-fourth (1/4) ounce shall be stored in any one building or
premises.
(1980 Code § 23-63)
   C.   Gunpowder: It shall be unlawful to keep or store any black powder or
gunpowder or guncotton in excess of five (5) pounds on any one premises in the
City.
(1980 Code § 23-64)
   D.   Rules Of The State Fire Chief: All explosives must be kept, stored and
sold in accordance with State law and in accordance with the rules enforced by
the State Fire Chief with regard to the same, subject to the conditions of this
section.
(1980 Code § 23-65)
   E.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation thereof.
(1980 Code § 23-190; amd. 2019 Code)
6-4-6: LIFE SAFETY CODE:
   A.   Life Safety Code Adopted: NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, as published by
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 2021 edition, is hereby
adopted as the Life Safety Code of the City of Watseka. Any amendments to the
Life Safety Code after April 15, 2021 , shall be effective in the City thirty
(30) days after promulgation by the NFP A. Said Life Safety Code is made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this section.
(Ord. 2628, 11-23-2021)
6-4-7: SMOKE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspections Required: No sale, lease, sublease or other transfer of
possessory rights (including installment contracts) in and to any residential
dwelling unit including, but not limited to, single-family residences, and any
living unit of a multi-family dwelling building (townhomes, duplexes,
apartments, condominiums) or mixed-use building, shall be finalized or closed
unless the owner, seller, lessor or other individual having possessory rights
therein provides to the purchaser, tenant or potential occupant a valid and
current (specific to the date of finalization or closing) certificate of
compliance from the Watseka Fire Department certifying compliance with the
Smoke Detector Act ( 425 ILCS 60/1, et seq.), the Carbon Monoxide Alarm
Detector Act (430 ILCS 135/1, et seq.), and the smoke detector and carbon
monoxide detector provisions of the Life Safety Code of the City of Watseka for
the dwelling unit.
   B.   Validity: Certificates of compliance shall be valid for a period of
thirty (30) days after issuance.
   C.   Applications: Requests for certificates of compliance shall be made to
the Watseka Fire Department and said application shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable forty dollars ($40.00) inspection fee. A non-refundable forty
dollars ($40.00) fee will be charged to and paid by the requestor each time a
subsequent request for a certificate of compliance is made due to the requestor
having failed to appear or provide appropriate access for an inspection or a
reinspection is necessitated due to the dwelling unit's non-compliance with
applicable laws.
   D.   Penalty: Any person that sells, purchases, leases, subleases or
transfers or takes ownership or possessory rights, or in any way facilitates
the finalization or closing of such transaction, in and to any residential
dwelling unit without obtaining or verifying that a valid and current
certificate of compliance from the Watseka Fire Department has been issued and
is in effect therefor shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1 ,000.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 2628, 11-23-2021)
6-4-8: EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND RECOVERY FEES:
The City hereby establishes the cost mitigation rates for the deployment of
certain emergency services by the Fire Department of the City for services
provided and/or rendered to residents and non-residents including the provision
of personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle incidents
and other emergency incidents as set forth herein, which are based on the
actual costs of the services and those costs that are usual, customary and
reasonable.
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply:
      AMBULANCE SERVICES: EMS response/pre-hospital care (involving usage of
supplies and/or medication) and/or transportation to the nearest hospital of
the sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated, or helpless at the time of dispatch.
Ambulance service shall only be provided to non-residents in circumstances
governed by a contract, mutual-aid or extreme life-saving necessity.
      FIRE SERVICES: Basic scene safety, investigation and fire/hazard control.
      FIRE INVESTIGATION SERVICES (FIRE INVESTIGATION TEAM): Scene safety,
investigation, source identification, K-9/Arson Dog Unit, identification
equipment, mobile detection equipment, fire/hazard control and fire report. The
claim begins when the fire investigator or investigation team responds to the
incident and is billed for logged time only.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENTS: The following:
         Level 1: Basic Response: This level is the provision of basic response
services including engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter
establishment, evacuations, set-up and command.
         Level 2: Intermediate Response: This level includes provision of Level
1 services as well as hazmat certified team and appropriate equipment, level A
or B suit donning, breathing air, detection equipment and set-up and removal of
decontamination center as necessary.
         Level 3: Advanced Response: This level includes provisions of Levels 1
and 2 services as well as robot deployment, recovery and identification of
material, disposal and environmental cleanup. This level also includes any
disposal rates for contaminated equipment and material used at scene.
      LIFT ASSISTANCE: Assistance moving an individual from one position to
another and there being no attendant physical injury requiring transportation
to the hospital.
      MOTOR VEHICLE INCIDENT: The following:
         Level 1: This level is the provision of hazardous materials
assessment, scene stabilization and basic response services.
         Level 2: This level includes provision of Level 1 services, as well as
clean up and material used for hazardous fluid clean-up and disposal. Billing
at this level will occur if the Fire Department of the City must clean up any
gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the
accident or incident.
         Level 3: This level relates to the extinguishment of a car fire,
provision of scene safety, fire suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hand
tools, hose, tip use, foam, exposure protection, and clean-up of gasoline or
other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident or
incident.
         Level 4: This level includes provisions of Levels 1 and 2 services, as
well as the use of extrication tools (heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags,
cribbing, etc.). Billing at this level will occur if the Fire Department of the
City is required to free or remove anyone from the vehicle(s) using any powered
equipment. Billing at this level will not occur if the person to be extricated
is unconscious or unable to move and the Fire Department is able to open a door
to the vehicle to access and safely remove the person.
         Level 5: This level includes provisions of Levels 1, 2 and 4 services
as well as aeromedical response coordination (multi-engine company response,
mutual aid, and helicopter). Billing will occur at this level any time a
helicopter is utilized to transport the patient(s).
         Level 6: Itemized Response: In the case of an unusual incident, the
Fire Department of the City may bill each incident as an independent incident
with actual costs and/or customary mitigation rates using itemized rates deemed
usual, customary and reasonable. Such incidents will be billed using itemized
amounts for apparatus and personnel, plus products and equipment used.
      NONRESIDENT: Any person not residing within the corporate limits of the
City who requires emergency services of any type, whether knowingly or
unknowingly, by the Watseka Fire Department.
      SPECIAL/BACK COUNTRY RESPONSE: Itemized Response: Each incident will be
billed in accordance with actual costs and/or customary mitigation rates using
itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable, subject to the minimum
amounts set forth above. Such incidents will be billed using itemized amounts
for each apparatus and each trained rescue person per hour, plus rescue
products and equipment used.
      WATER INCIDENTS:
         Level 1: Basic Response: This level is the provision of basic response
services including engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter
establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, scene safety
and investigation (including possible patient contact and hazard control).
         Level 2: Intermediate Response: This level is the provision of Level 1
services as well as clean-up and material used (sorbents), minor hazardous
clean-up and disposal. Billing will occur at this level if the Fire Department
of the City must clean up small amounts of gasoline or other fluids that are
spilled as a result of the incident.
         Level 3: Advanced Response: This level is the provisions of Levels 1
and 2 services as well as D.A.R.T. activation, donning breathing apparatus,
detection equipment, set up and removal of decontamination center, recovery and
identification of material, and disposal and environment clean up. This level
also includes any disposal rates of contaminated equipment and material used at
scene.
         Level 4: Itemized Response: In the case of an unusual incident, the
Fire Department of the City may bill each incident as an independent incident
with actual costs and/or customary mitigation rates using itemized rates deemed
usual, customary and reasonable. Such incidents will be billed using itemized
amounts for apparatus and personnel, plus products and equipment used.
   B.   Fees Established: Any person or entity (resident or nonresident) who
utilizes or is serviced with the emergency services of the Fire Department of
the City shall be responsible for the costs of such services according to the
following mitigation rates. Unless otherwise provided, the hourly rates set
forth below are the minimum response cost in that they will be charged whether
or not services are rendered for the entire hour:
Service
Service
Ambulance Services             Resident Non-Resident
   Basic Rate (per call)    $1,293   $1,400
   Mileage (per mile)       $32      $32
   Oxygen (per usage)       $54      $50
   Care without Transportati$215 per call
Fire Services                  $512 per hour, per engine; $640 per hour, per
                               truck
   Optional                 Itemized
Fire Investigation Services    $352 per hour
Hazardous Materials Incidents
   Level 1                  $896 per hour
   Level 2                  $3,200 per hour
   Level 3                  $7,554 per response through the first three (3)
                               hours
      Hazmat Team        $362 per hour after the first three (3) hours
Lift Assistance                $215 per lift assist (after two such requests in
                               a year)
Motor Vehicle Incidents
   Level 1                  $556 per hour
   Level 2                  $633 per hour
   Level 3                  $774 per hour
   Level 4                  $1,670 added to underlying per hour cost
   Level 5                  $511 added to underlying per hour cost
   Level 6                  Itemized
Special/Back Country Response  $512 per vehicle and $64 per rescue person per
                               hour
Water Incidents
   Level 1                  $512 per response, plus $64 per rescue person
                               per hour
   Level 2                  $1,023 per response, plus $64 per rescue person
                               per hour
   Level 3                  $2,532 per response, plus $64/$128 per rescue
                               person or Hazmat Team Member per hour
   Level 4                  Itemized
All Incidents (as applicable)
   Chief Response           $320 per hour
   Additional Time
      Engine             $512 per hour
      Truck              $640 per hour
      Miscellaneous Equip$385 per hour
 
   C.   Implementation and Procedure: The mitigation rates above are flat fees,
except for itemized responses, and have been determined to be usual, customary
and reasonable for the incident responses listed. The mitigation rates were
determined by itemizing costs for a typical incident (from the time a fire/EMS
apparatus leaves the station until it returns to the station) and are based on
the actual costs, using amortized schedules for apparatus (including useful
life, equipment, repairs, and maintenance) and labor rates (based upon an
average department's “actual personnel expense,” and not just a firefighter's/
EMT's base wage). The actual personnel expense includes, but not by way of
limitation, costs such as wages, retirement benefits, workers' compensation,
and insurance. When a claim is submitted, it will be itemized and based on the
actual services provided in accordance with the above rates.
      The mitigation rates shall represent an additional cost of the claim for
damages of the vehicles, property and/or injuries, and may be filed with the
insurance carrier of the owner of the titled vehicle, owner of the property, or
the responsible party or parties. In other circumstances, the owner of the
titled vehicle, owner of the property, or the responsible party or parties will
be billed directly.
      Annually, on December 1 of each calendar year, the mitigation rates set
forth above shall be increased by the greater of 2.60% or the previous year's
rate of inflation, calculated based on the Consumer Price Index - Urban Wage
Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W, Chicago All Items) published by the United
States Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 365-day period ending on the most
recent October 1.
      Responses involving intoxicated drivers, hazmat clean-up, intentional or
negligent acts, or any act that violates any local, State or Federal law or
regulation, may be subject to all applicable mitigation rates.
   D.   Collection: The City shall cause a bill to be issued to the person or
entity (resident or nonresident) who utilizes or is serviced with the emergency
services. Interest shall accumulate and be due upon such fee at the rate of one
percent (1 %) per month commencing as of the thirtieth (30th) day following the
mailing of the bill. All fees collected in conformance with this section shall
be deposited in the General Fund of the City and used for providing funds to
the Fire Department of the City for future replacement of life-safety vehicles
or equipment as may be determined by the City Council of the City.
(Ord. 2627, 11-23-2021; amd. Ord. 2667, 11-22-2022; Ord. 2673, 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 5: EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Section
6-5A-1: Agency Created; Purpose; Composition
6-5A-2: Coordinator
6-5A-3: Oath Of Office
6-5A-4: Functions And Powers
6-5A-5: Service As Mobile Support Team
6-5A-6: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
6-5A-7: Emergency Action
6-5A-8: Compensation
6-5A-9: Reimbursement By State
6-5A-10: Purchases And Expenditures
6-5A-11: Declaration Of Local Disaster Emergencies
6-5A-12: Continuity Of Government
6-5A-13: Office
6-5A-14: Appropriation; Tax Levy
6-5A-1: AGENCY CREATED; PURPOSE; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created for the City the Watseka Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from explosion of atomic or other means from without or by means of
sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure or other natural or technological causes, in
accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/
1 et seq.)” The Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall consist of the
Coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator.
(1980 Code § 9-1; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-2: COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment; Term: The Coordinator of the Watseka Emergency Services
and Disaster Agency shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of
the City Council, and shall serve until removed by the same.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for
the organization, administration, training, and operation of the Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor
and City Council.
   C.   Vacancy: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as the Coordinator, the Mayor, or any person designated by him, shall
be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
article.
(1980 Code § 9-2)
6-5A-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the local Emergency Services
and Disaster Agency organization shall, before entering upon his duties,
subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the local
Coordinator:
   I, ______________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic, that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.
(1980 Code § 9-11)
6-5A-4: FUNCTIONS AND POWERS:
   A.   Functions: The local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall
perform such Emergency Services and Disaster Agency functions within the City
as shall be prescribed in and by the State Emergency Management Agency plan and
program prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the Governor and, in addition, shall perform such duties
outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-
municipality entered into as provided in “The State Emergency Management Agency
Act”.
(1980 Code § 9-3; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Powers: In the event of any explosion of atomic or other means from
without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire,
flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or technological
causes immediately threatening or endangering the City or the lives of its
citizens and inhabitants, the members of said local Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency and any other person or persons appointed or drafted by the
acting Coordinator thereof to assist said organization are hereby, in such
event, invested fully and completely with each and every power invested in the
police of the City, including the power of arrest. Furthermore, the acting
Coordinator shall, during the emergency, have the power to publish in a local
newspaper or post in at least five (5) public places, in the event of the
destruction or nonexistence of a newspaper printed and published in the City,
all rules and regulations which he may deem necessary and advisable for the
regulation of the conduct of the citizens and inhabitants, so as to ensure the
health, safety and welfare of the City during the pendency of the emergency.
Said rules and regulations, during the emergency, shall have the force of law,
and each and every person violating any of them shall be subject to a fine or
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense.
(1980 Code § 9-14; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-5: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
   A.   Members Designated: All or any members of the local Emergency Services
and Disaster Agency organization may be designated as members of a mobile
support team created by the Director of the State Emergency Management Agency
as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 9-4; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Team Leader: The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated
by the Coordinator of the local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
organization.
   C.   Compensation: Any member of a mobile support team who is a City
employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State
Director shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights,
and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is
not a paid officer or employee of the City, while so serving, shall receive
from the State reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 9-4)
6-5A-6: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of the Local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency may
negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities, villages or political
subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it
has been approved by the Mayor and City Council and by the State Director of
the Emergency Management Agency.
(1980 Code § 9-5; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-7: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from explosion of atomic or other
means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or
from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or
technological causes, it shall be the duty of the local Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency to cooperate fully with the State Emergency Management Agency
and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 9-6; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-8: COMPENSATION:
Members of the local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency who are paid
employees or officers of the City, if called for training by the State Director
of the Emergency Management Agency, shall receive for the time spent in such
training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held. Members who
are not such City employees or officers shall receive for such training time
such compensation as may be established by the Mayor and City Council.
(1980 Code § 9-7; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The City Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training
members of the local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as prescribed by
the State Director of the Emergency Management Agency, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the City in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of the State
Emergency Management Agency, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement
made by the State incident to Emergency Services and Disaster Agency activities
as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 9-8; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The Mayor and City Council may, on recommendation of the local
Coordinator of the local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, authorize any
purchase of contracts necessary to place the City in a position to combat
effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of atomic or other means
from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from
fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or
technological causes.
(1980 Code § 9-9)
   B.   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the local Coordinator
of Emergency Services and Disaster Agency is authorized, on behalf of the City,
to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary
for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory
procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to City
contracts or obligations, as authorized by “The State Emergency Management
Agency Act”; provided, that if the Mayor and City Council meet at such time, he
shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(1980 Code § 9-9; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5A-11: DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
   A.   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or Mayor
Pro-Tem of the City. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the City Clerk.
   B.   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster emergency plans and to authorize the furnishing
of aid and assistance thereunder.
   C.   No inter-jurisdictional agency or official thereof may declare a local
disaster emergency, unless expressly authorized by the agreement pursuant to
which the agency functions. However, an inter- jurisdictional disaster agency
shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement pursuant to
which it functions.
(1980 Code § 9-10)
6-5A-12: CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT:
To avoid interruptions in the functioning of the City government, in the event
that any officer or employee of the City is killed or disabled at the time of
any such disaster described in this article, such office or position may be
filled by appointment of the Mayor, or by the members of the City Council who
are available, or by the City Clerk, or the City Attorney in that order of
preference. The successor so appointed may serve without furnishing bond or
taking an oath of office, until such time as a successor may be appointed in
the regular manner as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 9-13)
6-5A-13: OFFICE:
The Mayor is authorized to designate any available space for the local
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as its office.
(1980 Code § 9-12)
6-5A-14: APPROPRIATION; TAX LEVY:
The Mayor and City Council may make an appropriation for local Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency purposes in the manner provided by law and may
levy and collect taxes therefor.
(1980 Code § 9-15)
ARTICLE B: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
6-5B-1: Definitions
6-5B-2: Declaration Of Emergency; Notice
6-5B-3: Imposition Of Curfew
6-5B-4: Additional Orders
6-5B-5: Emergency Powers
6-5B-6: Termination Of Proclamation
6-5B-7: Absence Of Mayor
6-5B-8: Powers Of Police And Fire Departments Maintained
6-5B-9: Penalty
6-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY:
   A.   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute such force by three (3) or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or
   B.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the City of Watseka, resulting in the death or injury of persons or
the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must
be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare; or
   C.    The failure of the duly constituted civil authorities to function
occasioned by hostile enemy attack upon the United States.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the City during the
hours in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially
designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.
(1980 Code § 20-1)
6-5B-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY; NOTICE:
   A.   Whenever an emergency, as defined in section
6-5B-1 of this article, exists, the Mayor, or in his absence the next available
City official in order of preference as set out in section
6-5B-7 of this article, shall declare the existence of such civil emergency by
means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency.
(1980 Code § 20-2)
   B.   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Mayor or the City
official acting in his stead shall notify the news media situated within the
City, and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the
existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the City
of Watseka: the City Hall, the Police Station and the Post Office.
(1980 Code § 20-7)
6-5B-3: IMPOSITION OF CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor or the City official
acting in his stead, he may order a general curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole, as he deems
advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems
necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
(1980 Code § 20-3)
6-5B-4: ADDITIONAL ORDERS:
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor or the City official acting
in his stead may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any
or all of the following orders:
   A.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores;
   B.   Order the closing of all taverns;
   C.   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted;
   D.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer;
   E.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or any other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   F.   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products;
   G.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
   H.   Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of
firearms and/or ammunition; and
   I.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(1980 Code § 20-4)
6-5B-5: EMERGENCY POWERS:
During the period of a declared state of emergency, the Mayor or the City
official acting in his stead shall have the power to invoke any or all of the
following provisions:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages: No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in
a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any motor vehicle driven
or parked thereon which is within a duly designated restricted area.
   B.   Weapons: No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club, brick
or weapon, who uses or intends to use the same unlawfully against the persons
or property of another.
   C.   Incendiary Missiles: No person shall make, carry, possess or use any
type of “molotov cocktail”, gasoline, or petroleum base fire bomb or other
incendiary missile.
   D.   Restricted Areas: No person shall enter any area designated by the
Mayor as a restricted area unless in the performance of official duties or with
written permission from the Mayor or his duly designated representative, unless
such person shall prove residence therein.
(1980 Code § 20-5)
6-5B-6: TERMINATION OF PROCLAMATION:
   A.   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of
forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
or the City official acting in his stead indicating that the civil emergency no
longer exists. The Mayor or the City official acting in his stead shall have
the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each
forty eight (48) hour period during the time that the said civil emergency
exists.
   B.   In the case of the civil emergency described in section
6-5B-1 of this article, definition of CIVIL EMERGENCY, subsection C, the civil
emergency, when declared pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall not
cease until a quorum of the elected Mayor and Alderpersons can be assembled to
resume operation of the City government, or elections can be held so as to
provide a sufficient number of elected officials by which to resume their
operation of the City government by elected officials.
(1980 Code § 20-6)
6-5B-7: ABSENCE OF MAYOR:
In the absence of the Mayor from the City, the powers in this article granted
to the Mayor shall be exercised by the following City officials in the
following order of preference: first, the Mayor Pro-Tem; second, the Chair of
the Public Safety Committee; third, the Chair of the Finance, Audit, Legal and
Insurance Committee; and fourth, the City Attorney.
(1980 Code § 20-11)
6-5B-8: POWERS OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS MAINTAINED:
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in this Code giving power to the Police and Fire Departments, but
shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City.
(1980 Code § 20-10)
6-5B-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or any executive
order issued pursuant hereto, shall be guilty of an offense against the City,
and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(1980 Code § 20-8)
ARTICLE C: PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS
Section
6-5C-1: Emergency Powers Of Mayor
6-5C-2: Public Disturbances Or Obstructions Prohibited
6-5C-3: Parade Defined
6-5C-4: Parade And Demonstration Permit Requirements
6-5C-5: Parade And Demonstration Regulations
6-5C-6: Penalties
Cross-reference:
   See also title 9, chapter 5 of this Code
6-5C-1: EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR:
   A.   The Mayor or Mayor Pro-Tem, if the Mayor is absent from the City or
otherwise incapacitated, shall have full power and authority to declare a state
of emergency in the City if he finds that the City or any part thereof is
suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering a civil disturbance, disorder,
riot or other occurrence which will seriously endanger the health, safety and
property of the citizens of the City.
(1980 Code § 21-1)
   B.   Whenever a state of emergency is so declared, the Mayor is hereby
authorized to prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or
congregate in any outdoor place, except persons who are awaiting
transportation, engaging in recreational activities at a usual and customary
place or peaceably entering or leaving buildings. The duration of said state of
emergency shall not exceed two (2) weeks.
(1980 Code § 21-2)
6-5C-2: PUBLIC DISTURBANCES OR OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Schools: No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any
building in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall wilfully
make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends
to disturb the peace or good order of such school session or class thereof.
(1980 Code § 21-3)
   B.   Court House: No person shall, with the intent of interfering with,
obstructing, or impeding the administration of justice, or with the intent of
influencing any judge, juror, witness or court officer, in the discharge of his
duty, picket or parade in or near a building in the City housing a court of the
State of Illinois.
(1980 Code § 21-8)
   C.   Other Public Buildings: No person, while on public or private grounds
adjacent to the City Hall, City Library, or other public buildings in the City
in which public business is being transacted, shall wilfully make or assist in
the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the
peace or good order of a City Council meeting, a committee meeting of the City
Council, the City Library when in use, or any other public meeting when it is
in the process of transacting public business.
(1980 Code § 21-4)
   D.   Picketing: A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly
pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
any primary or secondary school building, while the school is in session and
one-half (½) hour before the school is in session and one-half (½) hour after
the school session has been concluded; provided, that said picketing or
demonstration disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good order of the
school session or class thereof.
(1980 Code § 21-5)
   E.   Disorderly Conduct: A person commits disorderly conduct when he
knowingly fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to
be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm,
and such disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited and declared unlawful.
(1980 Code § 21-6)
   F.   Obstructing Traffic: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons,
wilfully and unnecessarily, to hinder, obstruct, or delay another person or
persons in lawful driving, walking or traveling along and upon a street,
sidewalk, or other public way, whether said unlawful act is done by means of a
sitdown, riot, or other means.
(1980 Code § 21-7)
6-5C-3: PARADE DEFINED:
When used in this article, the word "parade" means any march or procession
consisting of people, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, except
funeral processions, upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or alley, which
does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
(1980 Code § 21-16)
6-5C-4: PARADE AND DEMONSTRATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a
parade or to promote a demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering upon any
street, highway, sidewalk or alley in the City or knowingly participate in any
such parade, demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering unless and until a
permit to conduct such parade, demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering
has been obtained from the Chief of Police.
(1980 Code § 21-15)
   B.   Parade Permit:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no parade shall be
held in the City, unless the sponsor or sponsors of the parade shall, at least
three (3) days before said parade, in writing, make application to the Chief of
Police for a permit to conduct the parade, which application shall set forth:
a) the names and addresses of the leadership and organization conducting the
parade; b) the purpose for which the parade is to be held; c) the date, time,
size, duration, and route of the proposed parade; d) a list of the various
services of the City which might be required by the parade; e) a list of any
floats, vehicles, or other objects which might be included in the parade so
that the City authorities might determine the clearance or lack of clearance
for said objects along the proposed parade route; and f) what police protection
the sponsor or sponsors believe will be necessary for the parade.
      2.   Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall, within
forty eight (48) hours thereafter, either allow or deny the permit, or should
he find that the parade should be allowed but that other intervening events
make it necessary that the parade be held on a day other than that requested,
he shall grant the permit for another day for which there is no conflict.
Denial of such permits may be made only on account of the applicant's failure
to furnish all the information required herein or on account of the existence
of conditions and circumstances which, in the opinion of the Chief of Police,
together with the parade, might reasonably result in a riot or other serious
public disturbance, causing death or injury or adversely affecting the public
peace and welfare, or where the Mayor has, pursuant to this Code, made a
declaration of a civil emergency (see article B of this chapter) or, pursuant
to this article, has made a declaration of a state of emergency.
      3.   Where a parade will be partially or wholly on streets or highways
under the jurisdiction of the State or Federal government, the requirements of
the State and Federal governments must also be met.
(1980 Code § 21-14)
   C.   Demonstration Permit:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no demonstration,
assembly, meeting or gathering shall take place on the streets or roadways of
the City, unless the sponsor or sponsors thereof shall have received, pursuant
to this subsection, from the Chief of Police a demonstration permit. The
sponsor or sponsors shall, at least seventy two (72) hours before the inception
of the demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering, make application in
writing to the Chief of Police for a demonstration permit. The application
shall set forth: a) the names and addresses of the leadership and organization
or organizations sponsoring said demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering;
b) the purpose thereof; c) the date, time, size, location and duration thereof;
and d) what police protection the sponsor or sponsors believe will be necessary
for the demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering.
      2.   Denial of the application for a demonstration permit may be made
only on account of the applicant's failure to furnish all the information
required herein or on account of the existence of conditions and circumstances
which, together with the demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, might reasonably result in a riot or other
serious public disturbance, causing death or injury or adversely affecting the
public peace and welfare, or where the Mayor has, pursuant to this Code, made a
declaration of a civil emergency, or pursuant to this article, has made a
declaration of a state of emergency.
      3.   If the proposed demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering is to
be on streets or highways under the jurisdiction of the State or Federal
government and might interfere with the flow of traffic thereon, a written
permit from the appropriate State or Federal agency allowing such meeting must
be furnished the Chief of Police before the City permit is to be issued.
(1980 Code § 21-14)
   D.   Standards For Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Standards For Issuance: The Chief of Police shall issue a permit
under this article conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply
with the terms of the permit unless the Chief of Police finds that:
         a.   The time, route and size of the parade or other assemblage will
disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic.
         b.   The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of
so great a number of police officers of the City to police properly the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the parade or
assemblage would deny reasonable police protection to the City.
         c.   The parade or assemblage will interfere with another parade or
assemblage for which a permit has been issued.
      2.   Standards For Denial: The Chief of Police shall deny an application
for a permit to be issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and notify
the applicant of such denial where:
         a.   The Chief of Police makes any finding contrary to the findings
required to be made for the issuance of a permit.
         b.   The information contained in the application is found to be false
or nonexistent in any material detail.
         c.   The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all
conditions of the permit or with all of the applicable provisions of this
article.
(1980 Code § 21-18)
   E.   Contents Of Permit:
      1.   In each permit, the Chief of Police shall specify:
         a.   The assembly area and time therefor.
         b.   The starting time.
         c.   The minimum and maximum speeds, if a parade.
         d.   The route of the parade or location of the assemblage.
         e.   What portions of streets, highways, alleys or sidewalks may be
occupied or traversed by the parade or assemblage.
         f.   The maximum number of units and the maximum and minimum intervals
of space to be maintained between the units of the parade, if a parade is
requested.
         g.   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof,
if a parade is requested.
         h.   The disbanding area and disbanding time.
         i.   The number of persons required to monitor the parade or
assemblage.
         j.   The number and type of vehicles, if any.
         k.   The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or
carrying device therefor.
         l.   The materials used in the construction of floats used in any
parade shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to City
requirements concerning fire safety.
         m.   That the permittee advise all participants in the parade or
assemblage, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of
the permit prior to the commencement of the parade or assemblage.
         n.   That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from
sound trucks or bull horns be fixed and not variable or noxious.
         o.   That any parade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed.
      2.   There shall be compliance with all conditions of the permit so far
as reasonable and practicable.
(1980 Code § 21-19)
   F.   Appeal Upon Denial: Upon a denial by the Chief of Police of an
application made pursuant to this article, the applicant may appeal from the
determination of the Chief of Police within five (5) days thereafter to the
City Council by filing a written notice of appeal for hearing by the City
Council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the City Council may reverse,
affirm, or modify in any regard the determination of the Chief of Police, after
holding an appropriate hearing thereon.
(1980 Code § 21-20)
   G.   Notice To Specific Officials: Immediately upon the granting of a permit
for a parade or other assemblage, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof
to the following:
      1.   The Mayor.
      2.   The City Clerk.
      3.   The Fire Chief.
(1980 Code § 21-21)
   H.   Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Any permit for a parade or other assemblage issued pursuant to this
article may be summarily revoked by the Chief of Police at any time when, by
reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the Chief of
Police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such
revocation, or when the Chief of Police discovers, after the issuance of a
permit, that it was fraudulently obtained by false statements made in the
application, or when, after the commencement of the parade or assemblage, overt
acts are committed by the sponsor, sponsors, member or members thereof for the
purpose of inciting a riot or other acts of violence or for the purpose of
advocating the violent overthrow of the government of the United States or the
State of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof, under such
circumstances that there is a reasonable apprehension that acts of violence on
the part of some or all those present will flow from the acts of said persons.
      2.   Notice of the action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing
to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail.
(1980 Code § 21-22)
6-5C-5: PARADE AND DEMONSTRATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Size: It is unlawful for any group or organization, or any individual
acting with such group or organization, to conduct or participate in any march,
assembly, meeting, parade or gathering on City streets or roadways, unless such
march, assembly, meeting or gathering is limited to such numbers as, in the
opinion of the Chief of Police, will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in an unreasonable manner. The Chief of Police shall, within twelve
(12) hours of receiving the notice required by subsection B of this section,
inform the group or organization as to the limitation on the number of persons
allowed to participate.
(1980 Code § 21-10)
   B.   Notice To Police: It is unlawful for any group or organization to
conduct or participate in any march, assembly, meeting, parade or gathering on
any City street or roadway, unless the Chief of Police has been given notice in
writing of the location, the maximum number of persons participating, and the
names and addresses of the organizers of any such march, assembly, meeting,
parade or gathering, its route, and its time of inception and duration at least
seventy two (72) hours before the inception of such march, assembly, meeting,
parade or gathering.
(1980 Code § 21-11)
   C.   Hours And Days Permitted: It is unlawful for any group, organization,
or any individual to conduct or participate in any march, assembly, meeting,
parade or gathering on City streets or roadways during peak traffic periods,
unless authorized in writing by the Chief of Police. Peak traffic periods are,
for the purposes of this Code, declared to be seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M.
to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. in the forenoon and from four thirty o'clock (4:30)
P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in the afternoon, on Mondays through Fridays,
inclusive, of each week, except for State and national holidays.
(1980 Code § 21-12)
   D.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Possession Of Weapons, Explosives Or Dangerous Missiles: It shall be
unlawful for any sponsor or member of a parade or other assemblage within the
City to carry or be possessed during the parade or assemblage of weapons,
explosives, ammunition, flammable liquids, rocks or other missiles.
      2.   Inciting Riots Or Mob Actions: It shall be unlawful to incite or
attempt to incite a riot, mob action, or other acts of violence while
participating in a parade or other assemblage in the City.
(1980 Code § 21-15)
      3.   Interference With Gathering: No person shall knowingly join or
participate in any parade, demonstration, assembly, meeting or gathering in any
manner so as to be in violation of any of the terms of the permit authorizing
it, or without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, or in any
manner so as to interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
(1980 Code § 21-17)
6-5C-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
subsections
6-5C-4A1 and B and 6-5C-5A, B and C of this article shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. Each day that any of the said violations continue shall be
considered to be a separate offense.
(1980 Code § 21-23; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article for which no penalty has been provided or violating any lawful order of
the Mayor or Mayor Pro-Tem made pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
(1980 Code § 21-24)
CHAPTER 6: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
6-6-1: Treatment And Care Of Animals
6-6-2: Nuisance Conditions
6-6-3: Noisy Animals
6-6-4: Dangerous Animals
6-6-5: Livestock
6-6-6: Diseased Animals
6-6-7: Bees
6-6-8: Killing Birds; Disturbing Nests
6-6-9: Hunting
6-6-10: Penalty
6-6-1: TREATMENT AND CARE OF ANIMALS:
   A.    It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to provide
animals in his care with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper
shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
(1980 Code § 32-8)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, cruelly treat, torment,
overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or permit any
dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or birds or
between animals and humans.
(1980 Code §§ 32-1, 32-8)
   C.   Any person who inhumanly beats, underfeeds, overloads, or abandons any
animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(1980 Code § 32-1)
6-6-2: NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and control
of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive,
continuous or untimely barking or other noises, molesting passersby, chasing
vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon school
grounds, or trespassing upon private property in such manner as to damage
property, shall be deemed a nuisance.
(1980 Code § 32-8)
Cross-reference:
   See also title 5, chapter 4, article A of this Code
6-6-3: NOISY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by
loud noises at any time of the day or night.
(1980 Code § 32-3)
6-6-4: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Running At Large Prohibited; Exemptions: It shall be unlawful to permit
any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the
City. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of
the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police.
(1980 Code § 32-2)
   B.   Authority To Destroy: The members of the Police Department, or any
other person in the City, is authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any
kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.
(1980 Code § 32-5)
6-6-5: LIVESTOCK:
   A.   Leaving Unfastened Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to leave or permit any
animal of the horse, mule, ass, cattle, sheep or goat species to run at large
upon the streets or alleys of the City or upon any other public place.
(1980 Code § 53-22)
      2.   Any person, firm or corporation violating this subsection shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle,
horse, swine, sheep, goats or poultry to run at large in the City. Any such
animal or poultry running at large in any public place in the City shall be
impounded in accordance with law.
   C.   Tying To Graze Or Feed: It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any
animal mentioned in subsection B of this section in any of the streets of the
City for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
(1980 Code § 32-4)
   D.   Parking Vehicles Containing Livestock: It shall be unlawful to stand or
park any vehicle containing livestock or poultry any place in the City for a
period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes, except for loading or
unloading.
(1980 Code § 32-10)
6-6-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of man or beast may be affected.
      2.   No diseased animal shall be shipped or removed from the premises of
the owner or keeper thereof, except under the supervision of the Animal Control
Officer or of the State Veterinarian.
      3.   No diseased animal shall be brought into the City.
   B.   Disposition And Treatment: It is hereby made the duty of the Animal
Control Officer to secure the disposition of any diseased animal and the
treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of
the contagion or infection, except in cases where the State Veterinarian is
empowered to act.
(1980 Code § 32-6)
6-6-7: BEES:
   A.   Keeping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any bees in
the City.
(1980 Code § 53-1)
   B.   Bee Hives Prohibited; Nuisance Declared: Any beehive used or occupied
by bees is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to keep
or maintain any such hive in the City.
(1980 Code § 53-2)
   C.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
6-6-8: KILLING BIRDS; DISTURBING NESTS:
   A.   It shall not be lawful for any person in the City, at any time, to kill
or attempt to kill or to trap or attempt to trap, net snare, harm or attempt to
harm any robin, bluebird, swallow, martin, mosquito- hawk, whippoorwill,
cuckoo, woodpecker, catbird, brown thrasher, yellow hammer, redbird, finch,
thrush, lark, yellow-bird, oriole, bobolink, or any song bird, nor shall it be
lawful to rob or destroy the nests of such birds, or of any or either of them.
(1980 Code § 53-19)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
6-6-9: HUNTING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or to engage in killing any
animal in the City, other than as is permitted by law or ordinance.
(1980 Code § 53-25)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
6-6-10: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
and every day during or on which a violation occurs or is permitted to
continue.
(1980 Code § 32-11; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE A: DOGS
Section
6-6A-1: Definitions
6-6A-2: Restraint Required
6-6A-3: Nuisance Dogs
6-6A-4: At Large Dogs
6-6A-5: Rabies Control
6-6A-6: Vicious, Dangerous Dogs
6-6A-7: Impoundment And Redemption Provisions
6-6A-8: Method Of Capturing Dogs
6-6A-9: Authority To Destroy Dogs
6-6A-10: Prohibited Acts By Persons
6-6A-11: Exemptions From Provisions
6-6A-12: Penalties
6-6A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
CONFINED: Restriction of a dog at all times by the owner, or his agent, to an
escapeproof building or other enclosure away from other dogs and the public.
DANGEROUS DOG: A dog which, because of its size or vicious propensity or other
characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if it is
not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or
animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such dog
under control.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois.
OWNER: Any person having a right or property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors
a dog, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly
permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other legal entity, any public or private institution, the State of Illinois,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State, or any other
business unit.
POUND: Any facility approved by the City for the purpose of enforcing this
article and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted dogs.
RUNNING AT LARGE: That a dog is running or going on public streets or public
ways or on private property not belonging to or in possession of his owner or
keeper, without the control of or beyond the control of his owner or keeper.
(1980 Code § 32-37)
6-6A-2: RESTRAINT REQUIRED:
All dogs shall be kept under restraint either by a leash or by being kept in an
enclosure on private property, and it shall be a public nuisance for any person
to permit a vicious or dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when
not under control by a leash or other recognized control methods.
(1980 Code § 32-44)
6-6A-3: NUISANCE DOGS:
   A.   Any dog permitted to run at large within the corporate limits of the
City is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   B.   Dogs which are vicious, ferocious or dangerous, or which have the habit
of jumping and biting at children or other people, or which, by reason of their
howling, barking or whining, disturb the rest of people residing near the home
of the dog and disturb the people in the reasonable use and enjoyment of their
property, thereby causing annoyance, discomfort or injury to the health or
welfare of said persons, or which dogs are kept or maintained in unsanitary
conditions are hereby declared to be nuisances.
(1980 Code § 32-38)
Cross-reference:
   See also title 5, chapter 4, article A of this Code
6-6A-4: AT LARGE DOGS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Dogs running at large shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.
(1980 Code § 32-42A)
   B.   Responsibility Of Owner:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow his dog to run
at large.
(1980 Code § 32-42)
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care
and control of dogs to prevent them from becoming such a nuisance, and failure
of such owner to exercise proper care and control shall be a violation of the
ordinances of the City.
      3.   Any owner violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to penalty provisions of section
6-6A-12 of this article.
(1980 Code § 32-42A)
6-6A-5: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Vaccination Required: Every dog owner or keeper shall cause such dog to
be vaccinated for rabies at least once every twelve (12) months, unless
vaccinations are perfected and approved by the State of Illinois for a longer
period of time, and the vaccination shall be performed by a duly licensed
veterinarian.
(1980 Code § 32-41)
   B.   Dog Bites: Whenever any dog bites a person or animal, the person who is
bitten and the owner of the dog shall immediately notify the Chief of Police
who shall order the dog held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded
for a period of two (2) weeks. The dog shall be examined immediately after it
has bitten anyone and again at the end of the two-week period. If, at the end
of two (2) weeks, a licensed veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then
free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound,
as the case may be. If the dog dies in the meanwhile, its head shall be sent to
the State Department of Health or other appropriate State agency for
examination for rabies.
(1980 Code § 32-49)
   C.   Proclamation; Muzzle Required: Whenever the Mayor, by proclamation,
shall declare that danger from rabies is great, it shall be unlawful to permit
any dog to go upon any public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place,
unless such dog is securely muzzled.
(1980 Code § 32-40)
6-6A-6: VICIOUS, DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a
vicious, ferocious or dangerous dog. A VICIOUS DOG is one which, without
provocation, attacks or injures any person who is peaceably conducting himself
in any place where he may lawfully be or is a dog possessed of a natural
fierceness or disposition to mischief as might occasionally lead him to attack
human beings without provocation.
(1980 Code § 32-43)
   B.   Destruction: In any action brought in the Circuit Court of Iroquois
County, Illinois against the owner or keeper of a dog wherein the City seeks an
order adjudicating that the dog is vicious or dangerous, upon the entry of such
order that the dog is vicious or dangerous and shall be destroyed, the Chief of
Police shall forthwith cause the destruction of said dog.
(1980 Code § 32-54)
6-6A-7: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS:
The City is contracted with the County for animal control services.
6-6A-8: METHOD OF CAPTURING DOGS:
The City is contracted with the County for animal control services.
6-6A-9: AUTHORITY TO DESTROY DOGS:
The City is contracted with the County for animal control services.
6-6A-10: PROHIBITED ACTS BY PERSONS:
   A.   Abandonment: It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a dog, for
any reason, within the corporate limits.
(1980 Code § 32-51)
   B.   Poisoning:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to poison any dog or dogs or distribute poison
in any manner whatsoever with the intent or for the purpose of poisoning any
dog or dogs.
(1980 Code § 53-14)
      2.   Any person, firm or corporation violating this subsection shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
6-6A-11: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Guide dogs for persons with disabilities and sentry, guard, or police owned
dogs are exempt from the provisions of this article.
(1980 Code § 32-44)
6-6A-12: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
for which no specific penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 32-60; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B: CATS
Section
6-6B-1: Definitions
6-6B-2: At Large Cats
6-6B-3: Impoundment And Redemption Provisions
6-6B-4: Penalties
6-6B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
CONFINED: Restriction of a cat at all times by the owner, or his agent, to an
escapeproof building or other enclosure away from other cats and the public.
OWNER: Any person having a right or property in a cat, or who keeps or harbors
a cat, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly
permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
POUND: Any facility approved by the City for the purpose of enforcing this
article and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted cats.
RUNNING AT LARGE: That a cat is running or going on public streets or public
ways or on private property not belonging to or in possession of his owner or
keeper, without the control of or beyond the control of his owner or keeper.
(1980 Code § 32-61)
6-6B-2: AT LARGE CATS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Cats running at large shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.
   B.   Responsibility Of Owner: It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to
exercise proper care and control of cats to prevent them from becoming a
nuisance, and failure of the owner to exercise proper care and control shall be
a violation of the ordinances of the City.
(1980 Code § 32-62)
6-6B-3: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS:
The City is contracted with the County for animal control services.
6-6B-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00)
nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first offense; provided,
that in the event of subsequent offenses involving the same cat, the minimum
fine shall be increased fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a
violation occurs or is permitted to continue.
(1980 Code § 32-66; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE C: DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Section
6-6C-1: Definition
6-6C-2: Permit Requirements
6-6C-3: Number Restricted
6-6C-4: Exemptions From Provisions
6-6C-5: Penalty
6-6C-1: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this article, DANGEROUS ANIMAL means and includes any wild
animal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild
nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other
characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property, if it is
not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. The term
DANGEROUS ANIMAL also means and includes any domestic animal, mammal, reptile
or fowl which, because of its size or vicious propensity or other
characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if it is
not kept or maintained in a safe manner and in secure quarters.
(1980 Code § 32-20)
6-6C-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain within the City any dangerous animal, unless a special annual permit
therefor is first obtained from the City Clerk.
(1980 Code § 32-21)
   B.   Conditions Of Issuance Of Permit: The City Clerk shall issue a special
permit for the keeping or maintenance of a dangerous animal if he finds:
      1.   That the animal is at all times kept or maintained in a safe manner
and that it is at all times confined securely so that the keeping of such
animal will not constitute a danger to human life or the property of others.
      2.   That adequate safeguards are made to prevent unauthorized access to
such animal by members of the public.
      3.   That the health or well being of the animal is not in any way
endangered by the manner of keeping or confinement.
      4.   That the keeping of such animal does not constitute a nuisance and
will not harm the surrounding neighborhood or disturb the peace and quiet of
the surrounding neighborhood.
      5.   That the keeping of such animal will not create or cause offensive
odors or constitute a danger to public health.
      6.   That the quarters in which such animal is kept or confined are
adequately lighted and ventilated and are so constructed that they may be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
      7.   That the applicant for such special permit prove his ability to
respond in damages to and including the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for
damage to property owned by any other person which may result from the
ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Proof of liability to respond
in damages may be given by filing with the City Clerk a certificate of
insurance stating that the applicant is, at the time of the application and
will be during the period of such special permit, insured in such amount
against liability to respond in such damages, or by posting with the City Clerk
a surety bond conditioned upon the payment of such damages during the period of
the special permit. The certificate of insurance or bond shall provide that no
cancellation of the insurance or bond will be made unless ten (10) days’ notice
is first given to the City Clerk.
(1980 Code § 32-22)
   C.   Compliance Required; Fees: No permit shall be issued for the keeping of
dangerous animals unless there is compliance with all provisions of this
article, and a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the City Clerk.
Permit fees shall be paid annually on or before the start of the license year.
(1980 Code § 32-24)
6-6C-3: NUMBER RESTRICTED:
In no event shall a permit be issued for the keeping of more than two (2)
dangerous animals at any single location.
(1980 Code § 32-23)
6-6C-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous
animals in the following cases:
   A.   The keeping of such animals in zoos, bona fide educational or medical
institutions, museums or any other place where they are kept as live specimens
for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction or study.
   B.   The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public by a circus,
carnival or other exhibit or show.
   C.   The keeping of such animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
   D.   Dangerous or poisonous reptiles may be maintained by bona fide
educational or medical institutions for the purpose of instruction or study,
provided such reptiles are securely confined and are properly cared for in a
manner which is in compliance with such standards of care as may be established
by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 32-25)
6-6C-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 32-26; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 7: MINORS
Section
6-7-1: Curfew Regulations
6-7-1-1: Contents And Title
6-7-1-2: Findings; Authority To Regulate
6-7-1-3: Definitions
6-7-1-4: Age And Hour Restrictions
6-7-1-5: Legitimate Excuse
6-7-1-6: Special Functions
6-7-1-7: Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian
6-7-1-8: Responsibility Of Owners Of Public Places
6-7-1-9: Police Procedures
6-7-1-10: Penalties
6-7-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
6-7-1-1: CONTENTS AND TITLE:
This section
6-7-1 regulates the presence and conduct of minors and others on streets and
other public places, defines duties of parents or others in care or charge of
minors, and provides for detention and penalties for violation hereof. This
section
6-7-1 shall be known and may be cited as the ORDINANCE REGULATING THE PRESENCE
AND CONDUCT OF MINORS ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
(1980 Code § 48-1)
6-7-1-2: FINDINGS; AUTHORITY TO REGULATE:
   A.   Whereas, juvenile delinquency has increased in the City and in the
country; and
   B.   Whereas, there has been an increase of abuse and damage to parks,
playgrounds and other property of and in the City; and
   C.   Whereas, there is a need for governing the conduct of minors in the
City for the purpose of alleviating the problem of juvenile delinquency; and
   D.   Whereas, it is in the public interest to reduce noises and disturbances
at late hours, and to prevent the reckless and noisy operation of motor
vehicles at late hours within the City and to prevent vandalism and other forms
of crime within the City; and
   E.   Whereas, it is in the public interest to protect the safety and lives
of minors who may be within the City, the City Council taking notice of the
many minors in the country who have been assaulted, abused or killed by
criminals when said minors were out at nighttime and unattended.
   F.   This section
6-7-1 is adopted as a proper exercise of the police power of the City.
(1980 Code § 48-2)
6-7-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section
6-7-1, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CUSTODIAN: Any person over the age of twenty one (21) years who is in loco
parentis to a minor.
GUARDIAN: Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PARENT: The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, school ground,
playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A "public place"
shall include, but is not limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern,
bowling alley, café, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and any
other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. The
term shall also include the front or immediate area of the above.
(1980 Code § 48-3)
6-7-1-4: AGE AND HOUR RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of twelve (12) years
to be upon the streets or sidewalks during the period from darkness to dawn, or
for any child between the ages of twelve (12) and sixteen (16) years to be upon
the streets or sidewalks between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day or for any children between the ages
of sixteen (16) years and eighteen (18) years to be upon the streets or
sidewalks between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or some responsible
person over the age of twenty one (21) years, or a member of his or her family
of the age of eighteen (18) years or older, unless he or she has a legitimate
excuse therefor.
   B.   It shall also be unlawful for any parent or guardian or custodian of
any child under the age of twelve (12) years to allow such child to be upon the
streets or sidewalks during the period from darkness to dawn, or for any parent
or guardian or custodian of any child between the ages of twelve (12) and
sixteen (16) years to allow such child to be upon the streets or sidewalks
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
the following day, or for any parent or guardian or custodian of any child
between the ages of sixteen (16) years and eighteen (18) years to allow such
child to be upon the streets or sidewalks between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian, custodian or some responsible person over the age of twenty
one (21) years or of a member of his or her family of the age of eighteen (18)
years or older, unless such child has a legitimate excuse therefor. All times
referred to herein are local time.
(1980 Code § 48-4)
6-7-1-5: LEGITIMATE EXCUSE:
The term “legitimate excuse”, as used in this section
6-7-1, shall include: a) the engaging in a business, occupation or employment
which the laws of the State of Illinois authorize a person of such age to
perform; b) the attendance of scheduled school activities; c) the attendance of
church activities; d) the attendance of a movie theater or bowling alley; and
e) those situations in which the minor, with the permission of a parent,
guardian or custodian thereof, is on an errand authorized by the parent,
guardian or custodian. If the permission given is not in writing, the burden of
proof shall be on the minor and the person giving the permission to prove the
existence of the permission. The minor shall be in his or her home or usual
place of abode within one-half (½) hour after any function is ended, if within
the City, or after the return to the City, if it is outside the City.
(1980 Code § 48-5)
6-7-1-6: SPECIAL FUNCTIONS:
Any minor attending a special function or entertainment of any church, school,
club, or other organization that requires the minor to be out at a later hour
than that called for in section
6-7-1-4 of this section
6-7-1 shall be exempt from the provisions of said section
6-7-1-4, provided the church, school, club or other organization shall register
in advance with the Chief of Police or his designee to have the minors stay out
at the special function to this later hour. The registrant shall state the time
the function or entertainment shall end, and the minors who attend the function
shall be required to be in their homes or usual places of abode within one-half
(½) hour after the function has ended.
(1980 Code § 48-6)
6-7-1-7: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
custody or control of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to suffer
or permit or, by inefficient control, to allow such minor to be on the streets
or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place within the City
during the prohibited hours set forth in section
6-7-1-4 of this section
6-7-1. However, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having the
care, custody or control of the minor, or if the minor is on an emergency
errand or specific business or activity directed by his parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor, or if the
parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing person
notification to the Police Department.
(1980 Code § 48-7)
6-7-1-8: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having
charge of any public place knowingly to permit or suffer the presence of minors
in said public place in violation of any of the provisions of section
6-7-1-4 of this section
6-7-1.    
(1980 Code § 48-11)
6-7-1-9: POLICE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any police officer upon finding a minor in violation of section
6-7-1-4 of this section
6-7-1 shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor
that he is in violation of curfew regulations and shall direct the minor to
proceed at once to his or her home or usual place of abode. The police officer
shall report such action to the Chief of Police who in turn shall notify the
parents, guardian, custodian, or person having custody or control of the minor.
   B.   If such minor refuses to heed the warning or direction by any police
officer or refuses to give the police officer his correct name and address, or
if the minor has been warned on a previous occasion that he or she is in
violation of curfew, he or she shall be taken to the Police Department and the
parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the
parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult person cannot be located or fails
to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the
juvenile authorities.
(1980 Code § 48-8)
6-7-1-10: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any minor violating the provisions of this section
6-7-1 shall be dealt with in accordance with the Juvenile Court law and
procedure (705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.)
   B.   Any parent, guardian, custodian, or other person having the care and
custody of a minor violating this section
6-7-1, after having been previously notified in accordance with section
6-7-1-9 of this section
6-7-1 and with knowledge of a previous curfew violation or violations of the
minor having failed or refused to exercise the necessary parental restraint
upon the minor to avoid further violations of the curfew regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   C.   Any minor convicted of violating any provision of this section
6-7-1 shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   D.   Any person who shall violate the provisions of section
6-7-1-8 of this section
6-7-1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 48-12)
CHAPTER 8: CRIME-FREE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING
Section
6-8-1: Purpose; Certain Persons And Homes Exempt
6-8-2: Definitions
6-8-3: License Requirements
6-8-3-1: License Required; Scope
6-8-3-2: Application For License
6-8-3-3: Conditions On Issuance Or Renewal Of License
6-8-3-4: License Fees
6-8-3-5: Term Of License
6-8-3-6: Display Of License
6-8-3-7: Transferability Of License
6-8-3-8: Refusal To Issue Or Renew License; Appeals
6-8-3-9: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Appeals
6-8-4: Crime-Free Housing Coordinator
6-8-5: Rental Managers
6-8-6: Crime-Free Housing Seminar
6-8-7: Security And Safety Inspections
6-8-8: Tenant List
6-8-9: Lease Agreements
6-8-10: Criminal Or Quasi-Criminal Activities
6-8-11: Violations
6-8-12: Penalties
6-8-13: Exemptions From Provisions
6-8-1: PURPOSE; CERTAIN PERSONS AND HOMES EXEMPT:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a scheme of regulations designed to
prevent, deter and sanction criminal and quasi-criminal activities occurring on
or within rental housing in the City. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to housing for older persons as provided in 42 USC section 3607, group
homes governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act (405 ILCS 25/1 et seq.),
or other similar uses governed by State or Federal laws, rules, or regulations.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are hereby defined:
ABSENTEE LANDLORD: A landlord who does not reside or maintain its principal
place of business in Iroquois County, Illinois, or a landlord who does reside
or has its principal place of business in Iroquois County but is regularly
absent from Iroquois County, Illinois, for a period of sixty (60) days or more
in a calendar year.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Building Official of the City of Watseka or his/her
designee.
COMMON AREA: Any area in a building that is not within a dwelling unit and is
or may be used by a tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit located within that
building.
CRIMINAL ACT(IVITY): Any act or omission identified as a petty offense,
misdemeanor, or felony under the laws of the State of Illinois.
DWELLING UNIT: Any part of a building used as a residence or sleeping place by
one or more persons in consideration for the payment of rental income.
LANDLORD: Any owner (i.e., person, trustee, corporation, partnership,
association, membership, cooperative, or business entity) of a dwelling unit
possessed by a tenant in consideration for the payment of rental income.
LEASE AGREEMENT: Any lease or rental agreement containing the terms of
occupancy of a dwelling unit by a tenant.
OWNER: The person or entity that holds legal title to the real property,
except: a) if legal title is held by a land trust, OWNER shall mean the
beneficial owner or owners of the land trust; and b) if there is a purchaser or
are purchasers under a real estate installment sales contract, OWNER shall mean
the purchaser or purchasers.
PERMANENT OCCUPANCY: The occupancy of a dwelling unit for more than thirty (30)
days in a calendar year.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE: The most recent version of the International
Property Maintenance Code in effect pursuant to the this City Code (see title
11, chapter 3 of this Code).
QUASI-CRIMINAL ACT(IVITY): Any act or omission identified as a violation of
this City Code.
RENTAL HOUSING: Any real estate, including a condominium unit, containing one
or more dwelling units occupied by a tenant for which rental income is paid.
RENTAL INCOME: Any monetary rent or other consideration exchanged for or in
connection with the use or occupancy of a dwelling unit.
RENTAL MANAGER: A person who is not the owner of property, who receives
compensation for managing rental housing.
TENANT: A person occupying a dwelling unit pursuant to a lease agreement.
TENANT LIST: A list of all dwelling units licensed or to be licensed, the name
of the tenant as it appears on the lease agreement, the number of occupants
residing in the dwelling unit, and the names and ages of the occupants of the
dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
6-8-3-1:    LICENSE REQUIRED; SCOPE:
   A.   No landlord shall rent or lease a dwelling unit, or receive any rental
income, without a crime-free residential rental license.
   B.   Crime-free residential rental licenses issued under this chapter shall
be specific to the landlord and shall apply to all dwelling units to be rented
as identified on the landlord's application.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Applications for the issuance and renewal of crime-free residential
rental licenses shall be filed no later than (30) days prior to the desired
effective date of the license.
   B.   Landlords seeking to obtain or renew a crime-free residential rental
license shall file an application with the Building Official on forms to be
provided by the City. The application must be completed and signed by the
landlord. The application shall set forth, with the required attachments, the
following information:
      1.   Name, home address, business address, home phone number, work phone
number, mobile phone number and facsimile number of the landlord;
      2.   The street address and permanent index number of the building, the
number of dwelling units therein, and the specific unit number of the dwelling
units to be licensed;
      3.   Proof of ownership of the building or dwelling unit or, if a
beneficiary of a land trust, a copy of the trust agreement granting the right
to control and manage the beneficial interest; and
      4.   Name, home address, business address, home phone number, work phone
number, mobile phone number and facsimile number of the rental manager, if any.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-3: CONDITIONS ON ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
The Building Official shall issue and/or renew a crime-free residential rental
license if the following requirements are met:
   A.   The landlord has filed an application containing all information
required under subsection
6-8-3-2B of this section
6-8-3.
   B.   The landlord has paid the annual license fee, and there are no
outstanding debts due and owing the City from the landlord and/or rental
manager, including, but not limited to, outstanding fines imposed for violating
the terms of this chapter.
   C.   The landlord and rental manager, if any, attends and successfully
completes a crime-free residential rental seminar pursuant to section
6-8-6 of this chapter.
   D.   The landlord has supplied a current and complete tenant list.
   E.   The landlord is a resident or has its principal place of business in
Iroquois County, Illinois, subject to the following exceptions: An absentee
landlord who has a rental manager that resides or has its principal place of
business in Iroquois County, Illinois, and that person/entity is listed on the
landlord's application.
   F.   The building and/or dwelling units to be subject to the crime-free
residential rental license have undergone and passed a security and safety
inspection.
   G.   There is no reason to deny the issuance or renewal of a crime-free
residential rental license pursuant to the provisions of subsection
6-8-3-8A of this section
6-8-3.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The annual fee for a crime-free residential rental license shall be
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   B.   The fee for a crime-free residential rental license transfer shall be
prorated to the date the new owner obtains legal title to the building.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
All crime-free residential rental licenses shall be valid from January 1 of the
calendar year through December 31 of the same calendar year.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The crime-free residential rental license shall be displayed in the foyer or
other conspicuous place within a common area of the building in which a
licensed dwelling unit is located.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-7: TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
   A.   No crime-free residential rental license shall be transferable without
the express written consent of the Building Official.
   B.   Every landlord holding a crime-free residential rental license shall
provide written notice to the Building Official within twenty four (24) hours
after having conveyed legal title to a dwelling unit covered by a license. Such
notice shall include the name and address of the successor owner.
   C.   A new landlord desiring to operate under the previous landlord's crime-
free residential rental license shall file an application for a transfer with
the Building Official no later than ten (10) days after having been conveyed
legal title to the dwelling unit. Issuance of the license transfer shall be
contingent upon the new owner's compliance with the requirements of section
6-8-3-3 of this section
6-8-3. In the event the new owner fails to apply for a transfer in the time
period referenced above, the crime-free residential rental license applicable
to the dwelling unit shall be deemed immediately revoked without further
notice.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-8: REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW LICENSE; APPEALS:
   A.   Refusal To Issue Or Renew:
      1.   Grounds: The Building Official may refuse to issue or renew a crime-
free residential rental license, in whole or in part, for past violations of
this chapter, violations of the Property Maintenance Code, refusal to take
steps to mitigate against or prevent future violations of this chapter or the
Property Maintenance Code, failure to complete any requirements of a
conditional license, threats to the health, safety and welfare of the tenants/
occupants/public, if the landlord has had his/her crime-free residential rental
license denied, suspended or revoked in the past by the City or other
municipality operating under similar regulations and cannot show that the
circumstances attending such action have been remedied or that steps have been
taken to prevent future violations of a similar nature, and the falsification
of information or documents required to be submitted under this chapter.
      2.   Determination By Building Official:
         a.   The Building Official shall make his determination in writing
which shall include the factual basis and legal conclusion for his
determination. The Building Official’s determination shall be mailed to the
landlord and rental manager, if any, by certified U.S. mail, return receipt
requested, no later than thirty (30) days after the application for issuance or
renewal is submitted or within three (3) business days of a landlord or rental
manager’s failure to timely complete any requirements of a conditional license.
         b.   The refusal to issue or renew a crime-free residential rental
license may be partial (i.e., for a particular dwelling unit(s)) or in whole
(i.e., for all dwelling units proposed to be governed by a particular license),
depending on the circumstances. A determination not to issue or renew a crime-
free residential rental license in whole shall be supported by a finding that
the prior violations were systematic, the result of wilful actions or
omissions, on-going despite warnings or requests for compliance by the Building
Official, or otherwise constitute a universal threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the tenants governed by the license.
      3.   Conditional License In Lieu: In lieu of refusing to issue or renew a
crime-free residential rental license, the Building Official may issue a
determination that a conditional crime-free residential rental license is
appropriate under the circumstances. A conditional crime-free residential
license shall be valid for a limited time period during which the landlord
shall be required to undertake and/or satisfy certain measures identified by
the Building Official before a crime-free residential rental license is issued
or renewed. The conditions imposed shall be directed towards remedying past
violations, the prevention of future violations under this chapter, or as a
probationary technique to ensure the landlord or rental manager understands and
has taken measures to ensure compliance with this chapter. A crime-free
residential rental license shall not be issued if the landlord fails to
complete or violates the conditions listed in the Building Official’s
determination in the time period referenced.
      4.   Appeals: A landlord may appeal the Building Official’s decision not
to issue or renew a crime- free residential rental license as provided in
subsection B of this section.
      5.   Effect Of Determination: The Building Official’s decision shall be
final and take immediate effect fourteen (14) days after it is issued, assuming
no appeal is taken.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   The Building Official’s decision to not issue or renew a crime-free
residential rental license may be appealed by the landlord to the Mayor of the
City. The landlord shall perfect the appeal by filing exceptions with the City
Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of the Building
Official’s determination. The exceptions shall identify any factual or legal
errors with the Building Official’s determination, a short argument in favor of
reversal, and a copy of the Building Official’s determination. Any argument or
basis for reversal not raised in the exceptions shall be deemed waived on
appeal.
      2.   The timely filing of exceptions shall stay the Building Official's
determination through the date on which the appeal is decided.
      3.   Within forty eight (48) hours of the filing of exceptions, the Mayor
of the City shall send written notice of the appeal to the Building Official
and the landlord. The notice shall include a copy of exceptions as well as
notification as to the date, time and location for the hearing on the appeal.
Notice shall be provided by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to
the home addresses listed for the landlord.
      4.   Licensees shall be permitted but are not required to be represented
by an attorney. The Building Official may be represented by an attorney. The
City Attorney shall sit as counsel for the Mayor.
      5.   A de novo hearing shall take place no sooner than twenty five (25)
days nor more than forty five (45) days after exceptions are filed with the
City Clerk. The Mayor shall preside over the hearing and base his/her decision
upon the evidence submitted. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the
hearing. All witnesses proposed to testify shall be presented live, sworn in,
and subject to direct and cross-examination. The landlord shall have the burden
of proof and shall be required to prove its case by a preponderance of
evidence.
      6.   No continuance will be granted except for the most extenuating
circumstances.
      7.   A court reporter will be provided upon the timely request (no later
than seven (7) days before the scheduled hearing) of either party. The party
requesting the court reporter shall be responsible for the costs of his/her
attendance and the reproduction of the transcript to be made a part of the
record.
      8.   No later than thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the
Mayor shall issue his written decision either affirming or reversing the
Building Official’s decision. The written decision shall be mailed to all
interested parties by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested. The
Mayor’s decision on appeal shall be final and take effect immediately.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-3-9: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEALS:
   A.   Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   All crime-free residential rental licenses are subject to suspension
or revocation in whole or in part.
      2.   The basis for suspension or revocation shall include, but not be
limited to: violations of this chapter or the Property Maintenance Code, the
failure to take adequate steps to prevent future violations of this chapter or
the Property Maintenance Code, the failure or refusal to initiate and prosecute
eviction proceedings against tenants that violate the “Crime-Free Lease
Addendum”, the failure to pay any fee or fine due and owing to the City in a
timely manner, and the falsification of information or documents required to be
submitted under this chapter.
      3.   Proceedings to suspend or revoke a crime-free residential license
shall be initiated by the Building Official. The Building Official shall
initiate such proceedings by filing written charges with the Mayor. The Mayor
shall send written notice of the charges to the landlord no later than forty
eight (48) hours after they are filed. The notice shall include a copy of the
charges as well as notification as to the date, time and location for the
hearing on the charges. Notice shall be provided by certified U.S. mail, return
receipt requested, to the home addresses listed for the landlord.
      4.   The hearing shall take place no sooner than twenty five (25) days
nor more than forty five (45) days after charges are filed by the Mayor. The
Mayor shall preside over the hearing and base his/her decision upon the
evidence submitted. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing.
All witnesses proposed to testify shall be presented live, sworn in, and
subject to direct and cross- examination. The Building Official shall have the
burden of proof and shall be required to prove his case by a preponderance of
evidence.
      5.   A court reporter will be provided upon the timely request (no later
than five (5) business days before the scheduled hearing) by either party. The
party requesting the court reporter shall be responsible for the costs of his/
her attendance and the reproduction of the transcript to be made a part of the
record.
      6.   Licensees shall be permitted but are not required to be represented
by an attorney.
      7.   No continuance will be granted except for the most extenuating
circumstances.
      8.   No later than thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the
Mayor shall issue his/her decision in writing setting forth his findings of
fact and legal conclusions. The written decision shall be mailed to all
interested parties by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested.
      9.   Either party to the proceeding may appeal the Mayor’s ruling to the
City Council in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this section.
      10.   The Mayor’s decision shall be final and take immediate effect
fourteen (14) days after it is issued assuming no appeal is taken.
      11.   Nothing herein shall prevent the immediate suspension/revocation of
a crime-free residential rental license by the Building Official as
circumstances dictate. Under such circumstances, post- deprivation proceedings
shall be afforded to the landlord. All other procedural requirements of this
subsection shall apply.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   The Mayor's decision to suspend or revoke a crime-free residential
rental license may be appealed to the City Council.
      2.   The landlord shall perfect the appeal by filing a notice of appeal
with the City Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of the
Mayor's decision. The notice of appeal shall identify any factual or legal
errors with the Mayor's decision, a short argument in favor of reversal, and a
copy of the Mayor’s decision. Any error or argument not raised in the notice of
appeal shall be deemed waived on appeal.
      3.   The timely filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the Mayor’s
decision through the date on which the appeal is decided.
      4.   Within forty eight (48) hours of the filing of the notice of appeal,
the City Clerk shall send written notice of the appeal to the Building Official
and the licensee. The notice shall include a copy of the notice of appeal as
well as notification as to the date, time and location for the hearing on the
appeal. Notice shall be provided by certified U.S. mail, return receipt
requested, to the home addresses listed for the landlord.
      5.   The hearing shall take place no sooner than twenty five (25) days
nor more than forty five (45) days after the notice of appeal is filed by the
landlord. No continuance will be granted except for the most extenuating
circumstances.
      6.   The City Council shall decide the appeal based upon the record
generated before the Mayor. The record shall consist of all evidence submitted
at the hearing before the Mayor and a copy of the transcript of the proceedings
assuming the appellant files a copy with the City Clerk no later than seven (7)
days after the notice of appeal is filed. The standard of review shall be
governed by the standards employed under the Administrative Review Law (735
ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.)
      7.   The City Attorney shall sit as counsel for the City Council on
appeal.
      8.   No later than thirty (30) days after the hearing, the City Council
shall issue its written decision either affirming or reversing the Mayor's
decision. The written decision shall be mailed to all interested parties by
certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested. The City Council’s decision on
appeal shall be final and shall take effect immediately.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-4: CRIME-FREE HOUSING COORDINATOR:
   A.   Coordinator Designated; Qualifications: A Crime-Free Housing
Coordinator shall be designated by the Building Inspector. The Crime-Free
Housing Coordinator may be a civilian or a sworn officer. The Crime-Free
Housing Coordinator shall be trained through the International Crime-Free
Housing Association.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the Crime-Free Housing Coordinator to
provide the Building Official with a list of landlords and rental managers that
have attended a crime-free housing seminar, along with dates of attendance, and
a verification that the landlord or rental manager has otherwise complied with
this chapter so as to be eligible for issuance, transfer or renewal of a crime-
free residential rental license or to conduct business on behalf of a landlord,
as the case may be.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the Crime-Free Housing Coordinator to notify
the Building Official any time a police officer issues a citation to a landlord
or rental manager for a violation of this chapter or any time a police report
is generated, a ticket is issued, or an arrest is made related to any criminal
or quasi-criminal act occurring within a dwelling unit or the common area of a
building containing a dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-5: RENTAL MANAGERS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   All rental managers shall be deemed authorized to accept notice and
process on behalf of the landlord.
      2.   No landlord shall authorize or permit another person to act on its
behalf with respect to a dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, the
acceptance of rental income, unless that person is designated as a rental
manager on the application for the crime-free residential rental license.
      3.   No person shall conduct business on behalf of a landlord unless
specifically listed as a rental manager on the application for the current
crime-free residential rental license.
      4.   No rental manager shall conduct business on behalf of a landlord
unless the manager has attended and successfully completed a crime-free
residential rental seminar.
      5.   Landlords shall be responsible for the conduct/actions of their
rental managers.
   B.   Substitution Of Managers:
      1.   Every landlord shall give notice to the Building Official should its
rental manager discontinue services in that capacity. Said notice shall be
provided to the Building Official, in writing, no later than two (2) business
days after the landlord has knowledge of such discontinuation.
      2.   Absentee landlords shall update the information required under
subsection
6-8-3-2B4 of this chapter, in writing, no later than seven (7) days after the
previous rental manager has discontinued services for a dwelling unit.
      3.   Landlords, other than absentee landlords, shall update the
information required by subsection
6-8-3-2B4 of this chapter, in writing, no later than seven (7) days after a
replacement rental manager is employed for a dwelling unit. In the event the
landlord has not identified a replacement rental manager within seven (7) days
after the previously identified rental manager has discontinued services, it
shall be presumed the landlord is managing the dwelling unit governed by the
crime-free residential rental license.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-6: CRIME-FREE HOUSING SEMINAR:
   A.   All landlords and rental managers shall attend a crime-free housing
seminar which shall be administered by the Watseka Police Department or its
agent. The seminar may be attended before or after an application for a crime-
free residential rental license has been submitted or is proposed to be
transferred, as the case may be.
   B.   The Crime-Free Housing Coordinator may forego this requirement for
landlords and/or rental managers who have attended and successfully completed a
similar crime-free housing seminar in another municipality, provided the
seminar was completed within two (2) years of the date listed on the crime-free
residential rental license application.
   C.   Each landlord and rental manager shall attend a crime-free housing
seminar every three (3) years.
   D.   A conditional license may be issued in the event a landlord files a
crime-free residential rental license application (or application for a
transfer) satisfying all other licensing requirements assuming a crime-free
housing seminar is not being immediately offered. A conditional license will be
valid for three (3) months, or such other time as may be extended by the
Building Official, not to exceed six (6) months, and shall be converted to a
crime-free residential rental license upon the successful completion of the
crime-free housing seminar by the landlord and the rental manager.
   E.   In the event a rental manager who has successfully completed a crime-
free housing seminar discontinues services for the landlord for a dwelling
unit, the replacement rental manager shall successfully complete the crime-free
housing seminar within three (3) months of the replacement.
   F.   At any time after the date of issuance of a crime-free residential
rental license, a landlord or rental manager may be required to re-attend and
successfully complete a subsequent crime-free housing seminar as a consequence
of failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-7: SECURITY AND SAFETY INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Specific Inspections Required:
      1.   No crime-free residential rental license shall be issued or renewed
unless the building, and all dwelling units located therein, have undergone a
security and safety inspection and are found to comply with all applicable laws
of the City.
      2.   Each dwelling unit that will be occupied by a new tenant during the
term of a crime-free residential rental license shall be subject to a security
and safety inspection before occupancy.
   B.   Periodic Inspections: Every dwelling unit, and any common area, is
subject to periodic security and safety inspections by the Building Official
during the term of a crime-free residential rental license. Any security and
safety inspection shall be in addition to any other required inspections under
this Code.
   C.   Inspection Report: All landlords shall be provided with a security and
safety inspection report. The security and safety inspection report shall be
marked “approved” or “not approved” based upon the findings of the Building
Official. The landlord shall be afforded a reasonable time period to correct
any adverse findings listed on the report. Failure to correct a violation
within a reasonable period of time may result in the suspension or revocation
of an existing crime-free residential rental license or, in the case of a new
crime-free residential rental license application, the denial of a crime-free
residential rental license application.
   D.   Inspection Fee: Landlords shall pay an inspection fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per inspection for any dwelling unit requiring more than two
(2) follow-up inspections to ensure adverse findings listed in a security and
safety inspection report are corrected. Payment of the inspection fee must be
in full prior to issuance or renewal of the crime-free residential rental
license.
   E.   Responsibility Of Landlord Or Manager To Schedule Inspections: It shall
be the duty of the landlord and/or rental manager to schedule any inspection
required under this section. The failure to timely schedule an inspection
required by this section may result in the delay, nonissuance, suspension, or
revocation of a crime-free residential rental license.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-8: TENANT LIST:
   A.   All landlords and rental managers shall maintain an accurate and
complete tenant list for all dwelling units subject to a crime-free residential
rental license.
   B.   Landlords shall file an accurate and complete tenant list with the
Building Official each time they apply for the issuance or renewal of the
crime-free residential rental license.
   C.   Landlords shall update the tenant list on file with the Building
Official no later than ten (10) days after a new tenant or occupant occupies a
dwelling unit.
   D.   No landlord shall allow the permanent occupancy of a dwelling unit by
any person not identified on the tenant list on file with the Building
Official.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-9: LEASE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Written Agreements Required; Issuance: All lease agreements shall be in
writing and shall be executed within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
commencement of occupancy. Landlords shall provide a fully executed copy of the
lease agreement to the tenant within fourteen (14) calendar days after
occupancy.
   B.   Maintenance Of Agreements:
      1.   All landlords and rental managers shall maintain a copy of all lease
agreements for dwelling units licensed under this chapter.
      2.   Copies of written lease agreements shall be maintained in a secure
location at the building if multiple dwelling units of the building are
licensed to a single landlord.
      3.   Landlords and rental managers shall provide the Building Official,
upon his/her request, with a copy of any written lease agreement for a dwelling
unit.
   C.   Certain Agreements Prohibited:
      1.   Oral lease agreements and sub-leases are prohibited.
      2.   No landlord shall enter into a lease agreement that would cause the
dwelling unit to be occupied by more persons than permitted under the
provisions of the Property Maintenance Code. Prior to entering into any lease
agreement, the landlord shall advise the prospective tenant as to the maximum
occupancy allowed under the Property Maintenance Code.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any tenant to permit any dwelling unit to
be occupied in excess of the occupancy limits of the Property Maintenance Code.
      4.   The rental of individual bedrooms, sleeping rooms, or portions of a
dwelling unit are not permitted. All rentals must apply to the complete
dwelling unit such that no property shall be operated similar to a boarding
house, dormitory or other similar use.
      5.   No tenant shall sub-lease, and no landlord shall permit the sub-
leasing, of any dwelling unit unless the tenant obtains a crime-free
residential rental sub-license. Crime-free residential rental sub- licenses
shall be applied for by the tenant, with the written approval of the licensee,
in the same manner as a crime-free residential rental license, and shall be
subject to all requirements imposed on landlord-licensees under this chapter.
The issuance of a sub-license shall not relieve the landlord- licensee of
responsibility under this chapter. Violations of this chapter by a sub-licensee
shall be deemed violations by the landlord-licensee.
   D.   Lease Addendum:
      1.   No landlord/rental manager shall enter into a lease agreement or an
extension of a lease agreement without incorporating a “Crime-Free Lease
Addendum”.
      2.   The provisions of the "Crime-Free Lease Addendum", as provided in
this subsection, shall be read into and shall constitute an integral part of
any lease agreement or extension governing a dwelling unit in the City,
irrespective of whether it is attached or a part of the lease agreement, in
fact.
      3.   The landlord or rental manager shall display in the foyer or other
conspicuous place within a common area of the building a copy of a “Crime-Free
Lease Addendum” notifying tenants and visitors that any and all lease
agreements are subject to the terms displayed.
      4.   The “Crime-Free Lease Addendum” shall be in the following form:
         CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM
         In addition to all other terms of the lease, Landlord and Tenant agree
as follows:
         1.   The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or
any other person associated with the tenant or under the tenant's control
regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of
the household:
            (a)   Shall not engage in or facilitate any criminal or quasi-
criminal activity as defined by local, state or federal law while in the
dwelling unit or in any common area of a building containing the dwelling unit;
and,
            (b)   Shall not permit or allow the dwelling unit or any common
area of a building containing a dwelling unit to be used by any person to
engage in or facilitate any criminal or quasi-criminal activity as defined by
local, state or federal law.
         2.   All tenants are required to notify the City of Watseka Police
Department of criminal or quasi-criminal conduct occurring or believed to be
occurring in any dwelling unit or in any common area of a building containing a
dwelling unit. Each tenant shall have the duty to notify the landlord or rental
manager of any criminal or quasi-criminal activities witnessed or believed or
alleged to be occurring or to have occurred in any dwelling unit or common area
of a building in which a dwelling unit is leased no later than forty-eight (48)
hours of having knowledge of the same. Any such notice may be made anonymously.
         3.   ANY VIOLATION OF THIS ADDENDUM SHALL CONSTITUTE A SUBSTANTIAL
VIOLATION OF THE LEASE, MATERIAL NONCOMPLIANCE WITH THE LEASE, AND GROUNDS FOR
TERMINATION OF TENANCY AND EVICTION.
         4.   In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and
any other provision of the lease agreement, the provisions of the addendum
shall govern.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-10: CRIMINAL OR QUASI-CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Each time the Crime-Free Housing Coordinator is notified of a criminal
or quasi-criminal act occurring in a dwelling unit or common area of a building
containing a dwelling unit, he shall send notice of such activity to the
landlord in writing no later than five (5) business days after he has knowledge
of the same. No written notice need be provided by the Crime-Free Housing
Coordinator if a ticket is issued to the landlord or rental manager for a
violation of this chapter as a result of the same criminal or quasi-criminal
activity.
   B.   Every landlord and rental manager shall notify the Police Department or
the Crime-Free Housing Coordinator, as the circumstances may dictate, whenever
he witnesses, or is advised of any allegation of, criminal or quasi-criminal
activity occurring in a dwelling unit or common area of a building containing a
dwelling unit which is subject to a crime-free residential rental license. In
the event the circumstances do not dictate the immediate notification to the
Police Department, notice to the Crime-Free Housing Coordinator shall be
provided no later than two (2) business days after the landlord or rental
manager has knowledge of the activity to be reported.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any landlord or rental manager to punish or
retaliate against a tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit, including, but not
limited to, the termination of a lease agreement or the initiation of eviction
proceedings, for: 1) providing notice to the City of violations of this chapter
or of criminal or quasi-criminal activities taking place in a dwelling unit or
in a common area of a building containing a dwelling unit; or 2) for testifying
in any criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding or proceeding authorized under
this chapter.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-11: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any landlord to:
      1.   Rent a dwelling unit to a tenant that engages in or facilitates any
criminal or quasi-criminal activity as defined by local, State or Federal law
while in the dwelling unit or in any common area of a building containing a
dwelling unit; or
      2.   Rent a dwelling unit to a tenant that permits or allows the dwelling
unit or any common area of a building containing a dwelling unit to be occupied
or used by any person engaging in or facilitating any criminal or quasi-
criminal activity as defined by local, State or Federal law.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any landlord or rental manager to violate or
permit the violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any landlord or rental manager that collects rental income from a
tenant of a dwelling unit without a crime-free residential rental license shall
be fined in an amount equivalent to the rental income collected. Each time
rental income is collected shall constitute a new and separate violation.
   B.   Any person found in violation of any other provision of this chapter
shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a new and separate offense. Violations of this chapter that
concern multiple-dwelling units shall constitute separate offenses as to those
dwelling units and shall not be considered a single violation simply because
the dwelling units are located in the same building or subject to the same
crime-free residential rental license.
   C.   Violations of this chapter may be administered through the provisions
of title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code, or by any other means permitted
by law. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or
penalties available to the City.
   D.   Any hearing officer or judge may require a landlord or rental manager
found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter to attend a crime-
free housing seminar in addition to any fines imposed.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
6-8-13: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing herein shall be construed as or constitute a violation of this chapter
if such a finding would penalize a tenant or landlord (provided the tenant is
not the perpetrator) based on any of the following circumstances:
   A.   Contact made to police or other emergency services, if: 1) the contact
was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual
violence; 2) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to respond to
or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or 3) the contact was made by,
on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability, and the
purpose of the contact was related to that individual's disability;
   B.   An incident of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual
violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the dwelling
unit or on the premises; or
   C.   Criminal activity or an ordinance violation occurring in the dwelling
unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence, engaged
in by a tenant, member of a tenant’s household, guest, or other party, and
against a tenant, household member, guest, or other party.
(Ord. 2478, 9-26-2017, eff. 6-1-2018)
CHAPTER 9: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
Section
6-9-1: Definitions
6-9-2: Violations
6-9-3: Procedure
6-9-4: Remedies
6-9-5: Abatement Of Nuisance; Burden Of Proof
6-9-6: Emergency Closing Procedures
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which three (3) or more of the
behaviors listed below have occurred during any sixty-day period, as a result
of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by any law enforcement agency:
   A.   Disorderly conduct, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-
1.
   B.   Unlawful use of weapons, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/24-1 et seq.
   C.   Mob action, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
   D.   Discharge of a firearm, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1.2 and 1.5.
   E.   Gambling, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1.
   F.   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances, as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
   G.   Assault or battery or any related offense, as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.
   H.   Sexual abuse or related offenses, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1.50 et seq.
   I.   Public indecency, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/30.
   J.   Prostitution, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et
seq.
   K.   Criminal damage to property, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
   L.   Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of Cannabis, as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
   M.   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol, as defined in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable
interest in the property. OWNER includes, but is not limited to: a) a mortgagee
in possession in whom is vested: 1) all or part of the legal title to the
property; or 2) all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises; or b) an occupant who has the right
to control what occurs on the property.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of
owning or using property in the City of Watseka.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner or occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land upon that which is affixed,
incidental or appurtenant to land, including, but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
(2019 Code)
6-9-2: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any property within the City which becomes a “chronic nuisance
property”, as defined in section
6-9-1 of this chapter, is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its
remedies.
   B.   Any person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership or
control to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter
and subject to its remedies.
(2019 Code)
6-9-3: PROCEDURE:
When the City Chief of Police receives two (2) or more police reports
documenting the occurrence of chronic nuisance activity on or within a
property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to
determine whether they describe criminal acts as set forth herein. Upon such
findings, the Chief may:
   A.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger
of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that may exist or that have occurred. The Chief of Police
shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action
that the Chief agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the Chief of Police
within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   B.   After complying with the notification procedures described herein, when
the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a
third nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that the
property has become a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of Police shall:
      1.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been
determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
         a.   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
         b.   A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the property
to be a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance
activities leading to his/her findings.
         c.   Demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to
the Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief agrees will
abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
      2.   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage pre-paid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge
at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or
such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the Chief of Police.
      3.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as
shown on the tax rolls of Iroquois County, and/or the occupant, at the address
of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge, and
shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage pre- paid.
      4.   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after ten
(10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the person
in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the Chief of Police.
      5.   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be
a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
      6.   If, after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the City pursuant to this chapter, a person in charge stipulates
with the Chief of Police that the person in charge will pursue a course of
action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation, the Chief of Police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a
period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, except in the
case of a nuisance activity under this chapter where a search warrant was
executed at the property. If the agreed course of action does not result in the
abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is
reached within thirty (30) days, the Chief of Police shall instruct the City
Attorney to commence legal proceedings to abate the nuisance.
      7.   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any other
documentation which supports legal proceedings, to the City Attorney.
   C.   When a person in charge makes a response to the Chief of Police as
required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance
activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not, however, require
the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any
other purpose.
(2019 Code)
6-9-4: REMEDIES:
   A.   In the event a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against
all use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or the court may employ any other
remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance and to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City.
   B.   In addition to the remedy provided in subsection A of this section, the
court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty as set forth in
section
1-4-1 of this Code, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the
property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a
chronic nuisance property.
   C.   In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   The disturbance of neighbors.
      2.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
      3.   Repeated consumption of alcohol in public.
(2019 Code)
6-9-5: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE; BURDEN OF PROOF:
   A.   The City Attorney of the City of Watseka or the State’s Attorney of
Iroquois County, upon request of the Mayor, may commence an action to abate a
chronic nuisance, as defined herein. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or
other competent sworn evidence that a chronic nuisance exists, the court may,
without notice or bond, enter a temporary restraining order or a preliminary
injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance and may enter
an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with all
property used in connection with the chronic nuisance.
   B.   In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the City
shall have the initial burden of showing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   C.   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance
property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in
the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had
become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, despite the exercise of
reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that
the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   D.   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court
may consider any of the following factors:
      1.   The action or lack of action taken by the person in charge to
mitigate or correct the problem at the property.
      2.   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous.
      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
      4.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the City.
      5.   The cost to the City investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition.
      6.   Any other factors which the court, in the interests of preserving
and protecting the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
City, deems reasonably appropriate.
(2019 Code)
6-9-6: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES:
   A.   In the event the Chief of Police determines the property is an
immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the City may apply
to the court for such interim relief as is deemed by the Chief of Police to be
appropriate. In such event, there need not be compliance with the notification
provision set forth in section
6-9-3 of this chapter; however, the City shall make a diligent effort to notify
the person in charge prior to a court hearing.
   B.   In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a CHRONIC
NUISANCE PROPERTY, as defined in this chapter, the court may order the remedy
set out above. In addition, in the event that it finds the person in charge had
knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting or violating
this chapter and permitted the activities to occur, the court may assess a
civil fine as provided above.
   C.   The court may authorize the City to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the
property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure shall
be made and assessed against the owner, and shall further constitute a lien
against the property. As used herein, "costs" means those costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorney fees, actually incurred by the City for the
physical securing of the property, as well as tenant relocation costs.
   D.   The City shall prepare a statement of costs and shall thereafter submit
the statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is
made within the period described by the court, a lien in said amount may be
recorded against the property.
   E.   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by
the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof by the City.
   F.   A tenant is entitled to its reasonable relocation costs, as determined
by the court, if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property
after either:
      1.   The owner received notice as described herein of the Police Chief's
determination as described above.
      2.   Unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action brought
pursuant to this section.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 10: GAMBLING
Section
6-10-1: Legality
6-10-1: LEGALITY:
Gambling, in itself, shall no longer be a Municipal offense, but nothing in
this Code shall legalize gambling when, by State or Federal law, it shall be
illegal.
(1980 Code § 24-2)
CHAPTER 11: DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING
Section
6-11-1: Definitions
6-11-2: Unlawful Acts
6-11-3: Blockbusting
6-11-4: Restrictive Covenants
6-11-5: Exemptions
6-11-6: Penalty
6-11-7: Enforcement
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise specified, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them for the purposes of this chapter:
DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS: Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
State and national codes.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any kind
which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a secured
interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Any building, structure, or portion thereof, which is
used or occupied, or maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied,
as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or any real
estate so used, designated or intended for such use.
OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in, any real property, or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof who, for a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the City of Watseka, Illinois.
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
6-11-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee, real
estate broker or salesperson, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property. In addition to the foregoing, it shall also
be unlawful for any real estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other
person, or financial institution dealing with housing or real property in the
City to:
   A.   Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or to
discriminate in making available such a transaction;
   B.   Alter the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction
or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith;
   C.   Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in
a real estate transaction from a person;
   D.   Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person;
   E.   Represent to a person that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail
to bring a property listing to his or her attention, or to refuse to permit him
or her to inspect real property;
   F.   Make, print, circulate, post, mail, publish, or cause to be made,
printed, circulated, posted, mailed, or published, any notice, statement,
advertisement or sign, or use a form of application for a real estate
transaction, or make a record or inquiry in connection with a prospective real
estate transaction, that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on unlawful discrimination or unlawful discrimination
based on familial status, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, or discrimination;
   G.   Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property with
knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of
familial status in a real estate transaction is intended;
   H.   Refuse to sell or rent or to otherwise make unavailable or deny a
dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or
renter, a disability of a person residing or intending to reside in that
dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available, or a disability of any
person associated with the buyer or renter;
   I.   Alter the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling or the provision of services or facilities in connection with such
dwelling because of a disability of a person with a disability or a disability
of any person residing or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is
sold, rented or made available, or a disability of any person associated with
that person;
   J.   Refuse to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises; except, that in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The
landlord may not increase for persons with a disability any customarily
required security deposit. However, where it is necessary in order to ensure
with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to pay for the
restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of
such a restoration agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an
interest-bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount
of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such
account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. A landlord may condition
permission for a modification on the renter providing a reasonable description
of the proposed modifications as well as reasonable assurances that the work
will be done in a workerlike manner and that any required building permits will
be obtained;
   K.   Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices,
or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person
equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling;
   L.   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-family
dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, to fail to design and
construct those dwellings in such a manner that:
      1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily
accessible to and usable by persons with a disability;
      2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises
within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with a
disability in wheelchairs; and
      3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of
adaptive design:
         a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
         b.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
         c.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of
grab bars; and
         d.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space;
   M.   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny real property to any blind or hearing impaired person or person with a
physical disability because he has a guide, hearing or support dog;
   N.   Discriminate against any blind or hearing impaired person or person
with a physical disability in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or
rental property, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection
therewith, because he has a guide, hearing or support dog;
   O.   Require, because a blind or hearing impaired person or person with a
physical disability has a guide, hearing or support dog, an extra charge in a
lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, other than for actual
damage done to the premises by the dog; or
   P.   Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or
enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
6-11-3: BLOCKBUSTING:
It shall be unlawful any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee, real estate
broker or salesperson, financial institution or employee of the financial
institution, advertiser, or agent or any other person to:
   A.   Solicit for sale, lease, listing or purchase any residential real
property on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective
entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of
any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex,
sexual orientation, marital status, familial status or disability;
   B.   Distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements
designed to induce any owner of residential real property to sell or lease his
or her property because of any present or prospective changes in the race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation,
marital status, familial status or disability of residents in the vicinity of
the property involved; or
   C.   Intentionally create alarm among residents of any community by
transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call, whether
or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any owner of
residential real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any
present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any
person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status or
disability.
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
6-11-4: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS:
It shall be a violation to insert in a written instrument relating to real
property a provision that is void under section 3-105 of the Illinois Human
Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/3-105).
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
6-11-5: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing contained in section
6-11-2 of this chapter shall prohibit:
   A.   Any sale of a single-family home by its owner so long as the following
criteria are met:
      1.   The owner does not own or have a beneficial interest in more than
three (3) single-family homes at the time of the sale;
      2.   The owner or a member of his or her family was the last current
resident of the home;
      3.   The home is sold without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker or salesperson, or of
any employee or agent of any real estate broker or salesperson; and
      4.   The home is sold without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection
6-11-2F of this chapter.
This exemption does not apply to subsection
6-11-2F of this section.
   B.   Rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing
accommodations for not more than four (4) families living independently of each
other, if the owner resides in one of the housing accommodations. This
exemption does not apply to subsection
6-11-2F of this chapter.
   C.   Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner if he or she or
a member of his or her family resides therein or, while absent for a period of
not more than twelve (12) months, if he or she or a member of his or her family
intends to return to reside therein;
   D.   A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from
limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from
giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, or national origin;
   E.   Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to persons
of one sex;
   F.   Conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any
court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a
“controlled substance”, as defined in section 102 of the Federal Controlled
Substances Act (21 USC 802);
   G.   Persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real
property from taking into consideration factors other than those based on
unlawful discrimination or familial status in furnishing appraisals;
   H.   The owner of an owner-occupied residential building with four (4) or
fewer units (including the unit in which the owner resides) from making
decisions regarding whether to rent to a person based upon that person’s sexual
orientation;
   I.   No provision in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this subsection, "housing for
older persons" has the meaning ascribed in section 3-106 of the Illinois Human
Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/3-106); or
   J.   A refusal of a child sex offender who owns and resides at residential
real estate to rent any residential unit within the same building in which he
or she resides to a person who is the parent or guardian of a child or children
under eighteen (18) years of age.
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
6-11-6: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
6-11-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing herein shall prevent the City, in addition to seeking penalties for
past violations, from seeking relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and/or prevent on-going or future
violations hereof.
(Ord. 2530, 1-22-2019)
TITLE 7: CRIMES AND OFFENSES
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS; MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
7-1-1: Aiding In An Offense
7-1-2: Attempt To Commit An Offense
7-1-3: Providing False Information
7-1-4: Penalty
7-1-1: AIDING IN AN OFFENSE:
Whoever aids, abets, assists, advises or encourages the commission of any act
prohibited by any ordinance of the City, or by any indirect means procures any
such offense to be committed, or whoever commits any offense through the
intervention of any agent, servant, employee, or person under his control shall
be guilty to the same extent, and may be proceeded against in the same manner,
as though said offense had been committed by him directly and with his own
hand; and any such agent, servant, or other person doing any such prohibited
act, for and on behalf of another, shall be deemed guilty of such acts equally
with his employer and shall be subject to the same penalty, except in such
cases where a different or other penalty is provided by ordinance for such
agent or employee.
(1980 Code § 53-50)
7-1-2: ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
Whoever attempts to commit an offense prohibited by any of the ordinances of
the City, and does any act towards it, but fails, or is intercepted or
prevented in this execution, where no other provision is made by ordinance for
such attempt, shall, upon conviction of such attempt, be subject to the same
penalty as by ordinance is prescribed for the actual commission of the offense.
(1980 Code § 53-51)
7-1-3: PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to knowingly give false information to any
official or employee or representative of the City on any matter pertaining to
or affected by his or her official duties.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal his or her identity or
falsely to identify himself or herself in response to any inquiry by an
official or employee of the City in connection with the performance of his or
her official duties.
(1980 Code § 53-9)
7-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(1980 Code § 53-56; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 2: OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
Section
7-2-1: Theft And Related Offenses
7-2-2: Trespasses
7-2-3: Damage To Or Removal Of Property
7-2-4: Obstructing Public Ways Or Passageways
7-2-5: Depositing Refuse
7-2-6: Removal Of Earth
7-2-7: Posting Bills And Notices
7-2-8: Throwing Missiles
7-2-9: Climbing On Utility Poles
7-2-10: Tampering With Signs
7-2-11: Playing On Railroad Property
7-2-12:    Securing Trash Receptacles And Enclosures
7-2-13:    Public Camping
7-2-1: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When
not inconsistent within the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the
singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory. To the extent a word is not defined in this section, the
meanings attached to those words as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/16-0.1 shall apply. Other words not defined in this section or in the above-
referenced statute shall be given their plain and ordinary meanings.
   JUVENILE: Any unemancipated person seventeen (17) years of age or younger.
   MERCHANDISE: Property offered for sale.
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: 1) as a natural or
adoptive parent; 2) as a legal guardian; 3) as a person who stands in loco
parentis; or 4) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by court
order.
   PERSON: Juveniles and those who are not juveniles.
   PROPERTY: Any tangible or intangible item or object.
   B.   Types Of Theft:
      1.   Theft From Person Or Property: A person commits a theft when he
knowingly: a) obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of another
person which is valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); or b)
obtains or exerts control of property of another person by deception which is
valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); or c) obtains or exerts
control of property of another person by threat which is valued at less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00); or d) obtains control over stolen property
knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce a person to believe that the property was stolen.
      2.   Theft Of Lost Or Mislaid Property: A person who obtains control over
lost or mislaid property commits theft when he: a) knows or learns the identity
of the owner or knows or learns a reasonable method of identifying the owner;
b) fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and
c) intends to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of the property.
      3.   Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he
knowingly commits one or more of the following acts and the property is valued
at one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or less:
         a.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers, or causes to be
carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining
such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full
retail value of such merchandise.
         b.   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking,
indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed
to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise.
         c.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise.
         d.   Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the
full retail value of the merchandise.
         e.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart.
         f.   Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner
of the property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or
attempts to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property
in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant.
         g.   Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft
detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
      4.   Theft Of Labor Or Services: A person commits theft of labor or
services when he knowingly obtains the temporary use of labor or services of
another which are available only for hire by means of threat or deception or
knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the labor
or services.
(Ord. 2507, 5-22-2018)
      5.   Fraud: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
obtain possession of any goods, property or thing of value by any false
proceedings or by cheating or by fraud of any kind.
(1980 Code § 53-36)
   C.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent of a
juvenile that resides in the same home as that juvenile to allow him/her to
knowingly possess stolen property. A parent shall be deemed to know that a
juvenile possesses stolen property when: 1) a reasonable person would be
induced to believe that the property in the juvenile's possession was obtained
in violation of this section; or b) a parent fails to take reasonable steps to
inquire as to the legality of the juvenile's possession of the property; and,
in addition to either of the above, c) fails to take reasonable measures to
restore the property to its proper owner.
   D.   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or the value of the stolen
property or merchandise, whichever is greater. Each act or individual piece of
property stolen shall constitute a separate offense. When deciding the amount
of the fine, the Hearing Officer may consider prior violations for similar
conduct.
(Ord. 2507, 5-22-2018)
7-2-2: TRESPASSES:
   A.   Violations:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Knowingly and without lawful authority enter or remain within or
on a building;
         b.   Enter upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to the
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
         c.   Remain upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart;
         d.   Present false documents or falsely represent his or her identity
orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to obtain
permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building or on
the land;
         e.   Intentionally remove a notice posted on residential real estate
as required by subsection (l) of section 15-1505.8 of article XV of the Code of
Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/15-1505.8(l)) before the date and time set forth in
the notice; or
         f.   Enter a field used or capable of being used for growing crops, an
enclosed area containing livestock, an agricultural building containing
livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered two-wheel vehicle) after
receiving, prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry
is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart.
      2.   For purposes of subsection A1a of this section, it shall not be
unlawful to be in a building which is open to the public while the building is
open to the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall it be
unlawful for any person who enters a public building under the reasonable
belief that the building is still open to the public.
   B.   Notices:
      1.   Oral Or Written Notice: A person has received notice from the owner
or occupant within the meaning of subsection A of this section if he or she has
been notified personally, either orally or in writing, including a valid court
order as defined by subsection (7) of section 112A-3 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/112A-3(b)(7)), granting remedy (2) of subsection
(b) of section 112A-14 of that Code (725 ILCS 5-112A-14(b)(2)), or if a printed
or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
      2.   Alternative Notice:
         a.   Subject to the provisions of subsection C1 of this section, as an
alternative to the posting of real property as set forth in subsection B1 of
this section, the owner or lessee of any real property may post the property by
placing identifying purple marks on trees or posts around the area to be
posted. Each purple mark shall be:
            (1)   A vertical line of at least eight inches (8") in length and
the bottom of the mark shall be no less than three feet (3') nor more than five
feet (5') high. Such marks shall be placed no more than one hundred feet (100')
apart and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the property; or
            (2)   A post capped or otherwise marked on at least its top two
inches (2"). The bottom of the cap or mark shall be not less than three feet
(3') but not more than five feet six inches (5'6") high. Posts so marked shall
be placed not more than thirty six feet (36') apart and shall be readily
visible to any person approaching the property. Prior to applying a cap or mark
which is visible from both sides of a fence shared by different property owners
or lessees, all such owners or lessees shall concur in the decision to post
their own property.
         b.   Nothing in this subsection B2 shall be construed to authorize the
owner or lessee of any real property to place any purple marks on any tree or
post or to install any post or fence if doing so would violate any applicable
law, rule, ordinance, order, covenant, bylaw, declaration, regulation,
restriction, contract, or instrument.
         c.   Any owner or lessee who marks his or her real property using the
method described in this subsection B2 must also provide notice as described in
subsection B1 of this section.
   C.   Exemptions From Provisions:
      1.   Employees Living On Land Of Employer: This section does not apply to
any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on the land with
permission of the owner or of his or her agent having apparent authority to
hire workers on this land and assign them living quarters or a place of
accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone living on the land at the
request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other agreement or arrangement with,
the owner or his or her agent, nor to anyone invited by the migrant worker or
other person so living on the land to visit him or her at the place he is so
living upon the land.
      2.   Beautification Of Property: A person shall be exempt from
prosecution under this section if he or she beautifies unoccupied and abandoned
residential and industrial properties located within the City. For the purpose
of this subsection C2, “unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
property” means any real estate: a) in which the taxes have not been paid for a
period of at least two (2) years; and b) which has been left unoccupied and
abandoned for a period of at least one year; and “beautifies” means to
landscape, clean up litter, or repair dilapidated conditions on or board up
windows and doors.
      3.   Mortgagee: A mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section for entering, securing, or maintaining an
abandoned residential property. For purposes of this subsection C3, “abandoned
residential property” means mortgaged real estate that the mortgagee or agent
of the mortgagee determines in good faith meets the definition of “abandoned
residential property” set forth in section 15-1200.5 of article XV of the Code
of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/15-1200.5).
      4.   Emergencies: This section does not prohibit a person from entering a
building or upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of
this subsection C4, “emergency” means a condition or circumstance in which an
individual is or is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger
of serious bodily harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be
in imminent danger of damage or destruction.
      5.   Governmental Officials: Subsection A1d of this section does not
apply to a peace officer or other official of a unit of government who enters a
building or land in the performance of his or her official duties.
      6.   Process Servers: This section does not apply to the following
persons while serving process: a) a person authorized to serve process under
section 2-202 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-202); or b) a
special process server appointed by the Circuit Court.
   D.   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. For purposes of this section, each
instance of trespass or day such trespass continues shall constitute a separate
and different offense.
   E.   Administrative Adjudication: Citations issued for violation this
section shall be administered through title 1, chapter 4, article A of this
Code.
(Ord. 2509, 6-26-2018)
7-2-3: DAMAGE OR REMOVAL OF PROPERTY:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Wilfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure,
deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto, or moveable or
personal property, belonging to the City or to any person in the City.
   B.   Tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice,
marker, fire alarm box, fire plug, topographical survey monument or any other
personal property erected or placed by the City.
(1980 Code § 53-6)
   C.   Mar, injure, destroy or deface, or aid in injuring, destroying, or
defacing, in the City, any public or private property, or cause to be posted or
stuck, any handbill or placard upon any public or private building, or upon any
fence or other property within the City without the permission from the owner
or occupant first obtained; or mar, injure, destroy or deface, or cause to be
marred, destroyed, injured or defaced, any bridge, fence, tree, street sign,
awning, lamppost, electric light post, or apparatus or any other property not
belonging to the person so offending, whether public or private.
(1980 Code § 53-37)
   D.   Cut, mar, deface, destroy, injure or interfere with any electric light,
or lamp, pole, post, signs, rope or wire, dynamo, engine or machinery belonging
to the City. (1980 Code § 53-21)
   E.   Wilfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or by any
other means injure any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, building,
fence, shrubbery, shade or ornamental tree, grounds or works belonging to any
public or school library, or take and carry away any property belonging to any
public or school library with the intention of converting the property to his
own use.
(1980 Code § 53-7)
7-2-4: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS OR PASSAGEWAYS:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Place or leave any large stone, rock, object or obstruction upon the
traveled portion of any street, alley or highway without adequate lights and
warning signs to protect the traveling public being put in place and
maintained, whereby the traveling public might collide with any of said objects
and sustain personal injury or property damage.
   B.   Place or erect upon a public way or passageway to any building an
obstruction of any type; provided, that this subsection shall not prevent the
duly authorized or required placing of temporary barriers or warning signs for
the purpose of safeguarding the public.
(1980 Code § 53-6)
   C.   Obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor, or
exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church, theater, assembly
hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two (2) or more
tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes with the free use of
such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit.
(1980 Code § 53-38)
7-2-5: DEPOSITING REFUSE:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley,
street, bridge or public passageway, or upon any private property, any waste or
other material of any kind.
(1980 Code § 53-6)
   B.   Throw, cast, lay or place on any sidewalk in the City, any rind or peel
of any orange, banana, apple, or other fruit or other refuse.
(1980 Code § 53-16)
7-2-6: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
No person in the City shall move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other
material from any public street, alley, park or other public ground.
(1980 Code § 53-6)
7-2-7: POSTING BILLS AND NOTICES:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Post any bills or advertisements on any public property without the
authority of the City Council; or post any bill or advertisement on any
property without the written consent of the owner thereof.
(1980 Code § 53-30)
   B.   Fasten in any way any show card, poster or other advertising device
upon public or private property in the City unless legally authorized to do so.
(1980 Code § 53-6)
7-2-8: THROWING MISSILES:
   A.   No person shall cast, hurl, throw, shoot or otherwise project any
stick, stone, brick, ball, or any other missile or projectile at, against or
upon any street lamp, light or other lamp, dynamo, engine, machinery or other
property belonging to the City.
(1980 Code § 53-20)
   B.   No person in the City shall throw any stone, snowball or any other
missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private
property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or
enclosed or unenclosed ground.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-2-9: CLIMBING UTILITY POLES:
No person shall climb upon any telegraph pole, telephone pole, cable television
pole, electric light pole or sign pole, unless in the performance of his duties
as an employee of the owner thereof.
(1980 Code § 53-32)
7-2-10: TAMPERING WITH SIGNS:
No person shall molest, swing upon, pull up or in anyway whatever interfere
with or turn any street sign, signboard, street sign pole or guide board pole
within the limits of the City which has been or shall be hereafter placed,
erected or maintained by the City.
(1980 Code § 53-34)
7-2-11: PLAYING ON RAILROAD PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play upon or about any railroad track,
depot, locomotive or car within the City, or to climb upon or jump from any car
or train of cars, or from one car to another while the same may be in motion.
(1980 Code § 53-15)
7-2-12: SECURING TRASH RECEPTACLES AND ENCLOSURES:
   A.   Excepting refuse contractors servicing commercial and multi-family
residential property with the authority of the owner, it shall be unlawful for
any person to access to search any trash, landscaping, or recycling receptacle
(including dumpster), or to pick, acquire, remove, take out, or possess any
item or material disposed of or held therein.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property being used for
commercial or multi-family residential purposes to have or maintain any trash,
landscaping, or recycling receptacle (including dumpsters), whether stored or
kept in a public alley or on the exterior of said property, in a condition that
is uncovered, unlocked, unsecured or accessible to the public and/or
unauthorized users.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property being used for
commercial or multi-family residential purposes to have or maintain a trash
enclosure to secure or conceal a trash, landscaping, or recycling receptacle
(including dumpsters) in a condition that is open, unlocked, unsecured or
accessible to the public and/or unauthorized users. Receptacles need not be
locked and secured if located within a closed, locked, secured and inaccessible
trash enclosure.
   D.   Any person found to have violated any provision of this section shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day a violation occurs or is
permitted to continue constitutes a new and separate violation.
(Ord. 2713, 6-25-2024)
7-2-13: PUBLIC CAMPING:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions apply to this Section:
   BEDDING: A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for bedding purposes.
   CAMPSITE: Any physical space that is not within an established structure,
where Bedding or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the
purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or
any vehicle or part thereof.
   EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY: Items which would otherwise constitute Personal
Property under the terms of this Section, but which:
      A.   Has no apparent utility or monetary value;
      B.   Is unsanitary to store or otherwise maintain;
      C.   Any weapon possessed illegally;
      D.   Drug paraphernalia;
      E.   Items appearing to be stolen or otherwise appearing to be evidence
of a crime;
      F.   items which the person cannot demonstrate the requisite lawful
authority to possess; and
      G.   Any items of food which can reasonably be expected to spoil or
otherwise perish within the next thirty (30) days.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person
and having apparent utility or monetary value, except for Exempt Personal
Property.
   PUBLIC CAMPING: To cause or participate in the establishment of, or the act
of remaining in or at, a Campsite.
   B.   Public Camping Prohibited: Public Camping is hereby declared to be a
nuisance within the City of Watseka. Except for parcels of property otherwise
specifically designated by the City for camping purposes, property located
within the corporate boundaries of the City of Watseka is neither intended nor
permitted to be used for the purpose of Public Camping. The following is
strictly prohibited in the City of Watseka:
      1.   Sleeping, or otherwise engaging in Public Camping, on a public
sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench, or any
other publicly owned property, or on or under any bridge or viaduct, at any
time.
      2.   Sleeping, or otherwise engaging in Public Camping, in any pedestrian
or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a public right-of-
way.
      3.   Sleeping, or otherwise engaging in Public Camping, on any real
property owned or otherwise maintained by the City.
      4.   Parking a vehicle overnight within the City for the purpose of
sleeping or otherwise engaging in Public Camping in said vehicle. Parking or
leaving a vehicle parked for two (2) consecutive hours, and/or remaining within
a public vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of the City for the
purpose of Public Camping, for two consecutive hours without permission from
the City Council, between the hours of midnight (12:00 a.m.) and six o’clock
(6:00 a.m.) shall be considered a violation of this Section.
   C.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation
to engage in Public Camping when done:
      1.   In a manner specifically authorized by this Code;
      2.   After a formal declaration of the City in emergency circumstances;
or
      3.   Upon resolution of the City Council, the same may exempt a special
event from the prohibitions of this Section, if the City Council finds such
exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with the goals and
objectives of the City, and with such conditions imposed as the City Council
deems necessary.
   Any conditions imposed will include a condition requiring that the applicant
provide evidence of adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the City
for any liability, damage or expense incurred by the City as a result of the
activities of the applicant. Any findings by the City Council shall specify the
exact dates and location covered by the exemption.
   D.   Removal of Campsite and Personal Property: The City may cause the
removal of a Campsite in violation of this Section under the following
circumstances:
      1.   Prior to removing a Campsite, the City shall post a notice, twenty-
four (24) hours in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the
Campsite is deemed to be necessary for one of the reasons in subparagraphs a-
d below. The City may cause the immediate removal of a Campsite for the
following reasons, and the basis for causing the immediate removal of such
Campsite should be adequately documented by the appropriate person(s):
         a.   Immediate removal of the Campsite 1s necessary to maintain access
to a property;
         b.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of the property;
         c.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary because the
Campsite is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or
         d.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary because the
Campsite poses a risk to the health and safety of the City and its residents.
      2.   Upon any action pursuant to paragraph D.1. above, the person causing
such action to be taken shall inform an appropriate agency delivering social
services to homeless individuals in the City of the location of the Campsite
and the persons found to be in violation of this Section, so said agency may
determine whether or not it would be appropriate to offer its services to those
persons.
      3.   If a twenty-four (24)-hour notice has been posted, and the twenty-
four (24)-hour notice period has passed, then the Campsite, as well as all
Personal Property thereon, shall be removed by the appropriate person(s) acting
on behalf of the City.
      4.   No portion of this Section shall be construed to prohibit any person
found to be engaging in Public Camping from removing their Personal Property
from the Campsite; however, such Personal Property that constitutes Exempt
Personal Property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement officer,
exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that said
Exempt Personal Property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or otherwise
appearing to be evidence of a crime, or items which the person cannot
demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained and
stored as evidence.
   E.   Disposition and Release of Personal Property:
      1.   All Personal Property removed from any Campsite which is not Exempt
Personal Property shall be stored by the police department for a minimum of
thirty (30) days, during which time the Personal Property shall be reasonably
available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
      2.   All Exempt Personal Property may be disposed of or retained as
evidence by the City police department.
   F.   Penalty; Mitigation:
      1.   The penalty for any person's first violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
      2.   The penalty for any person's second violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00).
      3.   The penalty for any person's third violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be three hundred and fifty
dollars ($350.00).
      4.   The penalty for any person's fourth violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00).
      5.   The penalty for any person's fifth violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be seven hundred and fifty
dollars ($750.00).
      6.   The penalty for any person's sixth or subsequent violation of this
Section within a rolling twenty-four (24) month period may be a monetary
penalty of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) or incarceration for a
period not exceeding the maximum time allowed pursuant to Section 1-2-1.1 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1).
      7.   As a substitute for any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to
paragraphs 1-6, above, and if consented to by the City, the penalty assessed to
any person found in violation of this Section may be that said person must
engage in public service by cleaning the rights-of-way and other public
facilities of the City for an amount of time that, if the person found to have
violated this Section was being paid the minimum wage under Illinois law, the
amount paid for that person's labors would have been equal to the monetary
penalty assessed under this Section.
      8.   The City is hereby empowered to exercise all powers afforded to it,
at law or in equity, to collect any fines assessed against a person pursuant to
this Section, including but not limited to seeking incarceration of said person
for a period of time that conforms with Section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1).
      9.   Penalties imposed under this Section may be mitigated by whether or
not the person immediately removed all Personal Property and litter, including
but not limited to bottles, cans, and garbage, from the Campsite after the
person was informed that the person was in violation of this Section
      10.   A separate offense of this Section shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
      11.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this Section,
any person found in violation of this Section may be immediately removed from
the premises where the Campsite is located.
(Ord. 2725, 10-22-2024)
CHAPTER 3: VANDALISM
Section
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Vandalism Prohibited
7-3-3: Issuance Of Complaint
7-3-4: Penalties
7-3-5: Liability Of Parent Or Guardian
7-3-6: Responsibility For Costs
7-3-7: Conditions Of Probation And Conditional Discharge
7-3-8: Acts By Persons Under Eleven
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor child
by a court, but the term does not include a person appointed guardian or given
custody of a minor under the “Juvenile Court Act (705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.)”,
as amended.
MALICE: Shall be deemed to exist even where the evidence only constructively or
impliedly shows malice. If it is shown that an act was wilfully done and its
necessary result is to injure the property of another, malice on the part of
the accused will be presumed without further evidence.
MINOR: A person who is at least eleven (11) years of age but who has not yet
reached eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: Includes the lawful mother or father of an unemancipated minor, whether
by birth or adoption.
PERSON: The City, or any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, government unit, government agency or organization of any
kind.
PROPERTY: Includes any real estate, including improvements thereon, and
tangible personalty.
VANDALISM:
   A.   The wilful or malicious damaging or defacing, within the corporate
limits of the City, of another person’s real or personal property, without the
other person's consent; or
   B.   The wilful or malicious entry into or the obtaining control over any
motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft of another person, without the
other person’s consent.
   C.   All acts which, under the common law, would be considered to be acts of
malicious mischief.
(1980 Code § 52-1)
7-3-2: VANDALISM PROHIBITED:
All acts of vandalism are hereby declared to be unlawful, whether done by a
MINOR, as herein defined, or by an adult.
(1980 Code § 52-2)
7-3-3: ISSUANCE OF COMPLAINT:
The City or any person, partnership, corporation, association or any
incorporated or unincorporated religious, educational or charitable
organization whose property is damaged may make a complaint for the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, provided the proceedings are brought
in the name of the City.
(1980 Code § 52-3)
7-3-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found guilty of an act of "vandalism", as defined in section
7-3-1 of this chapter, shall be subject to:
      1.   Penalties as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
      2.   A period of conditional discharge of not to exceed one year; or
      3.   Any combination of the penalties above set forth; and
      4.   Court costs.
(1980 Code § 52-4; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   The conditions of a conditional discharge may include that the
defendant:
      1.   Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of any
jurisdiction; and
      2.   Periodically report to and appear in person before such person or
agency as directed by the court for the purpose of reviewing the defendant's
fulfillment of the conditions of the conditional discharge; and
      3.   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training; and
      4.   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, professional counseling,
or treatment for drug addition or alcoholism; and
      5.   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual
loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and
      6.   If the defendant is an unemancipated minor, reside with his parent
or legal guardian or in a foster home; attend school; attend a nonresidential
program for youth; or contribute to his own support at home or in a foster
home.
   C.   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a part of a
conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional
discharge, may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only
the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional
period.
   D.   When a charge is filed charging a violation or a condition imposed for
conditional discharge, the court:
      1.   a.   May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a
warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the
jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to
answer a summons.
         b.   The issuance of a warrant for failure to answer a summons shall
stay the sentence of conditional discharge until the final determination of the
charge. The term of conditional discharge shall not expire if the hearing date
is after the date previously fixed for expiration.
      2.   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may
admit the offender to bail pending the hearing.
      3.   Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of
confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The City has
the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the
preponderance of the evidence.
      4.   Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with
the conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the
offender unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
      5.   May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on the motion
of the City or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice
to all parties and a hearing.
   E.   If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any
time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may extend the
time, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any
other penalty that was available at the time of the initial penalty.
   F.   A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final
appealable order.
(1980 Code § 52-4)
7-3-5: LIABILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such
parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition or
restitution imposed by a court upon an unemancipated minor for violation of
this chapter, if the minor has not paid said fine or made restitution or
reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further, if the parent or
legal guardian has been made a party defendant in all enforcement proceedings
against the unemancipated minor for a violation of this chapter and shall have
been served with all citations, summons, complaints, notices, and other
documents required to be served on the unemancipated minor defendant, and
further, if the court shall find that the parent or legal guardian has
neglected the minor in an irresponsible manner or has permitted or acquiesced
in a violation of the curfew laws by the minor (see section
6-7-1 of this Code) at the time of the occurrence of the vandalism by the minor
or has repeatedly or irresponsibly failed or neglected to exercise a reasonable
degree of supervision over the minor.
(1980 Code § 52-5)
7-3-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS:
Any person instituting any proceedings pursuant to section
7-3-3 of this chapter shall pay and be responsible for the costs incurred.
(1980 Code § 52-6)
7-3-7: CONDITIONS OF PROBATION AND CONDITIONAL DISCHARGE:
The court may, when a person has violated any provision of this chapter, admit
such person to probation or a conditional discharge upon the same conditions as
are set out in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.
(1980 Code § 52-7)
7-3-8: ACTS BY PERSONS UNDER ELEVEN:
Where an act of VANDALISM, as defined in section
7-3-1 of this chapter, is committed by a person under the age of eleven (11)
years and where the court finds that any parent or legal guardian has neglected
said person in an irresponsible manner, or has permitted or acquiesced in a
violation of the curfew laws at the time of the occurrence of the act of
vandalism by the person under the age of eleven (11) years, or has
irresponsibly failed or neglected to exercise a reasonable degree of
supervision over the person, it shall be deemed that the parent or legal
guardian shall have committed an act of VANDALISM, as defined in section
7-3-1 of this chapter, and shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in
section
7-3-4 of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 52-8)
CHAPTER 4: OFFENSES RELATED TO PUBLIC PEACE
Section
7-4-1: Assault
7-4-2: Tumultuous Conduct
7-4-3: Fighting
7-4-4: Assemblies
7-4-5: Vagrancy
7-4-6: Possession Of Burglar Tools
7-4-1: ASSAULT:
No person in the City shall beat, strike, wound, imprison, or inflict violence
on another where the circumstances show malice or assault another with intent
to commit murder, rape, mayhem, robbery, or larceny. Nor shall any person
assault another with a lethal weapon, instrument, or thing with intent to
commit upon the person of another any bodily injury where no considerable
provocation appears or where the circumstances of the assault show malice.
(1980 Code § 53-4)
7-4-2: TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT:
No person in the City shall disturb, tend to disturb, or aid in disturbing the
peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and
no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or
possessed by him or under his control.
(1980 Code § 53-4)
7-4-3: FIGHTING:
No person in the City shall fight another person except in boxing exhibitions
duly authorized and licensed under law.
(1980 Code § 53-4)
7-4-4: ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Unlawful Assemblies: It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a
member of any disorderly crowd or any crowd gathered for any unlawful purpose.
(1980 Code § 53-10)
   B.   Disturbing Assemblies:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage
or gathering in the City.
(1980 Code § 53-24)
      2.   No person in the City shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or
assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent
behavior, or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the
same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting.
(1980 Code § 53-4)
7-4-5: VAGRANCY:
No person in the City shall have the status or condition of a vagrant. The
following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
   A.   No Lawful Means Of Support: Any person having no lawful means of
employment and having no lawful means of support realized solely from lawful
occupations or sources; or any person who lives idly and without visible means
of support.
   B.   Loitering: Any person found loitering or strolling in, about, or upon
any street, alley, or other public way or public place, or at any public
gathering or assembly, or in or around any store, shop, or business or
commercial establishment, or on any private property or place without lawful
business and conducting himself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in
speech or behavior.
   C.   Burglar Tools: Any person upon whose person or in whose possession
shall be found any instrument, tool, or other implement for picking locks or
pockets, or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be
inferred to have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony,
misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to account
satisfactorily for the possession of the same.
   D.   Unlawful Occupancy: Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging,
or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop, or other
building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car, or other
vehicle, without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during
the hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.
   E.   Begging: Any person wandering abroad and begging; or any person who
goes about from door to door of private homes or commercial and business
establishments, or places himself in or upon any public way or public place to
beg or receive alms for himself.
   F.   Abroad At Unusual Hours: Any person who wanders about the streets,
alleys, or other public ways or places, or who is found abroad at late or
unusual hours in the night without any visible or lawful business and not
giving a satisfactory account of himself.
   G.   Illegal Association: Any person who keeps, operates, frequents, lives
in, or is employed in any house or other establishment of ill fame, or who
(whether married or single) engages in or commits an act of fornication or
perversion for hire.
   H.   Illegal Employment: Any person who frequents or loafs, loiters, or
idles in or around or is the occupant of or is employed in any establishment
where intoxicating liquor is sold without a license.
   I.   Fraudulent Schemes: Any person who shall engage in any fraudulent
scheme, device, or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing from others;
or any person who aids or assists in such trick, device or scheme.
   J.   Concealing Stolen Property: Any person who keeps a place where lost or
stolen property is concealed.
   K.   Common Law Vagrants: All persons who, by the common law, are vagrants,
whether embraced in any of the foregoing classifications or not.
(1980 Code § 53-4)
7-4-6: POSSESSION OF BURGLAR TOOLS:
   A.   A person commits possession of burglary tools when he possesses any
key, tool, instrument, device, or any explosive, suitable for use in breaking
into a building, housetrailer, watercraft, aircraft, motor vehicle, railroad
car, or any depository designed for the safekeeping of property, or any part
thereof, with intent to enter that place and with intent to commit therein a
felony or theft. The trier of fact may infer from the possession of a key
designed for lock bumping an intent to commit a felony or theft; however, this
inference does not apply to any peace officer or other employee of a law
enforcement agency, or to any person or agency licensed under the Private
Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith
Act of 2004. For the purposes of this section, LOCK BUMPING means a lock
picking technique for opening a pin tumbler lock using a specially-crafted
bumpkey.
   B.   Possession of burglary tools is a Class 4 felony.
(720 ILCS 5/19-2) (1980 Code § 53-5)
CHAPTER 5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Section
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Disorderly Conduct Unlawful
7-5-3: Acts Deemed Disorderly Conduct
7-5-4: Elements Of The Offense
7-5-5: Additional Prohibitions
7-5-6: Exemptions From Provisions
7-5-7: Penalty
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
INCITE A RIOT: Shall mean, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other
persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written: a)
advocacy of ideas; or b) expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any
act or acts of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to
commit, any such act or acts.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant,
tavern, or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, or parks.
RIOT: A public disturbance involving: a) an act or acts of violence by one or
more persons, part of an assemblage of three (3) more persons, which act or
acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage
or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other
individual; or b) a threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of
violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three (3) or more
persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate
execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened
act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or
would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the
person of any other individual.
(1980 Code § 50-1)
7-5-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of
any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace.
(1980 Code § 50-2)
7-5-3: ACTS DEEMED DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing
public danger, alarm, disorder, or nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to
cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he wilfully does any of the
following acts in a public place:
   A.   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health.
   B.   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged.
   C.   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so
as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another.
   D.   Interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of
violence.
   E.   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when
ordered to do so by the City police or other lawful authority known to be such.
   F.   Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or
drug in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his own safety or
the safety of others.
   G.   Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by any of the City
police or any other authorized official of the City, when known to be such an
official.
   H.   Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a
riot.
   I.   Addresses abusive language or threats to any member of the City Police
Department, any other authorized official of the City who is engaged in the
lawful performance of his duties, or any other person when such words have a
direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure,
annoyance or resentment are not prohibited.
   J.   Damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive
condition.
   K.   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise
or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any
public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square, or common, whereby the
public peace is broken or disturbed, or the travelling public annoyed.
   L.   Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when
known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety
is imminently threatened.
   M.   Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture.
(1980 Code § 50-3)
7-5-4: ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   B.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Fire
Department a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of the transmission that
there is no reasonable ground for believing that the fire exists;
   C.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in a place where its explosion or release would endanger
human life, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that the bomb, explosive or a container holding poison
gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive substance is
concealed in the place;
   D.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a threat of
destruction of a school building or school property, or a threat of violence,
death, or bodily harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or
school event, whether or not school is in session;
   E.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been
committed;
   F.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public;
   G.   Calls the number “911” or transmits or causes to be transmitted in any
manner to a public safety agency for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency;
   H.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
the Department of Children and Family Services under section 4 of the Abused
and Neglected Child Reporting Act;
   I.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, the
Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013, the ID/DD Community Care
Act, or the MC/DD Act;
   J.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Police
Department or Fire Department, or any privately owned and operated ambulance
service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-
ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there
is no reasonable ground for believing that the assistance is required;
   K.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
under Article II of Public Act 83-1432;
   L.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   M.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection Agency
Act or as an employee of the collection agency, and while attempting to collect
an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed
to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor.
(720 ILCS 5/26-1) (1980 Code § 50-4)
7-5-5: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent,
tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct by threatening, traducing,
quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting; or by using obscene, offensive,
profane or unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or vexation or
another.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to resist an
arrest which he knows is being made by a police officer, or by a private person
summoned and directed by a police officer to make an arrest, even if he
believes that the arrest is unlawful and the arrest is in fact unlawful.
(1980 Code § 50-5)
7-5-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly,
picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public opinion
not in contravention of other laws.
(1980 Code § 50-6)
7-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a
violation occurs or continues.
(1980 Code § 50-7; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 6: OFFENSES RELATED TO PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
7-6-1: Abandoned Containers
7-6-2: Unwholesome Businesses
7-6-3: False Alarms And Reports
7-6-4: Stench Bombs
7-6-5: Scaffolds
7-6-6: Articles On Window Ledges
7-6-1: ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
   A.   Declared A Menace: Abandoned, unattended or discarded iceboxes,
refrigerators and other airtight containers are a constant menace to the
health, welfare and safety of children in the City.
(1980 Code § 51-1)
   B.   Abandonment Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or
other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or
other structure under his or its control, in a place accessible to children,
any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other container
which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may
not be released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid, snap
lock or other locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
(1980 Code § 51-2)
   C.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a
violation occurs or continues.
(1980 Code § 51-3; amd. 2019 Code)
7-6-2: UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES:
It shall be unlawful to establish or conduct any packing plant, slaughterhouse,
rendering plant, tallow chandlery, soap factory, glue factory, tannery, or any
offensive or unwholesome business within the City or within one mile outside of
the limits thereof.
(1980 Code § 53-11)
7-6-3: FALSE ALARMS AND REPORTS:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need
for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such
act.
   B.   Knowingly start or spread any false alarm of fire, riot, explosion,
bomb threat, civil disturbance or other breach of the peace in the City.
   C.   Make to or file with the Police Department of the City any false,
misleading, or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or
alleged commission of any crime occurring within the City.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
   D.   Knowingly give false information to the effect that a bomb will be
exploded or that any other serious hazard exists in any public conveyance,
church, school, theater, auditorium, assembly hall, factory, warehouse,
industrial, commercial or residential buildings or any other place used for
public gatherings.
(1980 Code § 53-8)
7-6-4: STENCH BOMBS:
   A.   Throwing Or Depositing:
      1.   No person in the City shall throw, drop, pour, deposit or discharge
upon the person or property of another any liquid, gaseous or solid substance
which is injurious to person or property, or which is nauseous, sickening,
irritating or offensive to any of the senses with intent wrongfully to injure,
molest, discomfort, discommode or coerce another in the use, management,
conduct or control of his or her person or property.
      2.   No person shall attempt or aid in the attempt or commission of any
of these prohibited acts.
   B.   Manufacture, Possession: No person in the City shall manufacture or
prepare or have in his possession or under his control any liquid, gaseous or
solid substance or matter of any kind which is injurious to person or property,
or which is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the senses,
with the intent to use the same in violation of subsection A of this section or
with intent that the same shall be used in violation of said subsection A. The
possession or control by any person of any such liquid, gaseous or solid
substance or matter shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to use the
same or cause the same to be used in violation of subsection A of this section.
   C.   Excepted Uses: The prohibition of subsections A and B of this section
shall not apply to police officers acting in the line of duty or to proprietors
of business places or their employees using such substances for the protection
of their property and their business places when the substances referred to
herein are kept solely for the purpose of repelling robbers, thieves, murderers
or other law violators.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-6-5: SCAFFOLDS:
Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can
fall onto any public street, alley or other public way in the City shall be
firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded, and it shall be unlawful to
place or leave any tools or any article on any such place that the same can
fall onto the street, sidewalk or other public way from a greater height than
four feet (4').
(1980 Code § 53-31)
7-6-6: ARTICLES ON WINDOW LEDGES:
It shall be unlawful to place any moveable article on any window ledge or other
place abutting on a public street, alley or other public place at a height
above four feet (4') from the ground in such a manner that the same can be or
is in danger of falling onto the street, sidewalk, or other public place.
(1980 Code § 53-33)
CHAPTER 7: OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALS AND DECENCY
Section
7-7-1: Obscenity
7-7-2: Obscene Publications
7-7-3: Indecent Exposure
7-7-4: Profanity
7-7-5: Writing Indecent Language; Drawing Indecent Figures In Public
7-7-6: Bathing In Public
7-7-7: Prostitution And Related Offenses
7-7-8: Window Peeping
7-7-1: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Definition:
OBSCENE. Any material or performance is obscene if: (1) the average person,
applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a
whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and (2) the average person,
applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or
describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic
sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation,
excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and (3) taken as a
whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
   B.   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      1.   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or
provide, any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section or of the penal laws or
regulations of the State of Illinois; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   C.   Interpretation Of Evidence:
      1.   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults; except,
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      2.   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is utterly without redeeming social importance.
      3.   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall
be admissible to show:
         a.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed
or to which it was directed.
         b.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people.
         c.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof.
         d.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the
City.
         e.   If it appeals to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in
advertising or other promotion of the material.
         f.   The purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
   D.   Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      1.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
(1980 Code § 31-2)
   E.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
this section shall be fined as set forth in section
7-1-5 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 31-8; amd. 2019 Code)
7-7-2: OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to circulate,
pass from one person to another or expose in any public place or anywhere in
view of a place frequented by the public, any obscene publications, printed or
written matter or pictures or other representation.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to keep any such publication, printed or
written matter, picture or other representation in any place frequented by
minors, or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor.
(1980 Code § 31-1)
   B.   Wholesaler To Compel Retailer To Accept: Any person, firm or
corporation, or any agent, officer or employee thereof, engaged in the business
of distributing books, magazines, periodicals, comic books or other
publications to retail dealers, who shall refuse to furnish to any retail
dealer such quantity of books, magazines, periodicals, comic books or other
publications as such retail dealer normally sells because the retail dealer
refuses to sell, or offer for sale, any books, magazines, periodicals, comic
books or other publications which are obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or
indecent is guilty of an offense. Each publication sold or delivered in
violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense.
(1980 Code § 31-3; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
section shall be fined as set forth in section
7-1-5 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 31-8; amd. 2019 Code)
7-7-3: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
   A.   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an indecent exposure
of his or her person or to appear in any public place exposed in a state of
nudity.
(1980 Code § 31-5)
      2.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
subsection shall be fined as set forth in section
7-1-5 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 31-8; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   No person in the City shall publicly expose his or her person or make
any indecent gestures.
(1980 Code § 53-3)
7-7-4: PROFANITY:
No person in the City shall use vulgar, profane, or indecent language on any
public street or other public place or in any public dance hall, club dance,
skating rink, or place of business open to public patronage.
(1980 Code § 53-3)
7-7-5: WRITING INDECENT LANGUAGE; DRAWING INDECENT FIGURES IN PUBLIC:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to write or draw, cut or make,
print or paste any lewd or indecent word, sentence, design, figure or poster in
any public place.
(1980 Code § 31-6)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
section shall be fined as set forth in section
7-1-5 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 31-8; amd. 2019 Code)
7-7-6: BATHING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any
place open to the public view, unless such person is adequately garbed in a
bathing suit.
(1980 Code § 53-29)
7-7-7: PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Committing: Commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or act of
prostitution or moral perversion.
   B.   Securing: Secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd
act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   C.   Frequenting: Be in or near any place frequented by the public, or any
public place, for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to
commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   D.   Meretricious Display: Make a meretricious display in or near any public
place, any place frequented by the public, or any place open to the public
view.
   E.   Transportation: Knowingly transport any person to any place for the
purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   F.   Permitting: Knowingly receive, or offer or agree to receive, any person
into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act
of prostitution or moral perversion, or knowingly to permit any person to
remain in any place or building for any such purpose.
   G.   Directing: Direct or offer to direct any person to any place or
building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or
moral perversion.
   H.   Aiding: Aid, abet, allow, permit, or participate in the commission of
any of the acts prohibited in subsections A through G of this section.
(1980 Code § 53-3)
7-7-8: WINDOW PEEPING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of
another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately to look, peep or peer
through any window or other opening in any dwelling located thereon.
(1980 Code § 31-4)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
subsection shall be fined as set forth in section
7-1-5 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 31-8; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 8: OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Section
7-8-1: Drinking In Public
7-8-2: Public Intoxication
7-8-3: Narcotic Drugs
7-8-4: Possession Of Cannabis
7-8-5: Drug Paraphernalia
7-8-1: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drink any intoxicating
liquors in any public street, alley, lane, avenue or other public property.
(1980 Code § 53-23)
Cross-reference:
   See also subsection
4-2-18A of this Code
7-8-2: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in or on
any street, alley or other public place in the City.
(1980 Code § 53-12)
7-8-3: NARCOTIC DRUGS:
No person in the City shall:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Sell, give away, use or possess for any purpose whatever any
narcotic drug, except as is permitted under State law.
      2.   Establish, contribute to, support, maintain, become an inmate of, or
in any way be connected with any building or part thereof, or place of any
description whatever, or permit such building or part thereof, or place of any
description whatever, owned by or under the control of such person to be used
for the manufacture, preparation, sale, storage, smoking, or use of any
narcotic drug, except as is permitted under State law.
   B.   Barbiturates And Other Substances:
      1.   Sell, give away, use or possess, for any purpose whatever, any
barbiturate or other hypnotic or somnifacient drug, except as is permitted
under State law.
      2.   Establish, contribute to, support, maintain, become an inmate of, or
in any way be connected with any building or part thereof, or place of any
description whatever, or permit such building or part thereof, or place of any
description whatever, owned by or under the control of such person to be used
for the manufacture, preparation, sale, storage, smoking, or use of any
barbiturate or other hypnotic or somnifacient drug, except as is permitted
under State law.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-8-4: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   A.   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess
29.9 grams or less of any substance containing cannabis as defined by the
Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.)
   B.   Exception: There shall be no violations of this section if a person is
otherwise in lawful possession of any substance containing cannabis under and
pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.)
   C.   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
fined in accordance with the following schedule:
      1.   Possession of 00 - 9.9 grams: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   Possession of 10 - 19.9 grams: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   Possession of 20 - 29.9 grams: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   Administration Adjudication: Citations issued for violating this
section shall be administered through title 1, chapter 4, article A of this
Code.
(Ord. 2502, 5-22-2018; amd. Ord. 2575, 5-26-2020)
7-8-5: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine
manufacturing materials as defined in section 10 of the Methamphetamine Control
and Community Protection Act and cannabis paraphernalia as defined in section
1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, which are intended to be used
unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act or
the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or a synthetic drug
product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act. It includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance;
      2.   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      3.   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cocaine or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:
         a.   Water pipes;
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         c.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         e.   Carburetor pipes;
         f.   Electric pipes;
         g.   Air-driven pipes;
         h.   Chillums;
         i.   Bongs; and
         j.   Ice pipes or chillers;
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this Act.
   B.   Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer
for sale or deliver any drug paraphernalia. In determining whether an item
constitutes drug paraphernalia, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following may be considered:
      1.   Instructions or questions, oral or written, in conjunction with any
sale concerning any item's use;
      2.   Descriptive materials accompanying the item which explain or depict
its use;
      3.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      4.   The manner in which the item is displayed for sale;
      5.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the item is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of loose tobacco products;
      6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the item
(s) to the total sales of loose tobacco;
      7.   Evidence that the item(s) sold accompanied a purchase of loose
tobacco in an original manufacturer’s package;
      8.   The number of times an individual or group has purchased such item
(s) in a three-month period without having purchased loose tobacco in an
original manufacturer’s package;
      9.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the item in the
community; and
      10.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   C   .Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an
item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introduction cannabis or a controlled substance for that use. In
determining intent under this subsection, a trier of fact may take into
consideration, amongst other things, the proximity of the cannabis or
controlled substance to drug paraphernalia, the presence of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia, whether or not the person in
possession of the drug paraphernalia is under the influence of cannabis or
another controlled substance.
   D.   Exemptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or
other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale;
      2.   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance;
      3.   Items listed in the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/
1 et seq.) which are used for decorative purposes, when such items have been
rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit
purpose prohibited by that act;
      4.   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or
needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act (720 ILCS 635/0.01 et
seq.); or
      5.   A person who is legally authorized by or licensed through the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act to exhibit, sell, display for sale, offer to sell, give away,
or have in his possession, any drug paraphernalia.
   E.   Penalty: Any person or entity found to be in violation of this section
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. For purposes of this section,
each item of drug paraphernalia shall be chargeable and constitute a separate
and different offense.
   F.   Administrative Adjudication: Citations issued for violating this
section shall be administered through title 1, chapter 4, article A of this
Code.
(Ord. 2506, 5-22-2018; amd. Ord. 2575, 5-26-2020)
CHAPTER 9: OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS
Section
7-9-1: Discharge Of Weapons
7-9-2: Concealed Carry; Display In A Threatening Manner
7-9-3: Sale, Display Of Switchblade Knives
7-9-4: Possession Of Weapons
7-9-5: Weapons And Intoxicated Persons And Minors
7-9-6: Report Treatment Of Wounds
7-9-1: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
No person in the City shall discharge any firearm or airgun, BB gun, or any toy
gun, projecting lead or any missiles excepting in a regularly established
shooting gallery; provided, that this section shall not be construed to
prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance
of his duty nor any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending
his or her person or property.
(1980 Code §§ 53-5, 53-28)
7-9-2: CONCEALED CARRY; DISPLAY IN A THREATENING MANNER:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the City without
first having secured a license to carry such concealed weapons in accordance
with the laws of the State of Illinois.
(1980 Code § 53-26)
   B.   No person in the City shall wear under his or her clothes, or conceal
about his or her person, or display in a threatening manner, any dangerous or
deadly weapon including, but not by way of limitations, any pistol, revolver,
slingshot, cross-knuckles, or knuckles of lead, brass, or other metal, or any
bowie knife or knife resembling a bowie knife, or any knife with a switchblade
or device whereby the blade or blades can be opened by a flick of a button,
pressure on the handle, or other mechanical contrivance.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-9-3: SALE, DISPLAY OF SWITCHBLADE KNIVES:
No person in the City shall sell, offer for sale, or display any knife or
knives having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade or blades of which
can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle, or other
mechanical devices. Such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly
weapon within the meaning of subsection
7-9-2B of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-9-4: POSSESSION OF WEAPONS:
   A.   Prohibitions: No person in the City shall have in his possession,
except within his own domicile, or carry or use a revolver or pistol of any
description, shotgun, or rifle which may be used for the explosion of
cartridges, or any airgun, BB gun, gas operated gun or spring gun, or any
instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a “peashooter”, “slingshot”, or
“beany”, or any bow made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of
any kind by any means whatsoever, whether such instrument is called by any name
set forth above or by any other name.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   The prohibition of subsection A of this section shall not apply to
licensed shooting galleries or in private grounds or premises under
circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such
a manner as not to endanger persons or property, and also in such manner as to
prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits
of such gallery, grounds or residence; and further provided, that nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prevent the concealed carrying of any
type of gun whatsoever, when loaded and properly cased, to or from any range or
gallery or to or from an area where hunting is allowed by law.
      2.   The prohibition of subsection A of this section shall not be
construed to forbid United States marshals, sheriffs, constables, and their
deputies, and any regular, special, or ex officio police officer, or any other
law enforcement officer from carrying or wearing, while on duty, such weapons
as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-9-5: WEAPONS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS AND MINORS:
No person in the City shall purchase from, or sell, loan, or furnish any
weapon, in which any explosive substance can be used, to any person under the
influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, stimulant, or depressant, or to any
person in a condition of agitation and excitability, or to a minor under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
7-9-6: REPORT TREATMENT OF WOUNDS:
Every physician or surgeon duly admitted to the practice of medicine or surgery
in the State of Illinois, whenever he shall treat any person in the City for a
wound inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind, shall notify the
City Police Department within one hour of the time when he renders such
professional service, or is called upon to render the same.
(1980 Code § 53-5)
TITLE 8: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS AND DEVICES
Section
8-1-1: Obedience To Traffic-Control Devices
8-1-2: Unauthorized Signs, Signals, Markings And Devices
8-1-3: Interference With Signs Or Signals
8-1-4: Barricades
8-1-1: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
Each driver of any type of a vehicle, whether motorized or not, and, where it
applies, motorcycle, moped, and bicycle operators, shall obey all signs and
signals directing traffic, giving information about special speed zones,
hazardous conditions, road work and any other special directions.
(1980 Code § 46-8)
8-1-2: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS AND DEVICES:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is in
imitation of or resembles an official traffic- control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic; nor shall any
person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other sign
which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or
effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal; and
no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon
any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. Any such unauthorized device is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and may be removed by any police officer.
(1980 Code § 46-15)
8-1-3: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal.
(1980 Code § 46-16)
8-1-4: BARRICADES:
The driver of any vehicle shall use extreme caution in approaching any
barricade or similar warning device. Red and white barricades warn drivers of
the termination of a road, street or highway, other than construction or
maintenance areas. Such barricades are striped, and the colors are
reflectorized red and reflectorized white. Some of the meanings attached to
such barricades indicate the following:
   A.   The roadway ends in a dead-end or cul-de-sac with no outlet;
   B.   A ramp or lane is closed for operational purposes; or
   C.   The permanent or semipermanent closure or termination of a roadway.
(1980 Code § 46-10)
CHAPTER 2: DRIVING RULES
Section
8-2-1: State Rules Of The Road Adopted
8-2-2: Traffic Not To Be Obstructed
8-2-3: Through Streets; One-Way Streets And Alleys; Stop Streets
8-2-4: Driver Signals
8-2-5: Emerging From Alleys, Buildings, Private Roads Or Driveways
8-2-6: Use Of Spotlights
8-2-7: Use Of Off-Road Vehicles On Private Property
8-2-8: Snowmobiles Prohibited
8-2-1: STATE RULES OF THE ROAD ADOPTED:
Except as herein specifically provided differently, all drivers of motor
vehicles shall in all respects comply with the provisions of chapter eleven,
entitled “Rules of the Road”, of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-100
et seq.) Said provisions are hereby incorporated by reference into this Code,
and a violation of any of these provisions within the City shall be deemed a
Municipal offense.
(1980 Code § 46-137)
8-2-2: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
(1980 Code § 46-185)
8-2-3: THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS; STOP STREETS:
   A.   Through Streets: The streets and parts of streets of the City
designated by ordinance as through streets (see section
8-5-1 of this title) are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a
vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are
approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard,
unless directed otherwise by a traffic officer or a traffic-control signal.
(1980 Code § 46-93)
   B.   One-Way Streets And Alleys: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle
on any street or alley designated as a one-way street or alley by ordinance
(see section
8-5-4 of this title) in any direction other than that so designated.
(1980 Code § 46-94)
   C.   Stop Streets (see section
8-5-2 of this title for specific stop streets): The driver of a vehicle shall
stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is
erected at one or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously yielding
to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at
such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event,
there shall be compliance with the directions of the police officer.
(1980 Code § 46-95)
8-2-4: DRIVER SIGNALS:
No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn
without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to apprize others
who might be affected by his action.
(1980 Code § 46-275)
8-2-5: EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, BUILDINGS, PRIVATE ROADS OR DRIVEWAYS:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or
driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving into the sidewalk
area extending across such alley, building, entrance, road or driveway or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest to the
street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic
thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary
to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The Public Works Director is hereby
authorized and directed to place stop signs on such alleys, buildings, private
roads or driveways as may be designated by the Public Works Committee as having
sufficient volume of traffic as to require the placement of a traffic-control
device.
(1980 Code § 46-100.1)
8-2-6: USE OF SPOTLIGHTS:
The use of a spotlight within the City limits is hereby prohibited upon all
vehicles, except those being used by members of the police force of the City or
the Sheriff or his deputies while in the discharge of their duties.
(1980 Code § 46-268)
8-2-7: USE OF OFF-ROAD VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate any off-road vehicle, motorized go-
cart, three-wheeled vehicle, or four-wheeled vehicle (other than a properly
titled, licensed, and certificated motor vehicle as defined in the Illinois
Vehicle Code as now in force or as from time to time hereafter amended) on
private property, other than for the purpose of ingress and egress to such
property, within the City limits.
(1980 Code § 17-24)
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section
8-11-5 of this title. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. In addition to the penalty provided in this subsection, the City may
seek the abatement of any nuisance by a suit or action in Court for an
injunction or other appropriate remedy.
(1980 Code § 17-90; amd. 2019 Code)
8-2-8: SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED:
No person shall ride in or on, or use or control the operation of a snowmobile
in any manner within the City limits. Any person, firm or corporation violating
this section shall be fined as set forth in section
8-11-5 of this title.
(Ord. 2224, 3-13-2007)
CHAPTER 3: TRUCK TRAFFIC
Section
8-3-1: Application Of Provisions; Exemptions
8-3-2: General Regulations
8-3-3: Pavement And Weather Conditions Causing Restrictions
8-3-4: Trucks Over Ten Tons
8-3-5: Enforcement
8-3-6: Penalty
8-3-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
All trucks within the City shall be operated only over and along the
established truck routes (see section
8-5-7 of this title) and on the other designated streets over which truck
travel is permitted. This chapter shall not prohibit:
   A.   Operation On Street Of Destination: The operation of trucks upon any
street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point,
provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching
the intersection nearest the destination point.
   B.   Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street
in the City.
   C.   Street Repair And Maintenance: The operation of trucks owned or
operated by the City, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while
engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street
improvements, or street utilities within the City.
   D.   Detoured Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon
the street for which such detour is established.
(1980 Code § 45-132)
8-3-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Outside Origin:
      1.   One Inside Destination Point: All trucks entering the City for a
destination point in the City shall proceed only over an established truck
route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which
such traffic is permitted nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the
destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the
shortest permissible route.
      2.   Multiple Inside Destination Points: All trucks entering the City for
multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes
and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such
traffic is permitted nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the
first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination
points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic
is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall
return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.
   B.   Inside Origin:
      1.   Outside Destination Point: All trucks on a trip originating in the
City and traveling in the City for a destination point outside the City shall
proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is
permitted to a truck route as herein established.
      2.   Inside Destination Points: All trucks on a trip originating in the
City and traveling in the City for destination points in the City shall proceed
only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted.
(1980 Code § 45-134)
8-3-3: PAVEMENT AND WEATHER CONDITIONS CAUSING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   When any of the streets of the City, surfaced with blacktop or
bituminous materials, shall, in the opinion of the Public Works Committee and
because of weather or water conditions or any other condition affecting the
traffic-carrying capacity of the street surface, be in imminent danger of
substantial damage or destruction of the surface or pavement by truck traffic,
the Public Works Committee shall have the power to restrict or prohibit the use
of any said street or portion thereof during the emergency.
   B.   The committee, in the event of such emergency, shall post and place on
the street or streets or portions thereof signs with lettering thereon at least
three inches (3") high, which shall either prohibit or restrict truck traffic
on the street or streets, as the case may require. Any person or corporation
who shall, in violation of such signs, travel upon any street of the City,
shall be fined and set forth in sections
1-4-1 of this Code and 8-11-5 of this title.
(1980 Code § 45-135)
8-3-4: TRUCKS OVER TEN TONS:
   A.   Compliance With Provisions; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to transport, haul or convey any load, weight or
burden upon any wagon, automobile, truck or other wheeled vehicle over, upon or
along any pavement other than concrete laid and maintained upon any street,
avenue or alley in the City, when the weight of such load or burden, including
the weight of such wheeled vehicle, shall exceed ten (10) tons, unless the
person shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1980 Code § 45-130)
   B.   Permit Required: Any person, firm or corporation, desiring to
transport, haul or convey any load, weight or burden exceeding ten (10) tons
upon any wagon, automobile, truck or other wheeled vehicle over, upon or along
any pavement, other than concrete or other than those streets named in section
8-5-7 of this title, shall first make application for a permit therefor to the
Public Works Director stating the nature, character and weight of such wagon,
automobile, truck or other wheeled vehicle, also naming in the application the
paved streets, avenues or alleys over which it is proposed to transport or haul
the same, and agreeing to be responsible for and pay to the City all damages
that may occur to any such paved street, avenue or alley by reason of the
transportation or hauling of such load, weight or burden over or upon the same,
and if, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, no permanent injury is
likely to occur by reason of the transportation or hauling of such load, weight
or burden over or along the paved streets, avenues or alleys named in the
application, he may grant a permit therefor.
(1980 Code § 45-131)
8-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Maps: The City Clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps depicting
all truck routes, and the maps shall be kept on file in the Office of the City
Clerk and shall be available to the public.
   B.   Signs Posted: The Chief of Police shall cause all truck routes to be
clearly signposted.
   C.   Weigh-In: The Chief of Police shall have the authority to require any
person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a
truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any
public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining
whether there has been compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2519, 9-25-2018)
8-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no specific penalty has been provided, shall be fined as set forth in
section
8-11-5 of this title.
(1980 Code § 45-140)
CHAPTER 4: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
8-4-1: Method Of Parking
8-4-2: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
8-4-3: General Parking Restrictions
8-4-4: Parking On Highways
8-4-5: Parking During Snow Removal
8-4-6: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
8-4-7: Municipal Parking Lots
8-4-8: Loading And Unloading Zones
8-4-9: Signs Posted
8-4-10: Tampering With Motor Vehicle Prohibited
8-4-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-
hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right-hand curb
or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
      2.   Except when otherwise provided by ordinance, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the
curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement,
with its right-hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right-hand curb or
as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with
its left-hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left-hand curb or as
close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   B.   Angle Parking: The City may permit angle parking on any roadway;
except, that angle parking shall not be permitted on any Federal-aid or State
highway unless the Department of Transportation has determined that the roadway
is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the
free movement of traffic.
(1980 Code § 46-129)
   C.   Parallel And Angle Parking:
      1.   No vehicle shall be parked with the left of such vehicle next to the
curb or other edge of the pavement, except on one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the
curb or other edge of the pavement, and with the right wheels of the vehicle
within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb or other edge of
the pavement line; except, that upon those streets that have been marked for
angular parking, vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb or other edge
of the pavement as indicated by such marks.
(1980 Code § 46-111)
      2.   When stalls are marked on streets for diagonal parking, diagonal
parking is permitted on the following portions of streets, namely: That part of
Second, Third and Fourth Streets lying between Oak Street and Cherry Street.
Except where the berm of the street (that portion of a street between the
traveled portion of the street and the sidewalk) has been improved by the City
or someone else with the City's permission for diagonal parking, the parking of
vehicles in the streets of the rest of the City shall be by parallel parking.
(1980 Code § 46-133)
   D.   Parking Within Stalls; No Parking Zones:
      1.   When parking stalls have been marked on streets, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any vehicle in or on any
of said streets, except within the parking lanes or stalls as herein provided
and wherein parking is not designated as prohibited.
      2.   No person shall park any vehicle within the spaces designated and
marked on said streets as no parking spaces in front of fire hydrants, theaters
and hotel entrances, or in the stall immediately south of the City Hall which
is hereby reserved for the police cars and the car of the Mayor.
(1980 Code § 46-115)
8-4-2: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control device, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks.
         i.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
         j.   On any controlled-access highway.
         k.   In the area between roadways on a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         l.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
         m.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle reduces the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
         n.   On the west side of North 5th Street between Hickory Street and
Elm Street.
      2.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of
the roadway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly sign posted).
         f.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      3.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(1980 Code § 46-110; amd. Ord. 2680, 3-28-2023)
8-4-3: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No Parking Areas: No person shall park or permit to stand any vehicle
in any areas in the City designated and marked as a “No Parking” area.
(1980 Code § 46-122)
   B.   In Front Of Certain Buildings: No person shall be permitted to park in
front of any public meeting place for a space of ten feet (10') on either side
of the main entrance thereto, when a public meeting or entertainment is being
held, except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, which must be
accomplished with all convenient speed.
(1980 Code § 46-24)
   C.   Berm Parking: No vehicle shall be parked on the berm, being that
portion of the-right-of way between the paved portion of the street and the
sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, being the unpaved portion of the right-
of-way.
(Ord. 2260, 3-25-2008)
   D.   Obstructing Driveway Entrances: No person shall park or permit any
vehicle to stand in such manner as to obstruct the entrance to any public or
private driveway or any street or alley in the City.
(1980 Code § 46-122)
   E.   Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(1980 Code § 46-113)
   F.   Double Parking: No person shall park or leave any motor vehicle so that
the same shall stand outside of any authorized or plainly marked off parking
space provided on the streets or highways of the City; nor shall any person
permit any motor vehicle to stand upon the traveled portion of any street in
the City.
(1980 Code § 46-117)
   G.   Cab Stands And Bus Stands: No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab
shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no
vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus
loading zone.
(1980 Code § 46-118)
   H.   Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand,
or park any motor vehicle, boat, recreational vehicle, equipment or trailer on
any street, highway, Municipal or other government-owned parking lot, alley, or
easement, for the purpose of displaying such motor vehicle, boat, recreational
vehicle, or trailer for sale.
(Ord. 2322, 6-22-2010)
   I.   Private Property: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any
private property without the consent of the owner of the property.
(1980 Code § 46-120)
8-4-4: PARKING ON HIGHWAYS:
The City, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may place signs
prohibiting, limiting, or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles on any highway where, in its opinion, such stopping, standing or
parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic
thereon. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the
restrictions indicated by such devices.
(1980 Code § 46-129)
8-4-5: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park or to leave standing any
vehicle on any public street in the City at any time within twelve (12) hours
after a snowfall of three inches (3") or more has occurred, unless the snow has
first been plowed or removed from said streets.
(1980 Code § 46-124)
   B.   Towing Vehicles; Notice Provisions; Costs:
      1.   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic
duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed
away by a commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked
on any public street in violation of subsection A of this section.
      2.   Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe
place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such car or vehicle
upon payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus all storage, towing and
other charges incurred by the City.
      3.   If the identity and address of the owner of any such towed vehicle
is readily accessible, the Chief of Police shall send or cause to be sent by
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, a notice in writing to such person informing him of
the location of said vehicle and the procedure to be followed in order to
reclaim said vehicle. If such identity and address is not available, then a
notice containing the same information as required in the mailed notice shall
be published three (3) times in a newspaper printed and published or of general
circulation in the City. Said notice, whether mailed or published, shall also
state that the owner or bailee of said vehicle has the right to contest the
action of the Police Department by filing with the City Clerk, or in the
absence from the City of said Clerk, with the City Collector, his written
notice of his contest, stating the reason or reasons of his contest. Said
notice of contest must be filed within two (2) weeks after the mailing or first
publication of the notice by the Chief of Police. Within two (2) weeks after
the filing of the notice of contest, the City Council, after due notice to the
contestant, shall hear the objections of the contestant and testimony thereon
and within two (2) weeks after the close of said hearing make its decision
thereon. All proceedings thereafter shall be conducted in accordance with the
Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.)
(1980 Code § 46-125)
8-4-6: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   1.   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
vehicle in a stall or space designed for persons with disabilities if,
immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, there is posted a
sign known as the international wheelchair symbol consisting of a profile view
of a stylized wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background, unless
the driver of the car has a disability.
      2.   As used in this subsection A1, “disability” means either having a
physical condition requiring the use of a wheelchair, artificial limb, crutch,
cane or walker, or having a physical disease making it difficult or impossible
to walk more than twenty five feet (25') without shortness of breath or danger
of impairment of health. A certificate by a person licensed to practice the
healing arts in this State shall be acceptable by the City as evidence under
this subsection B1.
(1980 Code § 46-123; amd. 2019 Code)
      3.   The provisions of subsection A1 of this section shall apply to all
off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the City or by any privately
owned or operated parking lot.
      4.   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
subsection B1 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(1980 Code § 46-123)
   B.   It shall be unlawful and prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is
not bearing registration plates issued to a person with a disability, a veteran
with a disability, or which is not bearing such devices as City authorities
have authorized as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person
with a disability or a veteran with a disability, in any parking place
specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign, for motor vehicles
bearing such registration plates, unless in fact said vehicle is operated by a
person with a disability or a veteran with a disability.
(1980 Code § 46-132; amd. 2019 Code)
8-4-7: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS:
   A.   Parking Lots Established:
      1.   Parking Lot No. 1: There is hereby established a Municipal parking
lot at the corner of Oak Street and Third Street within the City, which said
parking lot shall be described and designated as “Parking Lot No. 1”. All other
Municipal parking lots acquired and maintained by the City for the parking of
vehicles shall be numbered consecutively in the order in which such lot, or
lots, are acquired.
(1980 Code § 46-87)
   B.   Supervision: The Municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or
established by the City shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
   C.   Use:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any Municipal parking
lot in violation of any ordinance; or to park contrary to the rules established
by the City Council for the use of such parking lot; or in any place or manner
other than that designated by the custodian thereof.
      2.   No commercial or freight-carrying vehicle or trailer shall be parked
in a City parking lot.
(1980 Code § 46-89)
   D.   Hours: It shall be unlawful to park any car in any parking lot for a
period more than twelve (12) hours in any one day.
(1980 Code § 46-90)
   E.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(1980 Code § 46-91)
8-4-8: LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES:
   A.   During the times specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the driver
of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a longer time than is necessary
to load or unload passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the
driver to stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than
is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30)
minutes, at any of the following places:
      1.   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night.
      2.   At any place not to exceed twenty five feet (25') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
      3.   At any place not to exceed twenty five feet (25') along the curb
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sunday.
      4.   Directly in front on the entrance to any theater at any time the
theater is open for business.
(1980 Code § 46-114)
   B.   Draying and hauling vehicles, while loading or unloading, shall not
stop or park so as to obstruct traffic and shall park near the entrance of any
public building only for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers or
freight.
(1980 Code § 46-23)
8-4-9: SIGNS POSTED:
The Public Works Committee shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where
parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions.
(1980 Code § 46-121)
8-4-10: TAMPERING WITH MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or
cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change or move
the lever, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a standing motor
vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or
driver thereof, or attempt so to do.
(1980 Code § 46-116)
ARTICLE A: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
8-4A-1: Leaving Vehicle Unattended
8-4A-2: Action By Police
8-4A-3: Presumption
8-4A-4: Parking Ticket
8-4A-1: LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
   Except for a law enforcement officer or an operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle performing his official duties, no person driving or in
charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition,
effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any perceptible
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. An
unattended motor vehicle shall not include an unattended locked motor vehicle
with the engine running after being started by a remote starter system.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1401) (1980 Code § 46-80)
8-4A-2: ACTION BY POLICE:
Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with
the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this article, the police
officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and to deliver the key
to the police officer in charge of the Police Station.
(1980 Code § 46-81)
8-4A-3: PRESUMPTION:
The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this article shall be
held prima facie responsible for any such violation.
(1980 Code § 46-82)
8-4A-4: PARKING TICKET:
A police officer, upon removing the ignition key from the unattended vehicle,
shall write a parking violation ticket or summons and leave it on the
windshield of the vehicle. On the ticket or summons shall be stated the name
and address of the police station where the key will be held and at which the
motorist may reclaim the key upon his proof of his right of possession to the
key and the vehicle. If one other than the owner, whether a bailee or
otherwise, appears to have the right of possession to the key and vehicle, then
a separate ticket or summons may be issued to that person. If no one appears to
claim the key and vehicle within twenty four (24) hours after the removal of
the key, then a notice in writing to the registered owner of the vehicle shall
be sent by certified mail, return receipt, stating that the Police Department
holds the ignition key to the vehicle, and further stating that the vehicle
will be treated as an abandoned vehicle unless reclaimed within seven (7) days
of the date of the notice. Upon the expiration of the seven (7) day period,
without the reclaiming of the key and vehicle, the procedure with reference to
abandoned vehicles shall be followed (see chapter 10 of this title).
(1980 Code § 46-83)
ARTICLE B: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
8-4B-1: Authority To Remove Or Tow Vehicles
8-4B-2: Prima Facie Proof
8-4B-3: Leased Vehicles
8-4B-1: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE OR TOW VEHICLES:
The Police Department, and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by a
commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any
place where the parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks
the use of a fire hydrant, obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any
emergency vehicle, or is illegally parked in violation of any of sections
8-4-2,
8-4-3F, and
8-4-6A and B of this chapter and
8-5-6-1 and
8-5-6-2 of this title. All proceedings thereafter shall be conducted in
accordance with the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.)
(1980 Code § 46-135)
8-4B-2: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in
whose name the vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the penalty for such violation.
(1980 Code § 46-135.1)
8-4B-3: LEASED VEHICLES:
   A.   Any person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and
who leases such vehicle to others, after receiving a written notice of a
violation of this chapter shall, upon request, provide the City police with a
written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of such
offense and the identifying number upon the registration plates and
registration sticker or stickers of the vehicle.
(1980 Code § 46-135.2)
   B.   No person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease
agreement shall be liable for the violation of any parking or standing
regulation of this chapter during the period of the lease; provided, that upon
the request of the City police received within one hundred twenty (120) days
after the violation occurred, the lessor provides, within sixty (60) days after
such release, the name and address of the lessee. The driver's license number
of a lessee may subsequently be requested by the City police if needed for the
enforcement of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-135.3)
CHAPTER 5: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
8-5-1: Through Streets
8-5-2: Stop Streets
8-5-3: Yield Right-Of-Way Intersections
8-5-4: Direction Of Traffic On Specific Streets And Alleys
8-5-5: Speed Limits
8-5-6: Parking
8-5-6-1: Parking Prohibited; Time Limit Parking
8-5-6-2: Ordinance 1169 Adopted By Reference
8-5-6-3: Persons With Disabilities
8-5-7: Restricted Weight Streets; Truck Routes
8-5-8: Bicycles, Motorcycles And Toy Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Sidewalks
8-5-9: Closing A Portion Of Main Street During School Hours Or Activities
8-5-10: Signs Posted
8-5-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be through
streets:
Belmont Avenue south from the southern boundary of Lincoln Avenue to the
northern boundary of Coney Avenue.
Elm Street eastward from the east line of Fourth Street to the west line of
Sixth Street.
Elm Street eastward from the east line of Sixth Street to the City limits.
Fairman Avenue from the western boundary of Fourth Street to the western
boundary of Belmont Avenue.
Jackson Avenue from the eastern boundary of Second Street to the western
boundary of Fourth Street.
Jefferson Street: U.S. Route 24 from its intersection with Jefferson Street
west to its intersection with the western boundary of the City, which said U.S.
Route No. 24 from its intersection with Jefferson Street west to Sugar Creek is
Lafayette Street.
Lincoln Avenue from the eastern boundary of Fifth Street to the western
boundary of Ninth Street.
Lincoln Avenue from the eastern boundary of Sixth Street to the western
boundary of Ninth Street.
Mulberry Street from the east boundary of Fifth Street eastward to the west
boundary of Ninth Street.
North Street westward from the west line of Fourth Street to its intersection
with Illinois State Route 1.
Walnut Street (which, from its intersection with Jefferson Street on easterly
to the corporate limits is the same as U.S. Route 24 and Illinois State Route
1) except at its intersections with Second Street, Third Street, Fourth Street,
Fifth Street and Jefferson Street when the traffic is regulated by stop and go
lights.
Second Street from the south boundary of Mulberry Street south to the City
limits.
Second Street northward from the north boundary of Oak Street to the south
boundary of North Street.
Second Street from the south boundary of Walnut Street to the north boundary of
Mulberry Street.
Third Street from the northern boundary of Oak Street north to the southern
boundary of North Street.
Fourth Street from the southern boundary of Cherry Street to the northern
boundary of Mulberry Street.
Fourth Street from the north boundary of Oak Street northward to the southern
boundary of Sheridan Street.
Fourth Street from the southern boundary of Mulberry Street south to the
southern boundary of Fairman Avenue.
Fourth Street from the southern boundary of Mulberry Street south to the
southern boundary of Jackson Avenue.
Fifth Street from the south boundary of Cherry Street south to the north
boundary of Mulberry Street.
Fifth Street south from the southern boundary of Lincoln Avenue to the northern
boundary of Fairman Avenue.
Eighth Street northward from the north line of Walnut Street to the south line
of Elm Street, also known as Cemetery Road.
Every driver of a vehicle traversing any street intersecting with any through
street shall stop such vehicle before entering upon the through street, unless
a go signal is given at such intersection by a traffic officer or a traffic-
control signal.
(1980 Code § 46-99; amd. Ord. 2721, 9-24-2024)
8-5-2: STOP STREETS:
All streets crossing the through streets designated in section
8-5-1 of this chapter within the corporate limits are hereby designated as stop
streets, and a stop sign shall be erected and maintained by the City on the
right side of said stop streets at each intersection of said stop streets with
the through streets designated in section
8-5-1 of this chapter.
   A.   The following street intersections shall be designated as four-way stop
intersections:
      Cherry Street and Third Street.
      Cherry Street and Fourth Street.
      Cherry Street and Fifth Street.
      Chicago Street and Pleasant Street.
      Fleming Street and Yount Avenue.
      Grant Street and Ninth Street.
      Lincoln Avenue and Fifth Street.
      Lincoln Avenue and Ninth Street.
      Main Street and Chicago Street.
      Market Street and Main Street.
      Mulberry Street and Second Street.
      Mulberry Street and Third Street.
      Mulberry Street and Fourth Street.
      Mulberry Street and Fifth Street.
      Mulberry Street and Ninth Street.
      Oak Street and Second Street.
      Oak Street and Third Street.
      Oak Street and Fourth Street.
      Oak Street and Fifth Street.
      Oak Street and Seventh Street.
      Pleasant Street and Market Street.
      Washington Avenue and Third Street.
      Second Street and Hickory Street.
      Sixth Street and Elm Street.
      Seventh Street and Ash Street.
      All traffic entering any of the above named four-way stop intersections
shall come to a complete stop before entering said intersection.
   B.   The following street intersections are hereby designated as stop
streets, and a stop sign shall be erected and maintained by the City at the
intersections hereinafter designated, regulating the traffic hereinafter
mentioned. The following street intersections shall be designated as stop
streets:
(1980 Code § 46-100)
      Ash Street at its intersection with Fifth Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Belmont Avenue at its intersection with Coney Avenue, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Belmont Avenue at its intersection with Fairman Avenue, for both east and
northbound traffic.
      Brianna Drive at its intersection with Elm Street, for northbound traffic
entering Elm Street from Brianna Drive.
      Brown Street at its intersection with Mulberry Street, for southbound
traffic.
      Brown Street at its intersection with Park Avenue, for northbound
traffic.
      Cherry Street at its intersection with Eighth Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Chicago Street at its intersection with Iroquois Street for northbound
traffic.
      Chicago Street at its intersection with North Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Chicago Street at its intersection with Washington Street, for both north
and southbound traffic.
      Coney Avenue at its intersection with Belmont Avenue, for eastbound
traffic.
      Both entrances from the Courthouse onto Tenth Street, for westbound
traffic.
      Division Street at its intersection with Fleming Street, for southbound
traffic.
      Elm Street at its intersection with Kay Street, for eastbound traffic.
      Grant Street at its intersection with Tenth Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Hickory Street at its intersection with Kay Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Hickory Street at its intersection with Walnut Street, also known as
Routes 1 and 24, for southwesterly bound traffic.
      Hickory Street at its intersection with Third Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Hickory Street at its intersection with Fifth Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Lincoln Avenue at its intersection with Fourth Street, for westbound
traffic.
      Lincoln Avenue at its intersection with Tenth Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Locust Street at its intersection with Seventh Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Locust Street at its intersection with Eighth Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Locust Street at its intersection with Third Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Market Street at its intersection with Newell Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Martin Avenue at its intersection with Tenth Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Mulberry Street at its intersection with Park Avenue, for northbound
traffic.
      North Street at its intersection with Market Street, for both east and
westbound traffic.
      Oak Street at its intersection with Kay Street, for eastbound traffic.
      Porter Avenue at its intersection with Ninth Street, for east and
westbound traffic.
      Ralph Street at its intersection with Grant Street, for northbound
traffic.
      Sheridan Street at its intersection with Sixth Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Smith Street at its intersection with Market Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Victory Avenue at its intersection with Kay Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Virginia Street at its intersection with Washington Street, for both
north and southbound traffic.
      Washington Avenue at its intersection with Second Street, for westbound
traffic.
      Washington Avenue at its intersection with Fourth Street, for eastbound
traffic.
      Yount Avenue at its intersection with Park Avenue, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Second Street at its intersection with Jackson Avenue, for north and
southbound traffic.
      Second Street at its intersection with Washington Avenue, for north and
southbound traffic.
      Third Street at its intersection with North Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Fourth Street at its intersection with Elm Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Fourth Street at its intersection with Fairman Avenue, for northbound
traffic.
      Fourth Street at its intersection with North Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Sixth Street at its intersection with Ash Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Sixth Street at its intersection with Hickory Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Sixth Street at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue, for southbound
traffic.
      Sixth Street at its intersection with Oak Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Seventh Street at its intersection with Locust Street, for northbound
traffic.
      Eighth Street or Line Street at its intersection with Locust Street, for
southbound traffic.
      Ninth Street at its intersection with Locust Street, for both north and
southbound traffic.
      Ninth Street at its intersection with Oak Street, for southbound traffic.
      Ninth Street at its intersection with Porter Avenue, for southbound
traffic.
      It shall be the duty of the driver of every motor vehicle traveling upon
a stop street or approaching the intersection with any through street to come
to a full stop before entering into said intersection, and to yield the right-
of-way to all approaching traffic upon said through streets.
(1980 Code § 46-100; amd. Ord. 1911, 9-21-1998; Ord. 1976, 7-17-2000; Ord.
2017, 8-20-2001; Ord. 2067, 8-19-2002; Ord. 2761, 9-26-2025)
8-5-3: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS:
The following streets at the following intersections are hereby designated as
yield right-of-way intersections:
      Chicago Street at its intersection with Main Street.
      Iroquois Street at its intersection with Chicago Street.
      Juanita Street at its intersection with Third Street.
      Locust Street at its intersection with Tenth Street.
      Market Street at its intersection with Main Street.
      North Street at its intersection with Market Street.
      Sheridan Street at its intersection with Second Street.
      Virginia Street at its intersection with Jackson Street.
      Virginia Street at its intersection with Main Street.
      Virginia Street at its intersection with Pleasant Street.
      Wabash Street at its intersection with Main Street.
      Western Avenue at its intersection with Fifth Street.
      Third Street at its intersection with Adams Street.
      Third Street at its intersection with Jefferson Avenue.
      Third Street at its intersection with Sheridan Street.
      Fourth Street at its intersection with Sheridan Street.
      Fifth Street at its intersection with Sheridan Street.
      Ninth Street at its intersection with Porter Avenue.
      At the intersection of Ash Street and Tenth Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Ash Street from the west shall yield the right-
of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Tenth Street.
      At the intersection of Chicago Street and Iroquois Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Chicago Street from the south shall yield the
right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on Iroquois Street.
      At the intersection of Chicago Street and Main Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Main Street either from the east or west shall
yield to traffic on the Chicago Street.
      At the intersection of Grant Street and Loveridge Lane, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Loveridge Lane shall yield the right-of-way to
all traffic approaching the intersection on Grant Street.
      At the intersection of Jackson Street and Virginia Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection either from the east or west on Jackson Street
shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on
Virginia Street.
      At the intersection of Juanita Street and Third Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Juanita Street from the west shall yield the
right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on Third Street.
      At the intersection of Locust Street and Tenth Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Tenth Street from the south shall yield the
right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on Locust Street.
      At the intersection of Main Street and Market Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Main Street either from the east or west shall
yield the right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on Market
Street.
      At the intersection of Main Street and Virginia Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Main Street either from the east or west shall
yield the right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Virginia
Street.
      At the intersection of Main Street and Wabash Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Main Street either from the east or west shall
yield the right-of-way to the traffic approaching the intersection on Wabash
Street.
      At the intersection of Market Street and North Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection either from the north or south on Market Street
shall yield the right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on North
Street.
      At the intersection of Oak Street and Tenth Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection of Tenth Street shall yield the right-of-way to
all traffic approaching the intersection on Oak Street.
      At the intersection of Oak Street and Eleventh Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Eleventh Street from the north shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Oak Street.
      At the intersection of Pleasant Street and Virginia Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Pleasant Street from the west shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Virginia Street.
      At the intersection of Rosewood Street and Boughton Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Rosewood Street from the east shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Boughton Street.
      At the intersection of Sheridan Street and Second Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection from the east on Sheridan Street shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Second Street.
      At the intersection of Sycamore Street and Boughton Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Sycamore Street from the east shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Boughton Street.
      At the intersection of Western Avenue and Fifth Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Western Avenue shall yield the right-of-way to
traffic approaching the intersection on Fifth Street.
      At the intersection of Third Street and Adams Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Adams Street from both east and west shall
yield the right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on Third Street.
      At the intersection of Third Street and Jefferson Avenue all traffic
approaching the intersection on Jefferson Avenue from the east and west shall
yield the right-of-way to traffic approaching the intersection on Third Street.
      At the intersection of Third Street and Sheridan Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Third Street from the south shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Sheridan Street.
      At the intersection of Fourth Street with Sheridan Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Fourth Street from the south shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Sheridan Street.
      At the intersection of Fifth Street and Sheridan Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Fifth Street from the south shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Sheridan Street.
      At the intersection of Seventh Street and Oak Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Seventh Street shall yield the right-of-way to
all traffic approaching the intersection on Oak Street.
      At the intersection of Ninth Street and Ash Street, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Ninth Street from the south shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Ash Street.
      At the intersection of Ninth Street and Porter Avenue, all traffic
approaching the intersection on Ninth Street from the north shall yield the
right-of-way to all traffic approaching the intersection on Porter Avenue.
(1980 Code § 46-101; amd. Ord. 1911, 9-21-1998)
8-5-4: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC ON SPECIFIC STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   One-Way Alleys: The following alleys are hereby made alleys for one-way
traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive or
operate any vehicle of any kind in, along, or upon the following alleys except
in the direction indicated:
      The alley located in Blocks Seventeen, Eighteen, Nineteen and Twenty in
the Town of South Middleport, now a part of the City, in a westerly direction.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stop or park any
vehicle in the alley herein described, except for the purpose of unloading
goods, wares, or merchandise consigned to any of the premises adjoining the
alley, in which case, the vehicle shall not be parked for any length of time
other than that which is reasonably necessary to unload said goods, wares, or
merchandise.
      The alley located in Block 27 in the Town of South Middleport, now a part
of the City, and the alley located in Block 12 in Stanley's Addition to the
City, in a westerly direction.
(1980 Code § 46-103)
   B.   Two-Way Alleys: The following alleys are hereby made alleys for two-way
traffic:
(2019 Code)
      The alleys between and bounded by North Fifth Street, North Second
Street, Walnut Street and Oak Street, in both easterly and westerly directions.
(Ord. 2090, 7-21-2003)
8-5-5: SPEED LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon the following streets or
within the following areas of the City:
Upon those streets and highways which constitute a part of U.S. Highway 24 or
Illinois State Highway 1, in excess of the speed permitted thereon by signs
posted thereon by the State of Illinois acting through its appropriate State
agency.
(1980 Code § 46-153)
   20 MILES PER HOUR
      An area which constitutes a business district.
(1980 Code § 46-151)
   25 MILES PER HOUR
      An area which constitutes a residential district.
      Brianna Drive from U.S. Route 24/Illinois Route 1, also known as Walnut
Street, to Cemetery Road.
(Ord. 2005, 5-14-2001)
   45 MILES PER HOUR
      That portion of Elm Street and the City’s east corporate line and the
intersection of Elm Street and the east line of LCI Subdivision Addition to the
City.
(Ord. 2005, 5-14-2001)
8-5-6: PARKING:
8-5-6-1: PARKING PROHIBITED; TIME LIMIT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful at any time to park any vehicle on certain City streets
and portions of streets at the times as specified as follows:
Belmont Avenue at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue, for northbound traffic.
Brianna Drive, east or west side, from its intersection with U.S. Route 24/
Illinois Route 1, also known as Walnut Street, to Cemetery Road, any time.
Fairman Avenue at its intersection with 4th Street, for westbound traffic.
Fairman Avenue, north side, from its intersection with Belmont Avenue west to a
point 175 feet west of its intersection with Fifth Street, any time.
Lincoln Avenue at its intersection with Belmont Avenue, for east and westbound
traffic.
Lincoln Avenue, either side, from a point 100 feet east and west of its
intersection with Belmont Avenue, at any time.
Mulberry Street, from a point 195 feet west of MOPAC northbound main track to a
point 150 feet east of MOPAC main track, any time.
Mulberry Street, south side, between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M., from
its intersection with Second Street to its intersection with Third Street.
North Street, from a point 175 feet west of the centerline of MOPAC northbound
main track to a point 160 feet east of the centerline of MOPAC northbound main
track, any time.
Oak Street, north side, between its intersection with Eighth Street and its
intersection with Tenth Street, any time.
Park Street, from a point 430 feet west of the centerline of MOPAC northbound
main track to a point 330 feet easterly, measured on the centerline of Park
Street, east of MOPAC northbound main track, any time.
Porter Avenue, south side, between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M., on
days when school is in session, from its intersection with Faith Street to its
intersection with Ninth Street, but that portion of Porter Avenue shall be a
school unloading zone in which vehicles may stop temporarily to load and unload
passengers only with the driver remaining in the vehicle.
Sheridan Street, north side, from the intersection of Second Street to the
intersection of Sixth Street.
U.S. Route 24 and Illinois Route 1, also known as Walnut Street, both sides,
from 5th Street easterly ±1.86 miles (±9820 feet) to the east corporate limits
of Watseka, located at the east junction of U.S. Route 24 and Illinois Route 1,
any time
U.S. Route 24 and Illinois Route 1, that part that lies east of the half
section line of Section 33, Township 25 North, Range 12 West of the Second
Principal Meridian, and is within the corporate limits, any time.
Walnut Street between Fifth Street and Eighth Street, any time.
South Second Street, west side, either on the street or in the paved portion
immediately west thereof for a distance of 90 feet north from the centerline of
West Cherry Street.
Third Street, west side, from Mulberry Street to its intersection with
Washington Street, any time.
North Third Street, any motor vehicle or motor vehicle combination, west side,
from its intersection with the alleyway between Hickory Street and North
Street, any time.
Fourth Street at its intersection with Fairman Avenue, for north and southbound
traffic.
Fifth Street, east side, from the intersection of Ash Street to the
intersection of Elm Street, any time.
Fifth Street, east side, from the intersection with East Fairman Avenue to its
intersection with Coney A venue, any time.
Fifth Street, east side, from Hamilton Street to Lincoln Avenue, any time.
Fifth Street, west side, from the intersection with Hickory Street and its
intersection with Elm Street, any time.
Fifth Street, west side, parallel parking only, from Hamilton Street to Lincoln
Avenue, any time.
Fifth Street, either side, from Lincoln Avenue to Mulberry Street, any time.
Ninth Street, west side, from its intersection with Locust Street south to its
intersection with Lincoln Avenue, any time.
Tenth Street, west side, between its intersection with Mulberry Street and its
intersection with Locust Street, any time.
(1980 Code § 46-128; amd. Ord. 1984, 11-15-2000; Ord. 2005, 5-14-2001; Ord.
2131, 11-15-2004; Ord. 2185, 6-19-2006; Ord. 2453, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2719, 9-24-
2024; Ord. 2420, 9-24-2024; Ord. 2744, 3-25-2025)
8-5-6-2: ORDINANCE 1169 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Ordinance No. 1169, adopted July 19, 1971, and being an ordinance regulating
parking on F.A. Route 9 (Illinois Route 1 and U.S. Route 24) Section 20-R,
along Lafayette, Jefferson and Walnut Streets extending north, east and west of
the intersection of Illinois Route 1 and U.S. Route 24 in the City, is
incorporated herein by reference. Said ordinance provides:
That in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens,
parking will be prohibited on the pavement or shoulders of Illinois Route 1 and
U.S. Route 24 within the corporate limits of the City of Watseka, from
approximately 678.79 feet west; 485.11 feet north; and 731.21 feet east of the
intersection of U.S. Route 24 and Illinois Route 1 in the City of Watseka,
Iroquois County, Illinois.
(1980 Code § 46-127)
8-5-6-3: PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
The City hereby designates suitable and sufficient space as required by its
ordinances and applicable State and Federal law for the following parking
spaces for persons with disabilities:
   1 space at 500 North Fourth Street.
(Ord. 2033, 12-19-2001; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2005; Ord. 2146, 5-16-2005)
8-5-7: RESTRICTED WEIGHT STREETS; TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to transport,
haul, or convey any load weight or burden upon any wagon, automobile, truck, or
any other road vehicle over or around designated restricted streets in the City
when the weight of such load or burden, including the weight of such wheeled
vehicles, shall exceed six (6) tons. The streets or specified portions involved
shall be designated as restricted weight streets, as follows:
      That portion of Oak Street from a point 166 feet east of its intersection
with Eighth Street, thence east through the remaining course of the street.
      Ninth Street between its intersection with Walnut Street to the
intersection of Oak Street.
(1980 Code § 45-142)
   B.   Truck Routes: There are hereby designated the following truck routes
within the corporate limits of the City:
      Brianna Drive.
      Elm Street from Brianna Drive to the eastern boundary of the corporate
limits.
      Ernest Grove Parkway.
      Fleming Street.
      Illinois Route 1.
      U.S. Route 24.
      Veterans Parkway.
      Second Street from West Oak Street to the southern boundary of the
corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 2519, 9-25-2018)
8-5-8: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride or drive any bicycle or
motorcycle or ride or use skateboards or roller skates on the sidewalks within
the area bounded and described as follows:
   West to east from the Union Pacific Railroad to Sixth Street.
   North to south from the alley between Oak Street and Ash Street to the alley
between Locust Street and Mulberry Street.
(Ord. 2328, 8-14-2010)
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see also subsection
8-7-3H3 of this title
8-5-9: CLOSING A PORTION OF MAIN STREET DURING SCHOOL HOURS OR ACTIVITIES:
Ordinance No. 1188 which was adopted May 15, 1972, at the request of the
Iroquois County Community Unit School District No. 9 for controlling traffic
near its attendance center in Block 33 of the Original Town of Middleport, now
a part of the City, is incorporated herein by reference.
(1980 Code § 46-102; amd. 2019 Code)
8-5-10: SIGNS POSTED:
Signs conforming to the State of Illinois Manual and Specifications shall be
placed by the City at the appropriate locations indicating the traffic
restrictions set out in this chapter.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 6: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
Section
8-6-1: Lights
8-6-2: Signal Lamps And Devices
8-6-3: Horns And Warning Devices
8-6-4: Tires And Nonskid Devices
8-6-5: Brakes
8-6-6: Noise Control
8-6-7: Spilling Loads
8-6-1: LIGHTS:
   A.   Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle
not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of State law
or the requirements of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-236)
      2.   When upon any highway in the City, during the period from sunrise to
sunset, every motorcycle shall at all times exhibit at least one lighted lamp,
showing a white light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the
direction the motorcycle is proceeding.
      3.   All motor vehicles shall, during the period from sunset to sunrise,
or at any other time when visibility is so limited to 1,000 feet as to require
the use of lights for safety, exhibit two (2) lighted driving lamps; except,
that a motorcycle need exhibit only one such driving lamp, showing the white
lights, or lights of a yellow amber tint, visible for at least five hundred
feet (500') in the direction the motor vehicle is proceeding. Parking lamps may
be used in addition to but not in lieu of any such driving lamps. Every motor
vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least two (2) lighted
lamps, commonly known as taillamps, which shall be mounted on the left rear and
right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light visible for at least five
hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction; except, that a motorcycle or a
truck-tractor or road tractor manufactured before January 1, 1968, need be
equipped with only one such lamp.
      4.   Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when
required and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to
the rear. Any taillamp or taillamps, together with any separate lamp or lamps
for illuminating a rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the driving lamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
(1980 Code § 46-229)
   B.   Projecting Loads: Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the
rear four feet (4') or more beyond the bed or body of the vehicle, there shall
be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in
subsection A2 of this section, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a
distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required under this subsection shall be in addition to the red
rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time, there shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less
than twelve inches (12") square.
(1980 Code § 46-230)
   C.   Other Vehicles And Equipment: Every vehicle, including animal-drawn
vehicles, referred to in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-101(b), not
specifically required by the provisions of this chapter to be equipped with
lamps or other lighting devices, shall at all times specified in subsection A
of this section be equipped with at least two (2) lamps displaying a white
light visible from a distance of not less than one thousand feet (1,000') to
the front of such vehicle and shall also be equipped with two (2) lamps
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than one thousand
feet (1,000') to the rear of such vehicle. This subsection does not apply to
antique vehicles. An antique vehicle or expanded use antique vehicle shall be
equipped with lamps of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer
as original equipment and in working order.
(1980 Code § 46-231)
   D.   Implements Of Husbandry; Slow-Moving Vehicles: Every animal-drawn
vehicle, farm tractor, implement of husbandry and special mobile equipment,
except when used for road construction or maintenance within the limits of a
construction or maintenance project where traffic-control devices are used in
compliance with the applicable provisions of the manual and specifications
adopted under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-301, when operated on a
highway or street during a time when lighted lamps are required by subsection A
of this section, shall display to the rear at least one flashing amber signal
lamp mounted as high as practicable and of sufficient intensity to be visible
for a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') in normal sunlight;
provided, that only the rearmost vehicle of a combination of vehicles coupled
together need display such lamp.
(1980 Code § 46-232)
   E.   Oscillating, Rotating Or Flashing Lights: Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter:
      1.   Prohibitions And Exceptions:
         a.   Red oscillating, rotating or flashing lights, whether lighted or
unlighted, are prohibited except on:
            (1)   Law enforcement vehicles of the State or Federal government;
            (2)   Law enforcement vehicles owned by local authorities;
            (3)   A vehicle operated by a police officer or county coroner and
designated or authorized by local authorities, in writing, as a law enforcement
vehicle; however, such designation or authorization shall be carried in the
vehicle;
            (4)   Vehicles of local fire departments and firefighting vehicles
of the State or Federal government;
            (5)   Vehicles which are designed as ambulances. Furthermore, such
lights shall not be lighted except while responding to an emergency call for
the purpose of conveying sick or injured persons; and
            (6)   Rescue squad vehicles operated by fire departments or rescue
squads.
         b.   Amber oscillating, rotating or flashing lights, whether lighted
or unlighted, are prohibited except on:
            (1)   Second division vehicles designed for towing or hoisting
disabled vehicles. Furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except when
the vehicles are actually being used for such purposes.
            (2)   Motor vehicles or equipment of the State of Illinois, local
authorities and contractors. Furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted
except while the vehicles are engaged in maintenance or construction operations
within the limits of construction projects.
            (3)   Vehicles or equipment used by engineering or survey crews.
Furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except while the vehicles are
actually engaged in work on a highway.
            (4)   Vehicles of public utilities and Municipal departments.
Furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except while the vehicles are
engaged in maintenance or construction operations within the limits of
construction projects.
            (5)   Oversized vehicle or load moving under a permit issued by the
Department of Transportation under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301.
            (6)   The front and rear of motorized equipment owned and operated
by the State of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof, which is
designed and used for removal of snow and ice from highways.
            (7)   Fleet safety vehicles registered in another state.
Furthermore, such lights shall not be lighted except as provided in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-212.
            (8)   Such other vehicles as may be authorized by local
authorities.
         c.   Blue oscillating, rotating or flashing lights, whether lighted or
unlighted, are prohibited except on:
            (1)   The front or any part from the back of the front seat forward
to the windshield, and the light may be permanently or temporarily mounted and
covered or uncovered, of any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a
volunteer firefighter, paid firefighter, part-paid firefighter, or call
firefighter, such lights to be used only while responding to a fire call or
other fire department emergency, or the vehicle of any volunteer, paid or
unpaid or on call, member of a rescue squad responding to a rescue squad
emergency or, if the fire department or a civil defense emergency medical
service unit operates as a rescue squad, its members on the way to an emergency
call; and
            (2)   Vehicles of rescue squads when on the way to an emergency
call.
         d.   All oscillating, rotating or flashing lights referred to in this
subsection E1 shall be of sufficient intensity, when illuminated, to be visible
at five hundred feet (500') in normal sunlight.
         e.   Nothing in this subsection E1 shall prohibit a manufacturer of
oscillating, rotating or flashing lights or his representative from temporarily
mounting such lights on a vehicle for demonstration purposes only.
(1980 Code § 46-233)
      2.   Police Vehicles: Oscillating, rotating or flashing lights located on
top of police vehicles in the City shall be lighted whenever a police officer
is in pursuit of a violator of a traffic law or regulation.
(1980 Code § 46-234)
8-6-2: SIGNAL LAMPS AND DEVICES:
Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required
signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device
when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left
outside limit of the body, cab, or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty
four inches (24"), or when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen
feet (14'). The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle and to any
combination of vehicles.
(1980 Code § 46-235)
8-6-3: HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible
signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle,
but such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose
other than as a warning of impending danger. No motor vehicle, other than a
police or emergency vehicle, shall be equipped with a siren or gong signaling
device.
(1980 Code § 46-227)
8-6-4: TIRES AND NONSKID DEVICES:
   A.   Tires: It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle
which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the State
Traffic Law.
(1980 Code § 46-240)
   B.   Nonskid Devices: It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any
motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or
nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.
(1980 Code § 46-239)
8-6-5: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such
vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition,
as required by the State Traffic Law, or to operate any vehicle which is so
loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating
the brakes of such vehicle.
(1980 Code § 46-244)
8-6-6: NOISE CONTROL:
   A.   Muffler Required; Cutout Prohibited: No motor vehicle shall be operated
on any street unless such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient
actual working condition. The use of a cutout is prohibited.
(1980 Code § 46-243)
   B.   Engine Compression Brakes:
      1.   Findings: The City Council finds that excessive engine braking noise
within the City limits is not in the best interest of the public health and
general welfare of the citizens of the City. The City Council further finds
that excessive engine braking noise has created an intolerable environment for
persons present in the City. The City Council further finds that 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-602.1 has been added to the Illinois Vehicle Code, which
section is expressly herein incorporated by reference.
      2.   Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection, the following
words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
   BRAKE: Any device used for slowing, halting, or stopping the movement of any
vehicle.
   ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE: Any motor vehicle brake that is operated by the
compression of the engine of the motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Means and includes automobiles, tractors, trucks, trailers,
and transportation equipment of all kinds and sizes, or any combinations of the
foregoing. !DEFEND!
      3.   Use Prohibited: No person shall use motor vehicle brakes anywhere
within the City limits which are in any way activated or operated by the
compression of the engine of such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof in
such a manner as to emit excessive noise.
      4.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this subsection shall, upon conviction, be fined of seventy five dollars
($75.00).
(Ord. 2259, 3-25-2008)
   C.   Sound Amplification System:
      1.   Restrictions: No driver of any motor vehicle within the City shall
operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system which can be
heard outside the vehicle from seventy five (75) or more feet when the vehicle
is being operated upon a City street, alley, or in any area in the City that
alarms, disturbs or offends any City resident, unless such system is being
operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
      2.   Exceptions: This subsection does not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles.
(Ord. 1979, 8-3-2000)
8-6-7: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the City.
(1980 Code § 46-242)
CHAPTER 7: BICYCLES
Section
8-7-1: Obedience To Traffic-Control Devices, Rules And Regulations
8-7-2: Riding On Bicycles
8-7-3: Operation Of Bicycles
8-7-4: Parking Bicycles
8-7-5: Equipment And Condition
8-7-1: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and
shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the City authorized to
direct or regulate traffic.
(1980 Code § 46-214)
8-7-2: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
A. Extra Passenger: No person operating a bicycle shall carry another person on
the handlebars of the bicycle.
(1980 Code § 46-204)
   B.   Clinging To Vehicles: No person operating a bicycle shall cling or
attach himself or the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
(1980 Code § 46-203)
   C.   Trick Riding: No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or
engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.
(1980 Code § 46-215)
8-7-3: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
   A.   Keep To Right: All bicycles when operated on roadways or streets shall
be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-
hand edge of the roadway.
(1980 Code § 46-211)
   B.   Ride Single File: When more than two (2) persons in a group are
operating bicycles on a roadway or street, they shall ride single file.
(1980 Code § 46-202)
   C.   Speed: No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is
reasonable and proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable
regard to the safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
(1980 Code § 46-213)
   D.   Yield Right-Of-Way: Any person riding a bicycle shall yield the right-
of-way in the following circumstances:
      1.   When a pedestrian is crossing or about to cross a roadway.
      2.   When a pedestrian is in a crosswalk or in an intersection when the
signal light changes.
      3.   When a vehicle is stopped to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian.
      4.   When a person with a disability, using a cane or guide dog, is
crossing any highway or intersection.
      5.   When traffic is so close as to be a hazard.
(1980 Code § 46-217)
   E.   Emerging From Alleys, Driveways And Garages: The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or private sidewalk shall stop the
bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or across a public sidewalk, or onto
or across a public sidewalk line projected across an alley, and shall exercise
reasonable care in making such movements.
(1980 Code § 46-205)
   F.   Turning Movements; Starting/Stopping:
      1.   The operator of a bicycle on a roadway or street, when making a
right turn, shall follow the right-hand edge of the roadway or street, and the
operator of a bicycle on a roadway or street when making a left turn shall
approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the
roadway or street.
      2.   No operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to
turn without first indicating such movement as provided by law.
(1980 Code § 46-216)
   G.   Riding Through Safety Zones: No rider of a bicycle shall ride through
any safety zone, unless directed by traffic signals, a police officer, or an
official posted sign.
(1980 Code § 46-218)
   H.   Riding On Sidewalks:
      1.   Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in
residential districts, but in single file only.
      2.   Under all circumstances, the rider shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper care shall at all times be
exercised by the rider for the pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on
the sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall be reduced to a speed which is no
greater than necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the
rider dismounting, and shall not be increased until the pedestrian has been
passed.
      3.   No bicycle shall be operated upon any sidewalk in any business area
of the City (see also section
8-5-8 of this title).
(1980 Code § 46-209)
   I.   Riding Under The Influence: No person shall operate a bicycle while
under the influence of liquor or drugs.
(1980 Code § 46-206)
8-7-4: PARKING BICYCLES:
   A.   Bicycles, when parked in a business district, shall be parked in zones
or places designated and marked for that purpose. It shall be unlawful to park
any bicycle along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with traffic or
with persons getting into or out of motor vehicles.
   B.   No person, other than the owner or operator, shall move, or in any
manner interfere with, any bicycle properly parked, nor shall any person
interfere with or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a
bicycle; except, that members of the Police Department and Fire Department may
move or, in proper cases, prevent the parking of the bicycle when, in the
judgment of the police officer or firefighter, his action is necessary in order
to safeguard persons or property.
(1980 Code § 46-210)
8-7-5: EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION:
   A.   Mechanical Condition: No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in
such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated.
(1980 Code § 46-208)
   B.   Lights; Reflector: No bicycle shall be operated within the period from
sunset to sunrise without having a properly lighted headlight attached to the
front of the bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the
front thereof, a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500'), nor
without having a red light or a reflector attached to the rear of the bicycle
which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of a motor vehicle for a
distance of not less than two hundred feet (200') to the rear of the bicycle.
(1980 Code § 46-207)
   C.   Signalling Device: Each bicycle shall be equipped with a signaling
device in good working order and audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') when
sounded.
(1980 Code § 46-212)
   D.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1507(c))
CHAPTER 8: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
8-8-1: Definition
8-8-2: Parking And Storage
8-8-3: Removal Of Wheels Prohibited; Boats On Trailers Required
8-8-4: Occupancy
8-8-5: Penalty
8-8-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall mean any
motor vehicle or trailer designed and/or used as a travel trailer, camper,
motor home, tent trailer, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer,
camping trailer, off-road vehicle, utility trailer, or personal watercraft.
(Ord. 2264, 5-13-2008)
8-8-2: PARKING AND STORAGE:
   A.   No recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in any required front
or exterior side yard, except in compliance with the provisions of subsection C
of this section.
   B.   In all zoning districts, a recreational vehicle may be stored in a
garage. In districts zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and RMH, recreational vehicles
shall not be stored on the front yard of any lot except on a driveway which
complies with the provisions of subsection C of this section. Such recreational
vehicles shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the area of the lot.
   C.   Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored within any zoning
district at any location other than an approved gravel, concrete or asphalt
parking area intended as a driveway or parking pad.
   D.   Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in such a way as to
create a dangerous or unsafe condition. All pointed objects such as boat
propellers, motors and trailer hitches, except bell-type hitches and trailer
tongues protruding from recreational vehicles located within two feet (2') of a
sidewalk, bike path, roadway pavement or other pedestrian or vehicular way
shall be covered or protected so as not to create a safety hazard.
(Ord. 2264, 5-13-2008)
8-8-3: REMOVAL OF WHEELS PROHIBITED; BOATS ON TRAILERS REQUIRED:
Recreational vehicles shall not have their wheels removed or be affixed to the
ground so as to prevent ready removal of the vehicle. Boats shall be stored on
an approved licensed trailer at all times when not in use.
(Ord. 2264, 5-13-2008)
8-8-4: OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful to occupy any motor home, camper or trailer for residence
purposes anywhere in the City except in a duly established trailer park or
mobile home park maintained in accordance with the ordinances of the City (see
title 11, chapter 13 and title 12, chapter 11 of this Code); provided, that
occupancy for residence purposes for a period of not more than three (3) days
shall not be considered to be a violation of this section.
(Ord. 2264, 5-13-2008)
8-8-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2302, 10-13-2009)
CHAPTER 9: NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
Section
8-9-1: Definitions
8-9-2: Operation Of Non-highway Vehicles
8-9-3: Non-Highway Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Roadways
8-9-4: Condition Of Non-highway Vehicles
8-9-5: Mandatory Insurance
8-9-6: Registration Required
8-9-7: Capacity Limitations
8-9-8: Attachments
8-9-9: Penalty
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel
primarily off-highway, fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or less,
traveling on three (3) or more non-highway tires, designed with a seat or
saddle for operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control,
except equipment such as lawnmowers.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois Department of Transportation.
   GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
   NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE: The following motor vehicles not specifically designed
to be used on a public highway: a golf cart; and, a recreational off-highway
vehicle.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE: Any motorized device designed to travel primarily
off-highway on two (2) wheels, having a seat or saddle for the use of the
operator, upon or by which any person, persons or property may be transported
or drawn.
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE: Any motorized off-highway device designed
to travel primarily off-highway, sixty-four inches (64") or less in width,
having a manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand pounds (2,000) or less for
gas-powered engines or three thousand pounds (3,000) or less for electric-
powered engines, travelling on four (4) or more non-highway tires, designed
with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for steering control, except
equipment such as lawnmowers.
   ROADWAY: Any portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-2: OPERATION OF NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be lawful for a
person to drive or operate a non-highway vehicle upon any roadway in the City
of Watseka.
   B.   No non-highway vehicle shall be driven or operated upon any roadway in
the City of Watseka with a speed limit greater than thirty five (35) miles per
hour. Provided, however, a non-highway vehicle may cross a roadway at an
intersection where the roadway to be crossed has a posted speed limit of more
than thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
   C.   No person shall drive or operate a non-highway vehicle upon any roadway
in the City of Watseka without a valid Illinois driver's license issued in his
or her name by the Secretary of State.
   D.   No person shall drive or operate a non-highway vehicle upon any roadway
under the jurisdiction of the Department unless permitted by the Department or
Illinois law and the City.
   E.   No person operating a non-highway vehicle shall drive upon or make a
direct crossing upon or across any toll road, interstate highway, or controlled
access highway.
   F.   No person operating a non-highway vehicle shall make a direct crossing
upon or across any other highway (other than those referenced in subsection E)
under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois except at a four-way controlled
intersection of the highway with another roadway on which such operation is
permitted, and only at such times as motor vehicles are permitted to cross said
highway.
   G.   No non-highway vehicle shall be driven or operated on any roadway not
exclusively under the jurisdiction of the City of Watseka unless the City and
the unit of local government with concurrent jurisdiction authorizes the same.
   H.   No all-terrain vehicle or off-highway motorcycle shall be driven or
operated on any roadway in the City of Watseka.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-3: NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN ROADWAYS:
No non-highway vehicles shall be driven or operated on the following roadways
in the City except to make a direct crossing where permitted in accordance with
Section
8-9-2:
   A.   Illinois Route 1 (Jefferson Street) from Iroquois Street on the north
to U.S. Route 24 (Walnut Street) on the south.
   B.   U.S. Route 24 (Walnut Street) from Illinois Route 1 (Jefferson Street)
on the west to the corporate limits of the City on the east.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-4: CONDITION OF NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
No non-highway vehicle may be operated on any roadway in the City of Watseka
unless, at a minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus,
tires, a rearview mirror, red reflectors in the front and rear, a slow moving
emblem (as required of other vehicles in Section 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code) on the rear of the non-highway vehicle, a headlight that emits a white
light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a tail
lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100') to
the rear, brake lights and turn signals. All non-highway vehicles shall have
their headlights and tail lamps illuminated when driven or operated upon a
roadway in the City of Watseka as required by Section 12-201 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-5: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
Any person who operates a non-highway vehicle on a roadway shall be subject to
the mandatory insurance requirements under Article VI of Chapter 7 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-6: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a non-highway
vehicle upon any roadway in the City of Watseka that is not registered with the
Watseka Police Department, or that does not have displayed conspicuously on the
rear of said non-highway vehicle, a corresponding current registration number
placard/sticker.
   B.   Commencing August 1, 2023, and annually thereafter each January 1, all
owners of non-highway vehicles shall apply to register their non-highway
vehicles with the Watseka Police Department by fully and truthfully completing
a non-highway vehicle registration application. In order to be registered, the
non-highway vehicle shall be subject to inspection by the Watseka Police
Department and must comply with the condition requirements of Section
8-9-4 of this chapter, and the owner of a non-highway vehicle must show proof
of compliance with the mandatory insurance requirements of Section
8-9-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Non-highway vehicle registration, and the corresponding placard/
sticker, shall be valid for a period of one year, from January 1 through
December 31 of each calendar year.
   D.   Commencing June 1, 2023, a nonrefundable registration fee of twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the owner at the time of application for
registration. Renewal registrations and nonrefundable fees are due January 1
each year and will be considered late after June 1 of each year. Late renewals
shall have an additional nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
added to the original twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee, for a total of fifty
dollars ($50.00) due at the time of registration.
   E.   Registration shall be subject to revocation in the event the Watseka
Police Department determines the applicable insurance policy for the non-
highway vehicle has been revoked, has lapsed or is otherwise invalid.
   F.   All owners of non-highway vehicles registered with the Watseka Police
Department will be issued a corresponding registration number placard/sticker,
which shall be affixed and remain conspicuously visible on the rear of said
non-highway vehicle.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-7: CAPACITY LIMITATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a non-highway vehicle
upon any roadway within the City of Watseka while transporting or carrying more
occupants than the non-highway vehicle is designed to transport or carry as
determined by the number of permanent individual seats provided in the non-
highway vehicle.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-8: ATTACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a non-highway vehicle
upon any roadway within the City of Watseka while having attached thereto any
trailer, side car, cab, tram, shuttle, or pull-behind of any nature.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
8-9-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found to have violated
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
   B.   Any person operating a non-highway vehicle upon a roadway in the City
of Watseka that is not registered or has expired registration shall be fined
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
   C.   Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue constitutes a
new and separate violation.
(Ord. 2685, 6-27-2023)
CHAPTER 10: ABANDONED, HAZARDOUS AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
8-10-1: Definitions
8-10-2: Nuisance; Violations
8-10-3: Penalty
8-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases set forth in this chapter shall be defined as set forth
in Article 10A of this chapter.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10-2: NUISANCE; VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared a nuisance:
   A.   For an operator of a motor vehicle to leave said vehicle on a public
way so as to constitute an abandoned vehicle;
   B.   For an operator of a motor vehicle to leave said vehicle on a public
way so as to constitute a hazardous motor vehicle;
   C.   For an operator of a motor vehicle to leave any motor vehicle on
private property so as to constitute an inoperable motor vehicle; or
   D.   For an owner of a motor vehicle to permit said vehicle to become an
abandoned vehicle, hazardous motor vehicle or inoperable motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10-3: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Each day that said violation continues shall be
considered to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
ARTICLE A: RELOCATION OF VEHICLES
Section
8-10A-1: Definitions
8-10A-2: Immediate Relocation Of Motor Vehicles
8-10A-3: Relocation Of Other Vehicles
8-10A-4: Inoperable Motor Vehicles
8-10A-5: Pre-Relocation Notice Contents And Service
8-10A-6: Pre-Relocation Hearing Procedures
8-10A-7: Post-Relocation Hearing Procedures
8-10A-8: Release Procedures
8-10A-9: Administrative Review
8-10A-10: Unclaimed Vehicles
8-10A-11: Exceptions
8-10A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it
in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which has been left unattended on a public
way for a period of at least ten (10) hours in a state of disrepair rendering
it inoperable or capable of being driven in its condition; any motor vehicle
which has been left unattended on a public way without state registration
plates or a temporary state registration placard for two (2) or more days; or
any motor vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive
days or more and is apparently deserted.
APPARENTLY DESERTED: A motor vehicle whose appearance is indicative of its
possession being disclaimed; a motor vehicle being found or parked in an area
or location which is not within a one mile of its owner’s residence; or a motor
vehicle found in a condition which is not indicative a reasonable degree of
care for the well-being of the motor vehicle or its contents.
EXPEDITIOUS REPAIR: The parts for repair have been ordered but are not yet
available for installation for reasons beyond the owner’s control; the repairs
to the motor vehicle shall be completed within thirty (30) days, or the motor
vehicle is inoperable because of a recent accident and the owner is scheduled
or intends to schedule the motor vehicle’s repair and the motor vehicle will be
relocated off-premises for such repairs within thirty (30) days.
HAZARDOUS MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle located on a public way which by its
condition or location constitutes a clear and present danger to the safety of
the public or an obstruction to the normal flow of traffic or which has been
involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the
owner of the vehicle.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle located on private property and in
public view for at least fourteen (14) days which cannot be driven safely or
legally due to the removal of the engine, wheels or other parts. INOPERABLE
MOTOR VEHICLE shall not mean a vehicle that is temporarily inoperable because
repairs are under way provided that the repairs are completed within fourteen
(14) days. A motor vehicle that has not moved for fourteen (14) consecutive
days that is covered with a cover or tarp, or which is not displaying current
and valid registration plates and registration stickers, or the license plates
for the motor vehicle are registered to someone other than an occupant of the
real property on which it is located, shall be presumed to be an inoperable
motor vehicle.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal title to the motor vehicle or a person
legally entitled to possess a motor vehicle as identified from the registration
files of the Illinois Secretary of State or other similar agency if registered
outside the State of Illinois.
PUBLIC WAY: Any public street or thoroughfare in the City.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-2: IMMEDIATE RELOCATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
   A.   Members of the Police Department are authorized to cause the immediate
removal of a motor vehicle from any public way under the following
circumstances:
      1.   When a vehicle qualifies as a hazardous motor vehicle;
      2.   When an unattended vehicle is parked illegally in an officially
designated and marked “low zone”;
      3.   When an unattended vehicle is parked illegally in an area designated
for handicapped users;
      4.   When the location of a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
emergency snow removal or street or sewer maintenance;
      5.   When a vehicle is in violation of any provision of the Illinois
Vehicle Code and said code authorizes or requires (see 625 ILCS 5/6-101 and 625
ILCS 5/4-203) the immediate towing and impoundment for that violation;
      6.   When a vehicle is reported as being stolen;
      7.   When a vehicle is subject to immediate relocation or removal under
the Criminal Code of 2012;
      8.   When an officer believes immediate relocation is necessary in the
performance of community caretaking functions such as the protection of the
vehicle from damage or theft; or
      9.   When towing or removal is necessary as an incident to an arrest.
   B.   Members of the Police Department, when practical, should attempt to
notify the owner by telephone, or through other means, in order to allow the
person the opportunity to request a preliminary hearing or to claim or remove
the vehicle so as to avoid the expenses associated with a police ordered
relocation.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-3: RELOCATION OF OTHER VEHICLES:
Members of the Police Department are authorized to cause the removal of all
other motor vehicles from a public way under the following circumstances:
   A.   When a vehicle qualifies as an abandoned vehicle;
   B.   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any ordinance of the City or
any State law prohibiting the parking, standing or stopping in certain places
for a period of at least twenty four (24) hours but is not located in a
designated “tow-zone,” handicapped area, or does not otherwise qualify as being
abandoned or hazardous; or
   C.   When the location of a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to snow
removal, street cleaning, or street or sewer maintenance, or another planned
event, and notice of such activities was posted in the vicinity for a period of
at least forty eight (48) hours ahead of the relocation.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-4: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
Members of the Police Department are authorized to cause the removal of
inoperable motor vehicles from private property provided pre-relocation notices
and the opportunity to request a pre-location hearing has been provided. Pre-
relocation hearings attending the removal of inoperable motor vehicles from
private property shall be afforded in accordance with the procedures set forth
in section
8-10A-6 of this article. Provided, however, an owner of an inoperable vehicle
shall have seven (7) days after the delivery of a pre-relocation notice by
letter to request a hearing. A request for hearing stays the relocation of the
vehicle pending the hearing and decision. At the hearing, if a vehicle is
determined to be inoperable, an owner may request an extension of time for the
vehicle’s relocation to a date not beyond thirty (30) days. Said extension
shall be granted upon a showing that the vehicle is being held for sale or
expeditious repair. After the hearing, a date shall be set by which the vehicle
shall be disposed of or enclosed. All requests or findings attending an
extension shall be documented in the Chief of Police’s or other supervising
officer’s written decision. In the event the vehicle is not disposed of or
enclosed by the date identified, the vehicle shall be relocated without further
prior notice or hearing assuming the circumstances have not changed warranting
an additional hearing. All owners of inoperable vehicles which are relocated
from private property shall be afforded process as specified in section
8-10A-7 of this article. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to create
a duty on behalf of the City to give prior notice and a hearing to an owner of
an inoperable motor vehicle before its relocation from private property if the
vehicle poses an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
public due to its location or condition.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-5: PRE-RELOCATION NOTICE CONTENTS AND SERVICE:
When a vehicle is subject to relocation for being parked illegally, abandoned,
or being inoperable, the following pre-relocation notices, shall be provided:
   A.   Sticker: A pre-relocation notice in the form of a sticker shall be
entitled “Notice of Intent to Tow,” and shall be affixed to a window of the
vehicle which is proposed to be relocated. The sticker shall contain the date
and time of posting, the date and time at which the vehicle will be relocated,
the basis for the proposed relocation, the phone number of the Police
Department, and the owner’s opportunity to request a preliminary hearing.
   B.   Letter: A pre-location notice in the form of a letter shall be
delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the
owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the
Secretary of State. The notice shall advise the owner of the location of the
vehicle, the basis for the proposed relocation, the date and time at which the
vehicle will be relocated, the opportunity and manner in which a preliminary
hearing may be requested, and the location of the relocation facility operator
where the vehicle will be held if relocated.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-6: PRE-RELOCATION HEARING PROCEDURES:
An owner of a vehicle to be relocated pursuant to this article shall have the
right to request a preliminary hearing before the date and time identified for
the relocation of the vehicle or, if the vehicle has already been relocated,
within seven (7) business days after any notice was post-marked.
   A.   Request For Hearing: The owner may make a request for a pre-relocation
hearing to the Police Department in person, in writing, or by telephone. The
Chief of Police or any supervising officer must conduct a hearing within
twenty-four (24) hours after the request for a hearing is received. Provided,
however, if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the pre-relocation hearing may be held on the next business day
following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. Notice of the date, time and
location of the pre-relocation hearing shall be provided to the owner. If a
request for a pre-relocation hearing is received by the City before the date
and time at which the vehicle was proposed to be relocated, the vehicle shall
not be relocated until a hearing and a decision is rendered by the Chief of
Police or other supervising officer. Nothing herein shall deprive an owner of a
post-tow hearing or the right to contest the vehicle's eligibility for
relocation during that proceeding.
   B.   Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to
pre-relocation hearings:
      1.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the pre-relocation hearing.
      2.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
      3.   The Chief of Police or supervising officer’s decision shall be based
upon the preponderance of evidence.
      4.   No Chief of Police or supervising officer shall preside over a
hearing regarding the relocation of a vehicle if he/she played a part in the
decision to designate or authorized the designation of that vehicle as being
eligible for relocation.
      5.   If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief of Police or
supervising officer determines that the vehicle is not eligible for relocation
under this article, an oral and written decision shall be issued and the
vehicle shall not be relocated. If the vehicle has already been relocated, the
Chief of Police or supervising officer shall issue a release and no charge
order to the owner which shall be brought to the relocation service facility.
The relocation facility operator shall release the vehicle immediately at no
expense to the owner. If the vehicle has already been released to the owner,
the Chief of Police or other supervising officer shall issue a refund order
requiring the relocation facility operator to refund any monies previously paid
by the owner for the vehicle’s release. A written decision of the Chief of
Police’s or supervising officer’s determination shall be sent to the owner by
first-class mail no later than three (3) business days following the hearing.
      6.   If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief of Police or
supervising officer determines that the vehicle is/was eligible for relocation,
he shall orally transmit his decision to the owner. A written decision shall
also be issued to the owner by first-class mail no later than three (3)
business days following the hearing. The owner shall be provided with a
reasonable period of time after the decision to relocate the vehicle at his own
expense. In the event the owner does not relocate the vehicle, the Chief of
Police or supervising officer shall order the vehicle’s relocation.
      7.   No vehicle shall be relocated prior to the date and time of
relocation identified in the pre-tow notice.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-7: POST-RELOCATION HEARING PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall apply to post-relocation hearings:
   A.   Notice Of Hearing: Within twenty-four (24) hours after a vehicle is
relocated pursuant to this article, the City shall notify the owner of record
of the motor vehicle of such relocation, the location of the relocation
facility at which the vehicle is being held, instructions on how to obtain a
release of the vehicle, the ability to request a post-relocation hearing, and
the date, time and location of the post-relocation hearing where the owner may
contest the validity of the relocation. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on
the records of the Secretary of State.
   B.   Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to the
owners hearing:
      1.   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall
be held within forty-five (45) days after the motor vehicle was seized.
      2.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing.
      3.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
      4.   The hearing officer’s decision shall be based upon the preponderance
of evidence.
      5.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines that the vehicle was not eligible for relocation under this article,
he shall issue a release and no charge order to the owner which shall be
brought to the relocation service facility. The relocation facility operator
shall release the vehicle immediately at no expense to the owner. If the
vehicle has already been released to the owner, the hearing officer shall issue
a refund order requiring the relocation facility operator to refund any monies
previously paid by the owner for the vehicle’s release, A written decision of
the hearing officer’s determination shall be sent to the owner by first-class
mail no later than three (3) business days following the hearing.
      6.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines that the vehicle was properly relocated under the provisions of this
article, he shall issue a written determination of his findings to the owner.
The hearing officer’s decision shall be sent by first-class mail no later than
three (3) business days following the hearing.
   C.   Other Process: When a person is issued a citation and he will be
afforded the opportunity to contest or challenge the propriety of a vehicle
relocation at an administrative hearing, the procedures established by the code
provisions governing the citation shall apply.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-8: RELEASE PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall apply for the release of relocated vehicles:
   A.   Unless a vehicle is held pursuant to applicable state, federal or any
other law, or a court order or warrant that authorizes the continued
impoundment of the vehicle, the owner of a vehicle relocated under this article
may obtain the immediate release of the vehicle by paying the full amount of
all applicable towing and storage fees charged by the relocation facility
operator. Obtaining an immediate release of the vehicle through full payment
shall not affect an owner’s right to contest the relocation.
   B.   No vehicle shall be released to an owner by the relocation facility
operator before the City issues a release order. A release order may be
obtained from the Police Department upon a finding that there is no other
reason to delay the immediate release of the vehicle.
   C.   No person shall be permitted to remove a relocated vehicle from the
custody of the relocation facility operator unless he has furnished evidence of
his identity and the right to possession of the vehicle and sign a receipt for
the vehicle.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-9: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The final decision of the hearing officer in a post-relocation hearing shall be
subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as is set forth in
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-10: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
Vehicles which have been relocated and which remain unclaimed by the owner
shall be disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
8-10A-11: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any vehicle parked in a
garage.
(Ord. 2550, 10-22-2019)
CHAPTER 11: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
8-11-1: Enforcement Of Provisions
8-11-2: Directing Traffic; Obedience Required
8-11-3: Traffic Violation Tickets
8-11-4: Penalty
8-11-1: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
The Police Department is hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered to exercise
all powers and duties with relation to the management of street traffic and to
direct, control and stop, restrict and regulate, and when necessary,
temporarily divert or exclude, in the interest of public safety, health and
convenience, the movement of pedestrians and animal and vehicular traffic of
every kind in the City.
(1980 Code § 46-2)
8-11-2: DIRECTING TRAFFIC; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Members of the Police Department, and auxiliary police assigned to
traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience
may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer. Except
in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law
to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
(1980 Code § 46-4)
   B.   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated
by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to
an emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in
the absence of or in assisting the police.
(1980 Code § 46-5)
8-11-3: TRAFFIC VIOLATION TICKETS:
For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving, police
officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle (and name of
the offender where possible), may issue a traffic violation ticket notifying
the offender to appear in Court at the time designated for hearing such cases.
(1980 Code § 46-286)
8-11-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title
for which no penalty has been provided shall, upon conviction, be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 46-289)
ARTICLE A: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF STANDING, PARKING AND VEHICLE
COMPLIANCE VIOLATIONS
Section
8-11A-1: Purpose
8-11A-2: Regulations Adopted
8-11A-3: Definitions
8-11A-4: Administrative Composition
8-11A-5: Violation Notices
8-11A-6: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties
8-11A-7: Administrative Hearings
8-11A-8: Additional Notices
8-11A-9: Final Determination Of Liability; Petition To Set Aside
8-11A-10: Vehicle Immobilization Program
8-11A-11: Judicial Review
8-11A-12: Debt To City
8-11A-13: Judgments
8-11A-14: Additional Means Of Enforcement
8-11A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient method of
enforcement of certain Municipal regulations through the administrative
adjudication of violations of Municipal ordinances regulating the standing,
parking, or compliance of vehicles (“vehicular regulation violations”), to
provide a schedule of uniform fines and penalties, and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-2: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted a system of administrative adjudication of vehicular
regulation violations.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
PARKING VIOLATION: A violation of those traffic regulations concerning the
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in this title.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-4: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
   A.   Composition Of System:
      1.   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular regulation
violations shall be composed of a Traffic Compliance Administrator, Hearing
Officer, Computer Operator/System Coordinator, and hearing room personnel, and
each of them shall possess the powers and authority set out in this section.
      2.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator, Hearing Officer, System
Coordinator, and hearing room personnel shall be those individuals assigned or
appointed as the Administrator, Hearing Officer, System Coordinator, and
hearing room personnel under title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code.
   B.   Traffic Compliance Administrator: The Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular regulation violations;
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process violation notices and/or other notices
as may be required under this article or as may be reasonably required to carry
out the purpose of this article;
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
determination of violation liability;
      4.   Certify copies of final determinations of liability and factual
reports verifying that final determinations of liability were issued in
accordance with this article;
      5.   Certify reports to the Illinois Secretary of State;
      6.   Certify the eligibility for immobilization or towing of any motor
vehicle whose owner has accumulated ten (10) or more unpaid determinations of
liability under this article;
      7.   Review determinations of violation liability, or the validity of
notices of impending driver's license suspension, in an administrative review
capacity;
      8.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created; and
      9.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
Circuit Court, or by selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of the City in filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or
penalties, and pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under the law.
   C.   Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
      1.   Preside over the administrative hearings as the adjudicator;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documentation;
      4.   Assess fines and penalties;
      5.   Make determinations of liability and the validity of notices of
impending driver's license suspensions;
      6.   Provide for the accurate recording of hearings; and
      7.   Issue certified notices for the immobilization or towing of vehicles
whose owners have received ten (10) or more unpaid determinations of liability
under this article.
   D.   System Coordinator: The System Coordinator shall be empowered and is
hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs
for the administrative adjudication system, on a day-to-day basis, including,
but not limited to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information;
      2.   Input of hearing dates and notice dates;
      3.   Input of fine and penalty assessments and payments;
      4.   Issue payment receipts;
      5.   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability or notices of impending driver's license
suspensions, as directed by the Traffic Compliance Administrator in accordance
with the provisions hereinafter set forth;
      6.   Issue certified notices to the Illinois Secretary of State and Chief
of Police regarding persons who have received ten (10) or more final
determinations of liability which remain unpaid; and
      7.   Maintain accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, and fines and penalties assessed and
paid.
   E.   Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel shall be empowered and
are hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum;
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the Circuit Court; and
      3.   Perform such other duties and acts as may be reasonably required as
directed by the Hearing Officer or Traffic Compliance Administrator.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-5: VIOLATION NOTICES:
Citations (“violation notices”) administered through the administrative
adjudication system shall be issued, served, and certified in accordance with
the following provisions:
   A.   Authorization: All full-time and part-time police officers, as well as
any other person authorized under this Code to issue citations for violations
of the vehicular regulations, shall have the authority to issue violation
notices.
   B.   Contents: Violation notices shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance);
      2.   The particular vehicular regulation violated;
      3.   Vehicle make and State registration number;
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment;
      5.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice;
      6.   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits;
      7.   That the payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition; and
      8.   A section entitled, “Request for Hearing-Nonappearance”, which
clearly identifies options for nonresidents to contest the violation notice
without appearing at the administrative hearing.
   C.   Service: Service of violation notices shall be made by the person
issuing such notice by affixing the original or a facsimile thereof to the
vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a vehicle if he or she is
present.
   D.   Certification: The correctness of the facts contained in the violation
notice shall be verified by the person issuing the violation notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the violation notice at the time of
issuance; or
      2.   In the case of a violation notice produced by a computer device, by
signing a single certificate, to be maintained by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all violation notices produced
by the device while under his/her control.
   E.   Business Records: The original or complete copy of the violation notice
shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept in
accordance with the ordinary course of business.
   F.   Prima Facie Evidence: Any violation notice, or complete copy thereof,
shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown thereon.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-6: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
The fines and penalties that shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular
regulations administered under this article shall be as follows:
   A.   General Fine Schedule: Notwithstanding any other provisions to the
contrary in this Code, for violations of any Code provision regulating,
restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the
streets, byways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other locations as
may be controlled by off-street parking agreements, located within the
geographical boundaries of the City, including parking for persons with
disabilities, for violations regarding the use or condition of vehicular
equipment and for violations regarding municipal vehicle stickers, the fines
shall be as follows:
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017; amd. 2019 Code)
 
                                                                                       General
                                                                                       Fine
                                                                                       Amount
Step Upon service of a “violation notice” issued and paid prior to or on the first $50.00
1    hearing date, the fine owed shall be:
Step Upon failure to pay the fine amounts specified in step 1 prior to or on the first
2    hearing date, the fine amount, if paid prior to or on the second hearing date,    100.00
     shall be:
Step Upon failure to pay the fine amount specified in step 2 prior to or on the second 150.00
3    hearing date, the fine amount, if paid, shall be:
Step Upon failure to pay the fine amount specified in step 3 within 30 days after the  250.00
4    second hearing date, the fine amount shall be:
 
   B.   Waiver: Except for those violations referenced in subsection E of this
section, a person may waive a hearing by paying the fine amount specified in
step 1 on or before the hearing date identified on the violation notice.
   C.   Nonappearance: As a courtesy to an individual who files a timely
“Request for Hearing - Nonappearance”, the fine amount shall be frozen at the
amount specified in step 1 until five (5) days after a notice of determination
has been mailed to the violator.
   D.   Uniformity: The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly
applied to each violation of any Code provision regulating, restricting, or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles, the use or condition of
vehicular equipment, and the requirement for display of a Municipal vehicle
sticker presently in effect or hereafter adopted.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
   E.   Violations Regarding Persons With Disabilities: Notwithstanding
subsections A through D of this section, any person found to be in violation of
subsection
8-4-7B2 of this title or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-1301.3(a)
shall be subject to a fine of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) if a sign
is displayed indicating that the fine imposed shall be three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for violation. If a sign is not displayed indicating that the
fine is three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), the fine shall be as posted or,
if no fine is posted, the fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-1) or similar provision of this Code shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) for the first offense and one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a second or subsequent offense.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-7: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate vehicular regulation
violations on their merits in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Time, Date And Location: The time, date, and location of any
administrative hearing shall be as set forth on a violation notice.
   B.   Waiver: Certain violation notices may be issued that allow the
recipient to pay a fine prior to, and thus obviating the need for, a hearing.
If the recipient fails to pay the required fine within the allotted time, the
violation notice will be processed through the administrative adjudication
system.
   C.   Tape Recording: Administrative hearings shall be tape recorded.
   D.   Hearing Rights: Persons appearing to contest an alleged violation may
be represented by counsel of their own choice at their own expense. Any written
notarized statement of facts timely submitted by a person filing a “Request for
Hearing-Nonappearance” shall be given the same weight as in-person testimony.
   E.   Nonappearance Of Nonresidents: Individuals that are served with a
violation notice that are not residents of the City may contest the merits
thereof without personally appearing at an administrative hearing. The person
cited shall complete and sign the “Request for Hearing - Nonappearance” section
of the violation notice acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is
waived, and file the same with the Traffic Compliance Officer no later than ten
(10) days after the date of issuance of the violation notice, along with a
notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the
violation notice. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be served by first class
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the address set forth in the statement of
facts. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed
in the United States mail.
   F.   Evidentiary Standard: The formal and technical rules of evidence do not
apply. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted if it is of the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs. City police reports, inspection reports and records of the State and
other governmental agencies shall be admissible in evidence.
   G.   Determinations: Hearings shall result in a determination of liability
or nonliability after consideration of the facts and/or testimony. The Hearing
Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in
accordance with this article. A determination shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-8: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
The following additional notices shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid, at the times and in the manner hereinafter prescribed:
   A.   Second Notice: Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee to appear
at the administrative hearing indicated on the violation notice, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall send or cause to be sent a second notice
containing the following information:
      1.   The date, time, and place of the violation (date of issuance);
      2.   The particular vehicular regulation violated;
      3.   Vehicle make and State registration number;
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment;
      5.   The date, time, and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits;
      6.   A statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date, time,
and place specified will result in a determination of liability for the
violation in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated; and
      7.   A statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City.
   B.   Notice Of Final Determination: A notice of final determination of
liability shall be sent following a determination of liability and the
conclusion of judicial review. The notice shall include the following
information:
      1.   A statement that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owed
to the City; and
      2.   A warning that a failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
the City may result in the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court of the
21st Judicial Circuit, Iroquois County, to have any unpaid fine or penalty
rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of the person’s driver’s
license or the immobilization or towing of vehicles for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten (10) or more violations.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-9: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY; PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
   A.   Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of liability
shall occur upon the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the Hearing
Officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of or failure to
exhaust administrative review, or where a person fails to appear at a hearing
to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified, the Hearing
Officer's determination shall become final upon the denial of a timely petition
to set aside a determination, or upon the expiration of the period for filing
the petition without a filing having been made.
   B.   Petition To Set Aside:
      1.   Time And Manner Of Filing: A petition to set aside a determination
of liability must be filed or mailed to the Traffic Compliance Administrator
within ten (10) days of the Hearing Officer's determination of liability.
      2.   Grounds: The grounds for granting a petition to set aside a
determination of liability are limited to:
         a.   The person was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date
the violation occurred;
         b.   The person has paid the fine or penalty for the violation in
question; or
         c.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.
      3.   Review And Decision: Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside
a determination of liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall review
the petition to determine if sufficient cause has been shown to set aside the
determination of liability. If cause has been shown, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall forward to the petitioner a new hearing date on which the
petitioner must appear to present his/her case on the underlying violation. The
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the petitioner of his/her
decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen (14) days of
his/her receipt of the petition.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-10: VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM:
   A.   Grounds For Immobilization: Any motor vehicle whose registered owner
has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more vehicular regulation
violations, for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid, may be immobilized
or impounded if:
      1.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator has determined that a person is
liable for ten (10) or more vehicular regulation violations, the fines or
penalties for which remain unpaid.
      2.   The person determined to be liable for ten (10) or more vehicular
regulation violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within
the City’s geographical boundaries.
      3.   a. A notice of impending vehicle immobilization/impoundment, and
right to challenge the validity of said notice by disproving liability for the
unpaid final determination of liability has been sent to the registered owner
of the motor vehicle containing the following information:
            (1)   A final determination has been made on ten (10) or more
vehicular regulation violations, the fines and penalties of which remain
unpaid.
            (2)   A listing of the vehicular regulation violations for which
the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each
violation:
               (A)   The vehicular regulation violation notice number;
               (B)   Date of issuance; and
               (C)   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
            (3)   Any motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located within
the City is subject to immobilization and/or impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice.
         b.   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
fully completing, signing, and filing the request for hearing portion of the
notice with the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not later than,
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. The request for hearing shall be
deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
      4.   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the
notice, and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
   B.   Administrative Hearing:
      1.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the notice of impending immobilization or impoundment, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest
the validity of said notice by disproving liability for the unpaid final
determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability listed
on the notice on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall the
hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing
is filed. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date on the registered owner by first class mail, postage prepaid.
Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United
States mail.
      2.   A registered owner of the vehicle(s) immobilized or impounded under
this section shall have the right to an administrative hearing to be held at
the next regularly scheduled administrative court date without the requirement
of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for which final determination has
been made, as follows:
         a.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve a post-
immobilization and post- impoundment notice upon the registered owner of a
vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded under this section, which notice
shall advise the registered owner of the vehicle of the right to a hearing to
challenge the validity of the immobilization or impoundment and which shall
contain the following information:
            (1)   Date of immobilization or impoundment;
            (2)   Location of vehicle;
            (3)   That the vehicle was immobilized or towed for nonpayment of
fines or penalties assessed for the violation of ten (10) or more violations of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation(s) for which the
registered owner has been determined liable and notified of impending
immobilization or impoundment;
            (4)   The date that the notice of impending immobilization or
impoundment was issued; and
            (5)   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or impoundment by completing and signing the request for hearing
portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days of the
date of the notice. Said request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator.
         b.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the
validity of the immobilization or impoundment, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or impoundment on the next available hearing date or
sooner if scheduled by the Traffic Compliance Administrator for good cause
shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days
after the request for hearing is filed, as follows:
            (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of
the hearing date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage
prepaid; and
            (2)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is
placed in the United States mail.
         c.   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or impoundment is a final administrative decision within the
meaning of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein
by reference.
   C.   Release Of Immobilized Or Impounded Vehicle: A vehicle immobilized or
impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to the registered owner
thereof, or his or her agent, upon payment of the fines and penalties due and
owing the Municipality as specified in the notice sent in accordance with
subsection A3 of this section, and upon payment of a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for the installation and removal of an immobilization device, if any,
and upon payment of towing charges and accrued daily impound charges, if any,
or upon order of the Hearing Officer following the hearing contesting the
validity of the impoundment.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Review of final determinations issued by the Hearing Officer shall be subject
to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as is set forth in 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. The City shall have the right to
appeal a determination, regardless of whether the violation notice in question
was formally prosecuted with the presence of an attorney representing the City.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-12: DEBT TO CITY:
Any fine or penalty, or part thereof, assessed following a final determination
of liability that remains unpaid shall be a debt due and owing the City and, as
such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Payment in full of
any fine or penalty resulting from a violation under this article shall
constitute a final disposition of that violation.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-13: JUDGMENTS:
   A.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall, following the expiration of
the period within which administrative and judicial review may be sought for a
determination of vehicular regulation violation liability take all necessary
actions, execute all required documents and appoint or retain any individual or
agency deemed appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect monies from
the person(s) who has been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid, and
have become a debt due and owing the City.
   B.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator is authorized to file a complaint
in the Circuit Court praying for the entry of a judgment against the person for
whom a final determination of vehicular regulation violation liability has been
made. The complaint filed by the Traffic Compliance Administrator or individual
or agency on behalf of the City, seeking entry of a judgment against an
individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final determination
of vehicular regulation violation liability, shall have attached to it:
      1.   A certified copy of determination of vehicular violation liability;
and
      2.   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final
determination of vehicular regulation violation liability was issued in
accordance with this Code. Nothing shall prevent the City from consolidating
multiple final determinations of vehicular regulation violation liability in an
action in the Circuit Court against an individual. The summons and a copy of
the complaint may be served upon the person against whom a judgment is sought
under the provisions of this Code by any method provided under State Statute;
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total amount of
fines and penalties for final determination of vehicular regulation violation
liability does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      3.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator is authorized to pursue all
available remedies authorized by the law to collect monetary judgments.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
8-11A-14: ADDITIONAL MEANS OF ENFORCEMENT:
The City reserves the right to employ all other means and methods available
under the law to enforce this Code, including direct application to the courts.
(Ord. 2487, 10-24-2017)
CHAPTER 12: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
8-12-1: Definitions
8-12-2: Violation
8-12-3: Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles
8-12-4: Bond
8-12-5: Preliminary Hearing On Impoundment
8-12-6: Final Hearing
8-12-7: Unclaimed Vehicles
8-12-8: Liability For Penalty And Costs
8-12-9: Possessory Rights Of Impounded Vehicles
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases used in this Article shall be defined as herein
provided unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT: Any violation as defined in §12-2 of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/12-2), as amended from time to time.
AGGRAVATED BATTERY: Any violation as defined in §12-3.05 of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/12-3.05), as amended from time to time.
ARSON: Any violation as defined in the following sections of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012, as amended from time to time: “Arson” (720 ILCS 5/20-1);
or “Aggravated Arson” (720 ILCS 5/20-1.1).
BURGLARY: Any violation as defined in the following sections of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012, as amended from time to time: “Burglary” (720 ILCS 5/19-
1); or “Residential Burglary” (720 ILCS 5/19-3).
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES VIOLATION: Except as otherwise authorized by law
including, but not limited to, the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot program Act, a violation of one or
more of the following statutes of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act or the
Illinois Cannabis Control Act: “Manufacture or Delivery of a Controlled
Substance” (720 ILCS 570/401); “Controlled Substance Trafficking” (720 ILCS
570/401.1); “Possession of a Controlled Substance” (720 ILCS 570/402);
“Possession of More than 10 Grams of Any Substance Containing Cannabis” (720
ILCS 550/4); “Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis” (720 ILCS 550/5); “Cannabis
Trafficking” (720 ILCS 550/5.1); “Delivery of Cannabis on School Grounds” (720
ILCS 550/5.2); or “Unauthorized Production or Possession of Cannabis Sativa
Plant” (720 ILCS 550/8).
DRAG RACING: A violation as defined in §11-506 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/1 1-506), as amended from time to time.
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Any violation as defined in §11-501 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501), as amended from time to time.
DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE IS
SUSPENDED OR REVOKED: Any violation as defined in § 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625  ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to time, except for
suspensions resulting solely from violations of vehicle emission requirements.
DRIVING WITHOUT A VALID DRIVERS LICENSE: A violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-101), as amended from time to time, where the
driver’s license or driving privileges have never been obtained, or previously
have been obtained and have been expired for not less than six (6) months.
FLEEING AND ELUDING A PEACE OFFICER: Any violation as defined in § 11-204 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-204), as amended from time to time.
HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney who is not an officer or employee of the
City.
INDECENT SOLICITATION OF A CHILD: Any violation as defined in § 11-6 of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/11-6), as amended from time to time.
INSURANCE VIOLATION: A violation of one or more of the following statutes of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended: “Required Liability Insurance Policy”
(625 ILCS 5/7-601); or “Insurance Card” (625 ILCS 5/7-602).
MOB ACTION: Any violation as defined in § 25-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of
2012 (720 ILCS 5/25-1), as amended from time to time.
OWNER:  The record titleholder to a motor vehicle.
POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Except as otherwise authorized by law
including, but not limited to, the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, any violation as
defined in § 3.5 of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/
3.5), as amended from time to time.
POSSESSION OF EXPLOSIVES OR EXPLOSIVE OR INCENDIARY DEVICES: Any violation as
defined in § 20-2 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/20-2), as
amended from time to time.
PROSTITUTION VIOLATION: A violation of one or more of the following statutes of
the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, as amended: “Prostitution” (720 ILCS 5/11-
14); “Solicitation of a Sexual Act” (720 ILCS 5/11-14.1); or “Patronizing a
Minor Engaged in Prostitution” (720 ILCS 5/11-18.1).
RETAIL THEFT: Any violation as defined in §16-25 of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/16-25), as amended from time to time.
ROBBERY: A violation of one or more of the following statutes of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012, as amended: “Robbery” (720 ILCS 5/18-1); or “Armed
Robbery” (720 ILCS 5/18-2).
VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle.
WEAPONS VIOLATION: A violation of one or more of the following statutes of the
Illinois Criminal’‘Code of 2012, as amended: “Unlawful Use of Weapons” (720
ILCS 5/24-1); “Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition” (720
ILCS 5/24-3.1); or, “Unlawful Sale or Delivery of Firearms on the Premises of
any School” (720 ILCS 5/24-3.3).
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-2: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be used in conjunction or association
with any of the following offenses:
   A.   Aggravated Assault;
   B.   Aggravated Battery;
   C.   Any Arson;
   D.   Any Burglary;
   E.   Any Controlled Substance Violation;
   F.   Drag Racing;
   G.    Driving Under the Influence;
   H.   Driving While License, Permit or Privilege to Operate a Motor Vehicle
is Suspended or Revoked;
   I.   Driving without a Valid Driver’s License;
   J.   Fleeing and Eluding a Peace Officer;
   K.   Indecent Solicitation of a Child;
   L.   Mob Action;
   M.   Possession of Drug Paraphernalia;
   N.   Possession of Explosives or Explosive or Incendiary Devices;
   O.   Any Prostitution Violation;
   P.   Retail Theft;
   Q.   Any Insurance Violation;
   R.   Any Robbery; and,
   S.   Any Weapons Violation.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-3: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle has been
used in violation of Section
8-12-2, he shall cause the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle to a facility
controlled by the City or its agents. No vehicle shall be seized and impounded
under this section unless the police officer determines that such action is
necessary and reasonable under the circumstances including, but not limited to,
community caretaking functions. If the vehicle is capable of being removed from
the scene by an individual who is present on the scene (not otherwise to be
taken into custody), and who has permission from the owner of the vehicle to
drive the vehicle, and the individual is otherwise capable of lawfully
operating a motor vehicle in the State of Illinois, the police officer shall
allow that individual to remove the vehicle without the same being subject to
seizure and impoundment. Similarly, if the vehicle is parked legally, and/or
will not present a hazard to the public safety or otherwise jeopardize the
efficient movement of vehicular traffic at its location, the officer shall
permit the vehicle to remain at its location without being seized and impounded
pursuant to this subsection. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to prevent a
police officer from seizing and impounding a vehicle when necessary for
investigative purposes or when otherwise authorized pursuant to some other
lawful purpose.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-4: BOND:
Any vehicle seized and impounded under Section
8-12-3 shall be held as bond to secure the personal appearance of the owner at
the administrative hearing. If a cash bond in the amount of Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) is posted with the City, the impounded vehicle will be
released to the owner, upon the payment by the owner of the towing and storage
costs. If a penalty is imposed for a violation of this Section
8-12-2, the cash bond will be forfeited to the City to satisfy such penalty;
provided, in the event that a violation of Section
8-12-2 is not proven, the bond will be returned to the owner. Any form of bond
posted pursuant to this section will be held by the City until the hearing
officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until a reviewing
court issues a final decision. No bond shall be required to be posted in the
event a vehicle is not seized and impounded.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING ON IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a vehicle is seized and impounded, the police officer shall notify the
person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle, or any
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing within
twelve (12) hours of the seizure. If the owner of a vehicle seized under the
provisions of this section timely requests a preliminary hearing, the Watch
Commander or any supervising officer must conduct a preliminary hearing within
twenty-four (24) hours after the request for the preliminary hearing is
received by the ‘City; provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the
next business day following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. No
preliminary hearing shall be required or granted to an owner whose vehicle was
not seized and impounded. For purposes of this section, the following shall
apply:
   A.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to he
heard at the preliminary hearing.
   B.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay
testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
   C.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Watch Commander or
supervising officer determines that there was probable cause to believe that
the vehicle was being used in violation of Section
8-12-2, and further determines that the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle
was proper under Section
8-12-3, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the
owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the City in the amount of Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Posting of the bond shall not relieve the owner from
paying any applicable towing and storage costs associated with the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle.
   D.   If the Watch Commander or supervising officer determines that there was
no probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in violation of Section
8-12-2, or otherwise determines that the vehicle should not have been seized
and impounded pursuant to Section
8-12-3, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record without the
posting of the bond and without the costs associated with the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle. A determination that the vehicle should not have
been seized and impounded pursuant to Section
8-12-3 has no bearing nor will relieve an owner of responsibility for violating
Section
8-12-2.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-6: FINAL HEARING:
   A.   Notice of Hearing. Any owner issued a citation for a violation of
Section
8-12-2 shall have the right to request a hearing to challenge the citation and/
or seizure and impoundment. Notice shall be given to the owner of record of the
ability to request a hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on the records of
the Illinois Secretary of State. Notice by certified mail need not be given
when the owner of the vehicle has been personally served with notice, in
written form, of his ability to apply for a hearing. If the owner of the
vehicle requests a hearing, the City shall, within ten (10) business days after
such request, notify the owner of the date, time and location of a hearing.
Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be sent via regular
mail.
   B.   Requesting a Hearing. Any person cited for a violation of Section
8-12-2 may apply for a hearing to contest whether the person driving the
vehicle was in violation of Section
8-12-2 at the time the citation was issued and/or whether the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle was proper under the circumstances. The application
for a hearing shall be made no later than five (5) days after notice has been
given either personally or by certified mail, whichever is applicable in the
given circumstance. The application to request a hearing shall be provided by
the City at the time notice is given. The bond will be forfeited in the event a
hearing is not requested as provided for in this chapter.
   C.   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to the
owners hearing:
      1.   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall
be held within forty five (45) days the citation was issued.
      2.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the final hearing.
      3.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in
violation of Section
8-12-2, and otherwise determines that the seizure and impoundment of the
vehicle was proper pursuant to Section
8-12-3, the hearing officer shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the City a penalty in the amount
of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), plus the towing arid storage costs. In the
event the vehicle was not impounded, an order shall be entered wherein the
owner of record shall be liable to the City in the amount of Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00).
      4.   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the City, which order shall
require the payment to the City of a penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
      5.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used as
hereinabove provided in violation of Section
8-12-2, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the
vehicle without any penalty or other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously
been posted, the cash bond shall be returned.
      6.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was used in
violation of Section
8-12-2, but determines that the vehicle was not properly subject to seizure and
impoundment under Section
8-12-3, the hearing officer shall enter a judgment against the owner in the
amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and release the seized vehicle without
towing and storage costs and/or order the reimbursement of towing and storage
costs if the vehicle was previously released.
      7.   The ticket issued shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
offense stated was committed.
      8.   Any penalty assessed shall be a debt due and owing the City.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-7: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after the
expiration of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of
the action of the City under this section, or the time at which a final
judgment is rendered in favor of the City, or the time at which a final
administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in
default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise,
provided by law.
   B.   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within eighty
(80) days after a penalty is imposed, the vehicle shall be deemed to be
abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles, unless a petition for judicial
review is filed with a court of proper jurisdiction. Where a petition for
judicial review of the hearing officer’s determination is filed and pending in
a court of proper jurisdiction, the vehicle shall not be deemed to be abandoned
and shall lot be sold. If the petition for judicial review is resolved in favor
of the City, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of by
the City if the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within thirty
(30) days after the date of the Court’s order.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-8: LIABILITY FOR PENALTY AND COSTS:
   A.   The owner of record of a motor vehicle used in violation of Section 46-
296 shall be liable to the City for a penalty of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle.
   B.   Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company,
except where the motor vehicle is stored on City property, in which case the
storage cost will be established by the Mayor or the Chief of Police.
   C.   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following occurs:
      1.   The penalty is paid to the City, and all towing and storage costs
are paid to the towing company and/or City, as may be applicable; and
      2.   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the owner as herein
provided in subsection A. above is posted with the City and all applicable
towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; and
      3.   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be
deposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or
unclaimed vehicles.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
8-12-9: POSSESSORY RIGHTS OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien holder, or any
other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle
impounded under this article until the penalty and all towing and storage costs
applicable have been paid in full. Notwithstanding the above, in the event a
lienholder has commenced foreclosure proceedings, pays the applicable towing
and storage costs, and executes and agreement with the City to refund to the
City the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale up to Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00), less any amounts necessary to pay any lienholders of record having
priority over the City’s claim. The lienholder shall submit the following
documents to the City as evidence that it has commenced foreclosure
proceedings: (1) a certificate of title showing the lienholder as having first
priority; (2) the motor vehicle installment agreement; (3) a notarized
affidavit detailing the default of the owner/purchaser and any steps taken by
lienholder to give notice or an opportunity to owner/purchaser in accordance
with its contract; and (4) identification of any contract provisions granting
the lienholder right of possession.
(Ord. 2580, 7-28-2020)
TITLE 9: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
9-1-1: Supervision
9-1-2: Street And Sidewalk Construction Comply With Specifications
9-1-3: Injury To Pavements
9-1-4: Maintenance And Repairs
9-1-5: Openings And Stairways
9-1-6: Obstructions And Encroachments
9-1-7: Deposits On Public Ways
9-1-8: Private Uses
9-1-9: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
9-1-10: Barricades And Lights
9-1-11: Utility Poles And Wires
9-1-12: Removing Earth From Street
9-1-13: Playing Games In Public Ways
9-1-14: Penalties
9-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the City shall
be under the supervision of the Public Works Committee. It shall have
supervision over all work thereon, and shall have power to enforce all
ordinance provisions relating to such public places, and is hereby authorized
to enforce such ordinances.
(1980 Code § 45-1)
9-1-2: STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION COMPLY WITH SPECIFICATIONS:
All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with the
specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 45-4)
Cross-reference:
   See section
12-3-4 of this Code for permit requirements
9-1-3: INJURY TO PAVEMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon
or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded
by a warning sign or barricade, or knowingly to injure any soft newly laid
pavement.
(1980 Code § 45-5)
   B.   It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavements.
(1980 Code § 45-13)
9-1-4: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good
repair. Such repair work, whether done by the City or by the abutting owner,
shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Committee.
(1980 Code § 45-6)
   B.   It shall be the duty of every City officer or employee, on becoming
cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction
thereof, to report the same to the Public Works Director as soon as possible.
(1980 Code § 45-7)
9-1-5: OPENINGS AND STAIRWAYS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street, sidewalk or alley without a permit from the City Council. All
such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover
or a railing, subject to the approval of the Public Works Committee.
(1980 Code § 45-27)
9-1-6: OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause,
create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the
Public Works Committee.
(1980 Code § 45-8)
   B.   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure
which encroaches upon any public street or property.
(1980 Code § 45-12)
   C.   No person shall make, or cause to be made, any enclosure, fence,
bridge, arched way or building of any kind extending upon, over or across any
street, avenue, alley or sidewalk within the City.
(1980 Code § 45-16)
   D.   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.
(1980 Code § 45-20)
9-1-7: DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails or other
similar articles or any debris on any street, alley or sidewalk or other public
place in the City.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or
deposit, or cause to be dumped or deposited, any grass, leaves, branches, or
any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in the City.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person mowing lawns to cause grass
clippings, leaves, or other debris to be thrown into a street or gutter and
left there.
(1980 Code § 45-24)
   B.   Deposits On Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass, or
other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property.
      2.   Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to
delivery or use; provided such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the
roadway at the point to less than eighteen feet (18'); and provided, that such
material or coal, other than material to be used in actual building
construction, shall not be permitted to remain on such street for more than
three (3) hours. Any material or coal shall be guarded by lights, if the same
remains upon any street at nighttime.
(1980 Code § 45-14)
   C.   Deposits On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public
sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any
waste material, or any glass or other articles which might cause injury to
persons, animals or property.
(1980 Code § 45-15)
9-1-8: PRIVATE USES:
   A.   Display Of Merchandise; Making Advertisements On Pavements: It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street, sidewalk or
other public place as space for the display or sale of goods or merchandise; or
to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavements.
(1980 Code § 45-11)
   B.   Gas Pumps: It shall be unlawful to erect any gasoline pump or tank in
any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1980 Code § 45-25)
9-1-9: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fence composed in whole or in
part of barbed wire, spikes, or with any similar device, or any wire charged
with electric current sufficient to cause shock, within seven feet (7') of the
ground level.
(1980 Code § 45-17)
9-1-10: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
   A.   Required:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on
a street, sidewalk or other public place, or making any excavation in any such
place, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or
vehicle by reason of the work; and such barricades shall be protected by lights
at nighttime.
      2.   Any defects in the pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any
injury; and any person, firm or corporation properly maintaining any opening or
excavation in any such place shall guard the opening or excavation while the
same remains open by proper barricades and lights.
(1980 Code § 45-9)
   B.   Disturbing Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere
with any barricade or light lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement
or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1980 Code § 45-10)
9-1-11: UTILITY POLES AND WIRES:
   A.   Poles:
      1.   No person or corporation shall set or cause to be set any telegraph,
telephone, electric light or other poles upon any street or alley within the
City, or string or hang any wire along or across any street or alley, unless
authorized so to do by the Public Works Committee. All guy wires shall be
equipped with guards from the ground level to a distance of eight feet (8')
above the ground level.
(1980 Code § 45-21)
      2.   All electric light, telegraph, cable TV, and telephone poles now in
any street of the City, or which shall hereafter be placed on any alley, or
street, shall be located and placed within the curb lines on the sidewalk side
thereof, which are now or may hereafter be established; and poles shall be
placed as near as may be in a line in the streets.
(1980 Code § 45-22)
   B.   Wires:
      1.   All wires suspended from the poles shall be at least thirty feet
(30') high above the level of the street grades, unless a different height is
required or permitted by the State or Illinois Commerce Commission, and the
poles shall be neatly smoothed and in a fit condition to be painted.
      2.   All high tension wires shall, so far as practicable, be kept upon
opposite sides of the streets from telephone and telegraph wires.
(1980 Code § 45-23)
      3.   In all new additions or subdivisions, all telephone, telegraph,
cable TV and electric light or power lines shall be constructed and maintained
in alleys or easements at the rear of the lot and in underground conduits.
(1980 Code § 45-21)
9-1-12: REMOVING EARTH FROM STREET:
It shall be unlawful, for any private purpose, for any person or corporation to
dig, remove or carry away any earth, gravel or sod from any street, avenue or
alley without first having secured the permission of the Public Works
Committee.
(1980 Code § 45-18)
9-1-13: PLAYING GAMES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk,
where such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with traffic or
pedestrians.
(1980 Code § 45-26)
9-1-14: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
In addition to the penalty provided in this section, the City may seek the
abatement of any nuisance by a suit or action in court for an injunction or
other appropriate remedy.
(1980 Code § 45-141; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 2: SIDEWALKS
Section
9-2-1: City Powers
9-2-2: Construction Regulations
9-2-3: Maintenance And Repairs
9-2-4: Obstructing Sidewalks
9-2-5: Displaying Merchandise
9-2-6: Openings And Steps
9-2-7: Expectorating Prohibited
9-2-8: Penalty
9-2-1: CITY POWERS:
The Public Works Committee may regulate or designate the location of any
sidewalk paving, and may require the reconstruction of any sidewalk paving
which is not made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 45-107)
9-2-2: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Original Construction: It shall be the duty and obligation of the
abutting property owner or owners to construct, at their own cost, the original
sidewalk paving in front of any private property adjacent to any street. To
this end, the Corporate Authorities may take the appropriate proceedings under
the powers granted to the City by the Statutes of the State of Illinois to
impose upon the abutting property owner or owners a special tax to cover the
cost of the construction of the sidewalk paving, when the abutting owner or
owners refuse to construct the paving.
(1980 Code § 45-106)
   B.   Specifications:
      1.   All sidewalks shall be of cement or concrete construction. Before
any grouting shall be placed within the forms for any proposed sidewalk, the
subgrade of the walk shall be brought to an elevation at all points four and
one-fourth inches (41/4") below the elevation of the top surface of the
finished walk; and before any grouting or any materials to be used in the
construction of the walk shall be placed on the subgrade, the subgrade shall be
inspected, approved and accepted by the Public Works Committee.
      2.   Hereafter, the centerline of the top or wearing surface of all
cement or concrete sidewalks constructed in the City for public travel shall be
one-half inch (½") higher than the outer edges thereof.
(1980 Code § 45-108)
   C.   Crossing Driveways: Where sidewalks cross a driveway, the sidewalks
shall be constructed of concrete not less than eight inches (8") in thickness.
(1980 Code § 45-109)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
13-5-6 of this Code; see section
12-3-4 of this Code for permit requirements
9-2-3: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   Maintenance:
      1.   Persons owning, occupying or in control of any premises shall keep
the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter.
      2.   In residential areas, owners or occupants shall sweep or rinse off
the sidewalks abutting their premises as often as may be required to keep the
walk and street reasonably free from dirt, paper, and waste.
      3.   All owners or persons controlling premises in the Central Business
District of the City shall, at least once each twenty four (24) hours, except
when the business is closed, sweep the sidewalks in front of their premises
down to the curb, and gather up and remove all loose paper and refuse.
(1980 Code § 45-121)
   B.   Repairs: Any abutting property owner desiring a repair or replacement
of a sidewalk in front of his premises may furnish the materials for said
repair or replacement, and the City may furnish the labor for said repair or
replacement. Any owner, desiring such repair or replacement shall make
application therefor to the Public Works Committee. This subsection shall not
obligate the City to make repairs under this subsection if funds are not
available for that purpose.
(1980 Code § 45-110)
9-2-4: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either by the
assemblage of persons on sidewalks or by the placing of objects on or across
sidewalks, to obstruct the sidewalk so as to prevent the free passage of
pedestrians thereon.
(1980 Code § 45-124)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to pile any
goods, sidewalk signs, boxes, or other like material or things upon any
sidewalk within the corporate limits of the City to a point farther from the
edge of the sidewalk adjacent to the lot or building than three feet (3').
(1980 Code § 45-114)
9-2-5: DISPLAYING MERCHANDISE:
   A.   Prohibited On Certain Streets: It is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to sell or display any goods, wares, merchandise or stock in trade
for sale, or any boxes, baskets, or other like materials upon the sidewalks
provided for the use of pedestrians on either side of Walnut Street between the
east and west intersection of Routes 1 and 24, or upon the sidewalks on either
side of Second Street, Third Street and Fourth Street within one block of
Walnut Street, all within the City.
(Ord. 2417, 6-24-2014)
   B.   Newsracks And Real Estate Flyer Racks Exempt; Regulations: It shall be
unlawful to exhibit or offer to sell, at or from any newspaper stand or real
estate flyer rack on any public street or other public place, anything other
than newspapers and regularly published magazines or real estate flyers or to
place on any public street or other public place at or near any such stand, or
use in connection with such stand, any rack, chair, box or other article not
located wholly within the stand. Any newsrack or real estate flyer rack which,
in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public property shall comply
with the following standards:
      1.   Location And Manner Of Installation:
         a.   No box shall be less than one and one-half feet (11/2') from the
back of the curb edge of the roadway.
         b.   No newsrack or real estate flyer rack shall be permitted to rest
upon, in or over any public property, when such installation, use or
maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or
location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation impedes the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally marked or stopped
vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or
interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mailboxes, parking meters, traffic-control devices, or other objects permitted
at or near said location.
         c.   No newsrack or real estate flyer rack shall be chained, bolted,
or otherwise attached to any tree, utility pole, light pole, parking meter,
traffic-control post, street sign post, or other fixture located on public
property except to other newsracks or real estate flyer racks.
         d.   Newsracks or real estate flyer racks may be placed next to each
other; provided, that no group of newsracks or real estate flyer racks shall
extend for a distance of more than eight feet (8') along a curb, and a space of
not less than three feet (3') shall separate each group of newsracks or real
estate flyer racks.
         e.   No newsracks or real estate flyer racks shall be placed,
installed, used or maintained:
            (1)   Within three feet (3') of any marked crosswalk.
            (2)   Within twelve feet (12') of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk.
            (3)   Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box,
police call box, or other emergency facility.
            (4)   Within fifteen feet (15') of any intersection, driveway,
alley or street from the point where the curb line meets an imaginary line
which constitutes an extension of the boundary of the driveway, alley or street
at its narrowest point.
            (5)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet (3').
            (6)   Within three feet (3') of or on any public area improved with
lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(Ord. 2304, 10-13-2009)
            (7)   On or interfering with any access ramp for persons with
disabilities.
(Ord. 2304, 10-13-2009; amd. 2019 Code)
            (8)   On or within any median within any public right-of-way.
            (9)   Within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any other newsrack on
the same side of the street in the same block containing the same issue or
edition of the same publication or periodical.
      2.   Size: No newsrack or real estate flyer rack shall exceed the
following:
         a.   Four feet (4') in height.
         b.   Twenty four inches (24") in width.
         c.   Twenty inches (20") in thickness.
(Ord. 2304, 10-13-2009)
9-2-6: OPENINGS AND STEPS:
   A.   Permit Required: No cellar way, window, or other opening, and no steps,
shall be built or maintained upon any street, alley, or sidewalk without having
first obtained a permit therefor from the Public Works Committee.
(1980 Code § 45-122)
   B.   Safety Precautions: All cellar ways, window openings, or steps upon any
street, alley, or sidewalk shall be securely protected by a substantial iron
guard, or railing, or covering.
(1980 Code § 45-123)
9-2-7: EXPECTORATING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person within
the corporate limits of the City to spit or expectorate on any sidewalk, depot
platform or in any public building or entrance thereto in any stairway or
hallway thereof.
(1980 Code § 45-113)
9-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 45-129)
ARTICLE A: SIDEWALK CAFES
Section
9-2A-1: Purpose
9-2A-2: Application For License
9-2A-3: Term Of License
9-2A-4: License Fee
9-2A-5: Conditions For Operation
9-2A-6: Penalty
9-2A-7: Administrative Adjudication
9-2A-1: PURPOSE:
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a sidewalk café business
license shall authorize the retail sale and/or consumption of food and beverage
(but excluding alcoholic beverages) in a sidewalk café adjacent to a permanent
structure otherwise being a licensed business premises.
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
9-2A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person applying for a sidewalk café business license shall submit to the
City Clerk the following information:
   A.   Approved Permit: An approved sidewalk café permit issued by the
Building Official;
      1.   An applicant for a sidewalk café permit shall submit the following
information to the Building Official with its request for a sidewalk café
permit:
         a.   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation, or
association applying for the permit;
         b.   The residence and phone number of the applicant or partners or,
if a corporation or association, the residences and phone numbers of the
principal officers;
         c.   The name of the business and the location for which the permit is
requested;
         d.   A nonrefundable permit application processing fee in the amount
of fifty dollars ($50.00);
         e.   A refundable, assuming the permit is not granted, permit fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00), plus fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot of sidewalk
space used; and
         f.   A scaled site plan of the proposed sidewalk café, including the
location of the licensed premises, location of access points to the sidewalk
café, locations of tables and seating, locations of fences, and the location of
the curb cut and adjacent street or roadway. Measurements of the size of the
sidewalk café, its proximity to the licensed premises, and proximity to any
adjacent roadway shall be shown on the site plan.
      2.   The Building Official's decision to grant or deny the sidewalk café
permit shall be governed by the following standards:
         a.   The sidewalk café shall be operated on a sidewalk adjacent to the
business premises, and no part thereof shall protrude past the building lines
of the licensed premises;
         b.   No sidewalk café shall be located next to another premises
licensed for a sidewalk café;
         c.   No sidewalk café shall be located adjacent to a designated bus
stop;
         d.   No sidewalk café shall be located within fifteen feet (15') of
any street corner, or twenty five feet (25') of a street corner if the
intersection is not controlled by a traffic-control device at each direction of
travel, as measured from the intersection of the curb line;
         e.   The sidewalk on which the sidewalk café is to be located must
have a minimum width of twelve feet (12');
         f.   No sidewalk café shall reduce the paved pedestrianway to less
than five feet (5');
         g.   The sidewalk café, with the exception of the entranceway thereto
which shall be no larger than six feet (6') in width, shall be separated from
the sidewalk and pedestrian traffic by a wrought iron fence or other approved
divider of at least three feet (3') but no greater than four feet (4') in
height on all sides;
         h.   The sidewalk café shall be situated on the sidewalk nearest the
licensed premises, and shall leave that portion of the sidewalk closest to the
street unobstructed; and
         i.   Tables and seats proposed should be heavy enough to withstand
significant wind gusts.
   B.   Bond: A bond issued by an insurance company authorized to do business
in the State of Illinois in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
with the City's name as obligee, conditioned for the faithful performance of
the provisions of this Code.
   C.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Proof of commercial public liability insurance in the amount of
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per person, five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, and twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) in property damage, and the City shall be named an additional
insured on a primary and noncontributory basis with respect to claims.
      2.   The applicant shall also provide a waiver of subrogation on the
liability policy in favor of the City.
      3.   Liability coverage should be written by a carrier licensed to do
business in Illinois and have an AM Best's rating of A-VII or better. Coverages
shall be written on an occurrence basis. Claims- made coverage is not
acceptable.
      4.   The applicant shall, upon the request of the City, furnish said
insurance policy or certificates evidencing coverage, which policy or
certificates shall provide that the insurance coverage shall not be reduced,
canceled, or allowed to expire without at least thirty (30) days’ written
notice to City.
      5.   Failure to provide evidence of insurance in no way will be deemed a
waiver of the insurance requirements.
   D.   License Fee: The annual sidewalk café business license fee.
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
9-2A-3: TERM OF LICENSE:
A sidewalk café business license shall only be valid from May-October of the
calendar year.
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
9-2A-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a sidewalk café business license shall be seventy
five dollars ($75.00).
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
9-2A-5: CONDITIONS FOR OPERATION:
   A.   Sidewalk cafes shall be closed no later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.,
Sunday through Thursday, and no later than eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., Friday
and Saturday.
   B.   No live entertainment or amplified sound or music shall be permitted in
a sidewalk café.
   C.   No smoking shall be permitted in or within five feet (5') of a sidewalk
café.
   D.   The sale, delivery, or consumption of alcoholic liquor in a sidewalk
café is prohibited in the absence of a Class S liquor license.
   E.   Any sidewalk café being operated on the side of the building located on
a corner lot shall be accessible from a side door of the licensed premises
only.
   F.   Licensees shall be responsible for the cleanliness of the sidewalk
within fifty feet (50') of the approved location.
   G.   Licensees shall stack tables and chairs together and secure them with a
lock at the end of each day’s operation.
   H.   Licensees shall sweep and remove any garbage or debris from the
sidewalk café at the end of each day's operation and shall also hose the area
of the sidewalk upon which the sidewalk café is located.
   I.   Sweeping or placement of garbage, debris, or other materials into the
street, storm sewers or any adjacent paved pedestrianway is prohibited.
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
9-2A-6: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense. For purposes of this chapter, each violation or
day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
9-2A-7: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
Citations issued for violating this article may be administered through title
1, chapter 4, article A of this Code.
(Ord. 2513, 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 3: DRIVEWAYS
Section
9-3-1: Construction Regulations
9-3-2: Driveway Crossings; Presence Of Utility Appurtenances
9-3-3: Maintenance And Repairs
9-3-4: Penalty
9-3-1: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Bond Required: The contractor or person proposing to construct a
driveway shall file with the City Clerk, on a form furnished by the City and
approved by the City Attorney, a penal bond in the sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) with good and sufficient surety thereon, conditioned that the
makers shall save harmless, defend and indemnify the City against or on account
of accidents, damages or claims arising out of or during the construction of
any driveway laid by the contractor. All such bonds shall be continuing until
terminated by notice in writing given thirty (30) days in advance, but only
after the completion of the proposed work.
   B.   Supervision: All such work shall be done under the jurisdiction of the
Public Works Director and in accordance with the ordinances of the City; and
shall be inspected upon completion by the Director.
   C.   Specifications: All plans and specifications must conform to the
following minimum requirements:
      1.   Driveways for other than residential or dwelling house use shall be
constructed of Portland cement concrete at least eight inches (8") in
thickness. Concrete shall be as specified by ordinance for sidewalks and in
accordance with sketches on file in the office of the City Engineer at all
times.
      2.   Driveways for residential or dwelling house use shall be constructed
in a manner and of a material equal at least to that existing for the paving in
the public street adjacent thereto; except, that where concrete pavement exists
in the public street and bituminous surface is desired for the driveway, such
surface shall be permitted, provided it shall have a minimum depth of two
inches (2") without any loose material on top and a base of water-bound macadam
at least six inches (6") thick; and provided, that a Portland cement concrete
apron not less than three feet (3') in width be constructed between the
existing concrete pavement and the proposed bituminous driveway surfaces.
      3.   Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across the
sidewalk space, it shall conform to the sidewalk grade as established by the
City Engineer.
      4.   a.   Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across
an existing sidewalk, said sidewalk shall be removed and replaced with Portland
cement concrete for the full width of the driveway and for a distance of at
least twelve inches (12") on both sides of the driveway. This portion shall be
not less than six inches (6") in thickness or the thickness of the driveway,
whichever is greater, and constructed in accordance with sketches on file in
the offices of the City.
         b.   Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or of
such other materials as may be approved by the City Council.
      5.   Macadam, gravel, cinder and other types of driveways, where
permitted herein, shall be not less than eight inches (8") thick, compacted
depth.
      6.   Where paving in the public street is of concrete and a concrete
driveway is constructed, a one inch (1") bituminous pre-molded expansion joint
with load transmission unit shall be placed approximately three feet (3') from
the edge of the concrete paving and normal to the centerline of the driveway.
      7.   The width of the driveways for other than residential or dwelling
house shall not exceed thirty-six feet (36') at the outer or street edge of the
sidewalk. Where two (2) or more adjoining driveways are provided for the same
property, a safety island of not less than ten feet (10') at the outer or
street side of the sidewalk shall be provided. Not more than two (2) such
driveways shall be allowed to any one owner for any one piece of property on
any one street for each one hundred feet (100') of continuous frontage thereof.
      8.   The width of the driveways for residential or dwelling house shall
be not less than nine feet (9') nor more than thirty feet (30') at the outer or
street edge of the sidewalk.
      9.   The width of the driveway opening at the curb line shall not exceed
the width of the driveway at the outer or street edge of the sidewalk, plus:
         a.   Ten feet (10') for residential or dwelling house properties
consisting of individual flares on each side not to exceed five feet (5'); or
         b.   Twenty feet (20') for properties other than residential or
dwelling houses consisting of individual flares on each side not to exceed ten
feet (10'). Flares shall be constructed and designed for a gradual and
consistent expanse from the outer or street edge of the sidewalk to the curb
line.
      10.   All driveways shall be so graded between the gutter and the
sidewalk that it will not be necessary to change the established grade of
either and will not elevate or depress any portion of either unless the
sidewalk cross-slope exceeds two (2%) percent. If the sidewalk cross-slope
exceeds two (2%) percent, the sidewalk shall be removed and reinstalled for the
full width of the driveway and a minimum of five (5') feet on each side of the
driveway with a maximum cross-slope of two (2%) percent. No part of the
driveway shall extend beyond the curb line in such a manner as to change the
grade of the gutter or obstruct the free flow of water in the gutter. Where
elevations or depressions are necessary in the parkway strip between the curb
and walk, the parkway shall be graded on both sides of the driveway to a
distance sufficient to create a gradual ascent or descent. At no time shall the
gradient exceed one foot (1') vertical to ten feet (10') horizontal.
      11.   Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing shall be entirely
removed for the full width of the driveway opening at the curb line. If an
existing joint in the curb is within five feet (5') of the end of the driveway
opening, remove the existing curbing to the joint, otherwise cut the combined
curb and gutter or separate curbing, making a neat edge truly at right angles
to the edge of the pavement and truly ve1tical. Integral curbing, which is that
type placed with the pavement and molded as an integral part of it, must be
removed for the full depth from the top of the curb to the bottom of the
pavement. The edge must be cut as above described. No combined curb and gutter,
straight curb or integral curb shall be removed within five feet (5') of a
public crosswalk.
(1980 Code §§ 45-81, 45-83, and 45-84; amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 2630, 11-23-2021;
Ord. 2691, 10-24-2023)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
13-5-8 of this Code; see section
12-3-4 of this Code for permit requirements
9-3-2: DRIVEWAY CROSSINGS; PRESENCE OF UTILITY APPURTENANCES:
   A.   Where driveways cross open ditches in the parkways, culverts shall be
installed. Said culverts shall be of such size and shall be constructed of such
material as determined by the Public Works Committee, depending on the
conditions existing. In no instance shall the size of opening be less than that
obtained by a twelve inch (12") diameter pipe. The length of culvert shall be
determined by the following method: For ditch depth of two feet (2') or less,
the culvert shall extend not less than five feet (5') beyond both edges of the
driveway where it crosses the ditch. For each additional foot depth of ditch,
add two feet (2') to the above figure; except, that no culvert shall be less
than twenty feet (20') long; and except, that where headwalls are constructed
at the ends of the culvert, the length shall be as determined by the Public
Works Committee.
   B.   Where existing meter pits are in the area of a proposed driveway, the
existing cast iron top shall be removed and turned in to the Water Department.
A heavier cover shall be furnished and set by the Water Department, and the
additional cost thereof shall be paid by the contractor.
   C.   Where an existing catch basin is in the area of the proposed driveway,
the tops shall be removed and replaced with a manhole top with perforated lid.
Said top shall be set by the Public Works Department, and the additional cost
thereof shall be paid by the contractor.
(1980 Code § 45-83)
9-3-3: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   All driveways constructed or reconstructed over, across or upon any
public street or public parkway in the City shall be kept and maintained at all
times in accordance with the provisions hereof by the persons so constructing,
reconstructing or using the same as an adjunct or appurtenance to lands or
properties immediately adjacent thereto.
(1980 Code § 45-83)
   B.   It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a driveway to keep the
same in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstruction and
openings.
(1980 Code § 45-85)
9-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 45-90)
CHAPTER 4: CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
9-4-1: Purpose; Scope; Interpretation
9-4-2: Definitions
9-4-3: Registration Required; Annual Recurring Rate For Wireless Provides
9-4-4: Permit Requirements
9-4-5: Insurance; Indemnity; Security
9-4-6: Collocation Of Small Wireless Facilities
9-4-7: Change Of Ownership, Identity Or Legal Status
9-4-8: General Construction Standards
9-4-9: Traffic Control
9-4-10: Location Of Facilities
9-4-11: Construction Methods And Materials
9-4-12: Vegetation Control
9-4-13: Removal, Relocation Or Modifications Of Facilities
9-4-14: Cleanup And Restoration
9-4-15: Maintenance And Repairs
9-4-16: Variances
9-4-17: Penalties
9-4-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities in the rights-of-way within the City so
as to:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
City’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the City's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   B.   Scope: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the City, unless
otherwise exempted pursuant to a franchise, license, or similar agreement.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   The City may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license,
or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within a right-of- way. Utilities or
wireless providers that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement
may request that the City enter into such an agreement.
      2.   In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider
has a franchise, license, or similar agreement with the City, such franchise,
license, or similar agreement shall govern and control during its term.
      3.   In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license, or
similar agreement between the City and any telecommunications provider, the
provisions of such franchise, license, or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term.
      4.   Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles,
that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the City's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this chapter. A wireless provider that has an existing agreement
with the City on the effective date of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act, P.A. 100-0585, may accept the rates, fees and terms that the City has
currently adopted for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the
installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two (2) or more
years after the effective date of the act by notifying the City that it opts to
accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect,
subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities
the wireless provider has collocated on the City's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the City before the wireless provider provides such
notice and exercises its option under this subsection C4.
   D.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter, and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements provided herein when appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed below shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30.
AASHTO: The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: The American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: The American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: The International Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing or
Mechanical Code, adopted by a recognized national code organization, or local
amendments to those Codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: Shall be given the meaning ascribed in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: Shall be given the meaning ascribed in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: Shall be given the meaning ascribed in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: Any pipe enclosing a liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The City of Watseka.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING: The protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The City of Watseka City Code.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: “Cable service”, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; “information service”, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
"mobile service", as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service
other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A “cable operator”, as defined in 47 USC 522
(5), as amended; a “provider of information service”, as defined in 47 USC 153
(24), as amended; or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR: Any wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification, or abandonment in place, of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a
right-of-way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a
material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment,
devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of
the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a
manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility or wireless provider.
ENCASEMENT: The provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The City engineer, or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate the construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: A pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way, but shall exclude any
facility owned or operated by the City.
FEE: A one-time charge.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
City engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or
safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment,
including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or
petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables,
corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any
Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets, and shall include all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101, et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: The Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: The Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities or wireless providers.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the City in public
rights-of-way.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over, or under a right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right- of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by a street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
trust or other entity or organization.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible, or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PRIVATE LINE: A dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations.
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at the local, State or Federal level.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services to respond
to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the City has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the City, but shall exclude any real or personal property of the
City that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences, and
shall not include City buildings, fixtures and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to subsection
9-4-5C of this chapter.
SHOULDER: The width of roadway adjacent to the pavement providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets the following
qualifications:
   A.   The facility is:
      1.   Mounted on a structure fifty feet (50') or less in height including
antennas; or
      2.   Mounted on a structure no more than ten percent (10%) taller than
other adjacent structures; or   
      3.   Does not extend an existing structure on which it is located to a
height of more than fifty feet (50') or by more than ten percent (10%),
whichever is greater;
   B.   Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated
antenna equipment, is no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume;
   C.   All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including
the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting
associated equipment on the structure is no more than twenty eight (28) cubic
feet in volume;
   D.   The facility does not require antenna structure registration with the
Federal Communications Commission under 47 CFR section 17.1-17-57;
   E.   The facility is not located on "tribal lands", as defined under 36 CFR
section 800.16(x); and
   F.   The facility does not result in human exposure to radio frequency
radiation in excess of applicable safety standards.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices, and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Means, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through a
“cable system” as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC 521
et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the City through an “open video
system” as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47
CFR section 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any “facility” as defined
in this chapter; except, that, for purposes of this chapter, "utility" does not
include a wireless provider.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used, in whole or in part, by
a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control or a similar function.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: Shall have the meaning ascribed in section 21-201(v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: A boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY:
   A.   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and communications network, including: 1) equipment
associated with wireless communications; and 2) radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
   B.   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.
   C.   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include: 1) the structure or improvements
on, under or within which the equipment is collocated; or 2) wire line backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between the wireless support
structure or the utility pole, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider applying to collocate, or already collocating, a small wireless
facility on a utility pole in the City’s right-of-way.
WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018; amd. Ord. 2529, 12-18-2018)
9-4-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; ANNUAL RECURRING RATE FOR WIRELESS PROVIDERS:
   A.   Registration: Every utility or wireless provider that occupies the
right-of-way within the City shall register by January 10 of each year with the
Public Works Director, providing the utility's or wireless provider's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility or wireless provider
in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s or wireless provider’s
facilities in the right-of- way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in subsection
9-5-4A of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
   B.   Wireless Provider Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the
City an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City
utility pole located in the right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year; or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to
the wireless provider's use of space on the City utility pole. If the City has
not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00), payable on the first day after the first annual
anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and
on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall CONSTRUCT (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right-
of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility; 2) adds a new facility;
3) disrupts the RIGHT-OF-WAY (as defined in this chapter); or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above,
along, under across or within the right-of-way, without a permit.
   B.   Application For Permit: Permit applications shall be on the form,
contain such information, and be filed in the manner specified by the Public
Works Director. The applicant may designate those portions of its application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential
information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of
such materials accordingly.
      1.   Minimum General Requirements: The application shall be made by the
utility, wireless provider or duly authorized representative and shall contain,
at a minimum, the following:
         a.   The utility’s or wireless provider’s name and address and
telephone and telecopy numbers;
         b.   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility
or wireless provider, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;
         c.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-
mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant
with respect to the application;
         d.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
         e.   Evidence that the utility or wireless provider has placed on file
with the City: 1) a written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; 2) an emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are
needed; 3) drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 4)
evidence of insurance as required in subsection
9-4-5A of this chapter; 5) evidence of posting of the security fund as required
in subsection
9-4-5C of this chapter; 6) any request for a variance from one or more
provisions of this chapter; and 7) such additional information as may be
reasonably required by the City.
      2.   Supplemental Requirements For Specific Utilities: In addition to the
requirements of subsection B1 of this section, the permit application shall
include the following items, as applicable to the specific facility that is the
subject of the permit application:
         a.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “Certificate Of Public
Convenience And Necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
         b.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
         c.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
         d.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land
and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and such other local governmental
bodies/agencies having jurisdiction over the same have been satisfied; or
         e.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
      3.   Consolidated Applications For Small Cell Wireless Facilities: An
applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to
file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation
of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure. If an application includes multiple
small wireless facilities, the City may remove small wireless facility
collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility
collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not
qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The City may issue
separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated
application.
      4.   Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application
review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any
amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted
by the utility or wireless provider in writing to the City within thirty (30)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
      5.   Application Fees:
         a.   Utilities: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications by utilities for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the cost of the work to be permitted. No
application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Law (35 ILCS 645/15 et seq.)
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
         b.   Wireless Providers:
            (1)   Applicants for the collocation of small wireless facilities
shall pay an application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an
application to collocate up to five (5) small wireless facilities within the
rights-of-way, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional small
wireless facility collocation in excess of five (5).
(Ord. 2529, 12-18-2018)
            (2)   The City will not impose fees on wireless providers for: a)
routine maintenance; b) the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless
facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the
wireless provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement; or c)
the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro
wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   C.   Review Of Applications:
      1.   Utilities: Completed permit applications for utilities, containing
all required documentation, shall be examined by the Public Works Director
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to
the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the Public Works Director shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the Public Works Director is satisfied that the proposed
work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Public Works Director shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
      2.   Wireless Facility: The City shall process applications for the
collocation of small wireless facilities as follows:
         a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different wireless facility applicants for collocation
on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the City
shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant.
If an application is incomplete, the City must specifically identify the
missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the City fails
to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all
documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the City's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the City. Processing
deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness
to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
         c.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days after the submission of
a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner
than forty five (45) days after the submission of a completed application. The
permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the sixtieth day after
submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this section.
         d.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a
completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner
than seventy (75) days after the submission of a completed application. The
permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the ninetieth day after
submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provide under this section.
         e.   An application to collocate a wireless facility that does not
meet the definition of a "small wireless facility" under this chapter and seeks
installation on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
approved or denied by the City within ninety (90) days.
         f.   An application to collocate a wireless facility that does not
meet the definition of a "small wireless facility" under this chapter and
requires construction of a new wireless support structure or pole shall be
approved or denied by the City within one hundred fifty (150) days.
         g.   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter. If the City determines that applicable codes,
ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or any of the
requirements of this chapter, require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider. The City shall document the basis for a
denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on
which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or
before the day the City denies an application.
         h.   An applicant whose application has been denied may cure the
deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the revised application once
within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without
paying an additional application fee. The City shall approve or deny the
revised application within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the
application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised
application within thirty (30) days of denial shall require the applicant to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and result in recommencement of
the City's review period. Any review of a revised application shall be limited
to the deficiencies cited in the denial, except in cases in which the revised
application involves review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         i.   Upon approval of an application to collocate a small wireless
facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter
into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the City, for the initial
collocation. For subsequent approved permits to collocate a small wireless
facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter
into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
         j.   The time period for filing small wireless facility applications
may be further tolled by: 1) an express written agreement by both the applicant
and the City; or 2) a local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
(Ord. 2529, 12-18-2018)
   D.   Supplemental Review:
      1.   Telecommunications Retailers:
         a.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act (220 ILCS 65/
4), a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Public Works Director shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
         b.   In the event that the Public Works Director fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: 1)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the City by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or
2) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
         c.   Where a permit is required for work pursuant to this chapter, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of subsection D1a of this section.
      2.   Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition
Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-
100 et seq.) shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after submission to
the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided the holder has
complied with applicable City codes, ordinances, and regulations.
   E.   Effect Of Permit:
      1.   Authority Granted: A permit authorizes a permittee to undertake
certain activities in the right- of-way and does not create a property right or
grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may
have an interest in the right-of-way.
      2.   Term Of Permits:
         a.   Utilities: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for
a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually commenced
and prosecuted diligently thereafter to completion.
         b.   Small Wireless Facilities: For permits issued to wireless
providers to collocate small wireless facilities, the collocation must be
complete within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit,
unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend the period or a delay
is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of
the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time
to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after
issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the City
grants an extension in writing to the applicant. Small wireless facility
permits which comply with the foregoing shall be for a period of not less than
five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
      3.   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: No construction shall commence
prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction
meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place
designated by the City with such City representatives in attendance as deemed
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the
permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work
will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other
facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of
other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and
access and egress by adjacent property owners.
      4.   Compliance With Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the City
does not excuse the permittee from complying with other laws that may govern
the construction.
      5.   Location Revisions: In the event that the actual location of any
facilities deviates in any material respect from the location identified in the
plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the
permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City no later
than ninety (90) days after the permittee has knowledge of the same. The
revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the location of the
actual facilities deviates from the locations approved in the permit. If any
deviation from the permit involves other deviations from the requirements of
this chapter, such submission shall be treated as a request for variance in
accordance with section
9-4-16 of this chapter. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
   F.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Grounds: The City may revoke or suspend a permit for one or more of
the following reasons:
         a.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresented, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
         b.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
         c.   The permittee’s physical presence or presence of the permittee’s
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
         d.   The permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially
in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
      2.   Notice Requirements: The City shall send written notice of its
intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating
the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives
available to the permittee under this section.
      3.   Option Of Permittee:
         a.   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
            (1)   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
            (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the City within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
            (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the City, providing written proof of such removal
to the City within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
         b.   The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time period to complete any action required herein.
      4.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons that constitute a basis for the revocation or
suspension of a permit.
      5.   Failure Or Refusal Of Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of subsection F3 of this section, the City or its
designee may, at the option of the City: a) correct the deficiencies; b) upon
not less than twenty (20) days’ notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or c) after not less than thirty (30) days’ notice to
the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City
for all costs of removal.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-5: INSURANCE; INDEMNITY; SECURITY:
   A.   Insurance:
      1.   Coverages And Limits:
         a.   Utilities:
            (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying the right-of-way or constructing any facility
in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies:
               (A)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “X”, “C”, and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than
                  i)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury
or death to each person;
                  ii)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property
damage resulting from any one accident; and
                  iii)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other
types of liability;
               (B)   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for personal injury and property damage for each accident;
               (C)   Workers’ compensation with statutory limits; and
               (D)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
            (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this subsection.
         b.   Wireless Providers: Wireless providers collocating small wireless
facilities shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the
following insurance:
            (1)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost
against all risks;
            (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; or
            (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the City's right-of- way to afford minimum protection limits in
the same manner as described in subsection A1a(1)(A) of this section.
      2.   Additional Insured: The City, its officials, employees, and agents
shall be named as additional insureds on the policies identified in subsections
A1a(1)(A), A1a(1)(B) and A1a(1)(C) of this section.
      3.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this
subsection may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
      4.   Copies Required: The utility or wireless provider shall provide
copies of any of the policies required by this subsection to the City within
ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
      5.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
         a.   The insurance policies required by this subsection shall contain
the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Public Works Director of such intent to cancel
or not to renew.
         b.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of the notice, and
in no event later than ten (10) days prior to the cancellation, the utility or
wireless provider shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this subsection.
      6.   Self-Insurance: A utility or wireless provider may self-insure all
or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
subsection A1 of this section. A utility or wireless provider that self-insures
is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the naming of additional insureds, or the requirements of
subsections A3, A4 and A5 of this section. A utility or wireless provider that
elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and
limit requirements required under this subsection, such as evidence that the
utility is a “private self- insurer” under the Workers’ Compensation Act (820
ILCS 305/1 et seq.)
      7.   Effect Of Insurance Or Self-Insurance On Facility Liability: The
legal liability of the utility or wireless provider to the City and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-
insurance shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or
by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
      8.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this
subsection shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of
Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-”
or better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.
   B.   Indemnification: As a condition of any permit, and the right to occupy,
construct, or operate facilities in the right-of-way, a utility or wireless
provider shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and
its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents, and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or alleged
to arise out of or result from, the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility, wireless provider or
their affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in
the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's
or wireless provider's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by
the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
   C.   Security:
      1.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in the form
and amount specified herein. The security fund shall be continuously maintained
at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized by a permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
         a.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
         b.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
         c.   The payment by the permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee in violation of this chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the City must
perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s
failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the City from the
permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
      2.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the City in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant
to this subsection C2 shall, at a minimum:
         a.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
City and the permittee;
         b.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection
by the City of any amounts covered by it; and
         c.   Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
      3.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient
to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the City engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the City estimates are likely to be incurred if the
permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the City, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities
in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in
another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the City engineer may, in the
exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of
security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the
permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal
to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of
this subsection C3 for any single phase.
      4.   Withdrawals: The City, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under, this subsection C4, may withdraw an amount from the security
fund; provided, that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
         a.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
         b.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due
and unpaid;
         c.   Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
         d.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
      5.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C3 of this section.
      6.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the
City, upon written request for said withdrawal to the City; provided, that any
such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C3 of this section.
      7.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of the revocation; provided,
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
      8.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the City with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the security fund shall affect
any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed upon or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-6: COLLOCATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility
poles in the rights-of-way is a permitted use as long as such facilities meet
the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   C.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in a safe condition,
in good repair and in compliance with all requirements of this chapter. The
wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contractors that
perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately
trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental
standards and regulations.
   D.   Make-Ready Requirements:
      1.   Nonaerial Facility Poles: The City may require make-ready work on an
existing utility pole to ensure structural integrity, compliance with an
approved City plan, or to comply with any ordinance, law or regulation. The
City will not require more make-ready work than required to meet applicable
codes or industry standards. Make-ready work may include work needed to
accommodate additional public safety communications needs that are identified
in a documented and approved plan for the deployment of public safety equipment
as specified and included in an existing or preliminary City or public service
agency plan. Fees for make-ready work, including a City utility pole
attachment, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to
communications service providers for similar work, and shall not include any
consultant fees or expenses for City utility poles that do not support aerial
facilities used to provide communications services or electric service. Make-
ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within sixty
(60) days of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the City at the
wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
      2.   Utility Poles With Aerial Facilities: For City utility poles that
support aerial facilities used to provide communications services or electric
services, a wireless provider shall comply with the process for make-ready work
under 47 USC 224 and its implementing regulations. Wireless providers shall
follow a substantially similar process for such make-ready work except to the
extent that the timing requirements are otherwise addressed by this chapter.
The good-faith estimate of the person owning or controlling the City’s utility
pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the
requested collocation shall include City utility pole replacement, if
necessary. Make-ready work for utility poles that support aerial facilities
used to provide communications services or electric services may include
reasonable consultant fees and expenses.
   E.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will
be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small
wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970
through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The City may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the FCC's public safety
spectrum rules. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.
   F.   Electric Distribution Or Transmission System Poles: The wireless
provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on City utility poles
that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For
purposes of this subsection, the terms “communications space”, “communication
worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the meanings given to
those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   G.   Compliance With Applicable Codes And Design Standards: The wireless
provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or
regulations that concern public safety. The wireless provider shall comply with
written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility
poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are
set forth in any City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers
of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
   H.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this section, a wireless
provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any
specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation
proposed by the City, the applicant shall provide written certification
describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the
alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this subsection.
   I.   Height Limitations:
      1.   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated. New or replacement utility
poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are
collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within three
hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional
boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which intersecting right-
of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      2.   If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in
excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility has
proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in
conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section
9-4-16 of this chapter.
   J.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right- of-way.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-7: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility or wireless provider shall notify the
City no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any
facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility or wireless
provider. The new owner of the utility, wireless provider or the facility shall
have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the
permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-
of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to reflect the new ownership status. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City’s
right-of-way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-8: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic- control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
      7.   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   B.   Interpretation Of Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists
between or among differing principles and standards required by this chapter,
the City engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering
judgment, which principles apply, and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the City engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply
to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-9: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The City’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The utility or wireless
provider is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective
devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal, State, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's or wireless
provider's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility or wireless provider shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of the work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to section
9-4-15 of this chapter, the utility or wireless provider shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances. In addition to the above, the
utility or wireless provider shall notify ICOM (911 Center) and Iroquois County
Community Unit School District No. 9 for the rerouting of emergency vehicles
and school buses, respectively, as needed.
   E.   Compliance: The utility or wireless provider shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the utility's or wireless provider's attention by the City.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-10: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No facilities shall be placed in any location if the City engineer
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the City’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the City’s utility
facilities.
      2.   The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible
interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum
possible impact upon, and interference with, the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
      3.   No facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the
usual travel on such right-of- way.
      4.   No facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit
visibility of or by users of the right-of- way.
   B.   Size Of Utility Facilities: For utility facilities only, the proposed
installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner,
regardless of location, for the particular application. Small wireless
facilities shall comply with the size limitations described in section
9-4-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities:
         a.   An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-
way lines of a highway only if:
            (1)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
            (2)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') behind the face of the
curb, where available;
            (3)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from the
pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') outside
the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
            (4)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
            (5)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot
(1') of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') from and parallel to the right-
of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') from the right-of-way line, and any abovegrounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') of the right-of-way line or
as near as practicable.
   D.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between
the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may require the incorporation of
materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid
settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of
such crossing facilities.
      2.   Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts,
or drainage facilities.
      3.   Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree
(90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only
if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by the ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
Illinois Administrative Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway
only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   The City may require the utility or wireless provider to provide a
marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify
the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49 CFR section
192.707 (1989)).
   E.   Utility Facilities Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The City
may require that utility facilities be located within particular rights-of-way
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   F.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The City may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of- way.
      2.   The City may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   G.   Aboveground Utility Facilities: Aboveground utility facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable. The installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   H.   Utility Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   I.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The City may require that utilities or wireless providers install
screening or otherwise camouflage facilities in particular locations in order
to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-11: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from
pits located at a minimum distance from the edge of the pavement specified by
the City engineer. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated not more than
forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings over six inches (6") in diameter shall be accomplished
with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not
exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1").
         d.   Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be
accomplished by either jacking, being guided with auger, or using the auger and
following pipe method.
         e.   Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated
by the City to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the
root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction”.
         a.   The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable
minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only one-half (½) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission
is obtained from the City engineer.
         b.   Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected
as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between
the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be
allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width
does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   The utility or wireless provider shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction”. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility or wireless provider shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of
the facility. If so ordered by the City engineer, the utility or wireless
provider, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to
the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the City engineer.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
9-4-16 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the City engineer.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
City.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair;
and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                    Minimum Cover
Electrical lines                    30 inches
Communication, cable, video service 18-24 inches (as determined by the City)
line
Gas or petroleum lines              30 inches
Water lines                         Sufficient for freeze protection
Sanitary, storm, or drainage lines  Sufficient for freeze protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Electric power or communications facilities within City rights-
of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the
provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code Part 305 entitled “Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines”, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         b.   Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole
construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used.
Utilities or wireless providers shall make every reasonable effort to design
the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with
guy guards for maximum visibility.
         c.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided, that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads. If a crossing is installed by
boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if: 1) the crossing is installed by the use
of “moles”, “whip augers”, or other approved method which compress the earth to
make the opening for cable installation; or 2) the installation is by the open
trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. Cable
shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
         d.   All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the
prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be
buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise
permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary
drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of “moles”, “whip augers”, or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City-approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction”, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the then current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer, Main
Construction in Illinois”.
      6.   Ground-Mounted Appurtenances: Ground-Mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') in width beyond
the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by
an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the City engineer. With the approval of the City engineer,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free
area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way
shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the
applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction”, the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
      2.   No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior
written approval of the Public Works Director. When such storage is permitted,
all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be
distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner
to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or
damage to the right-of- way and other property. If material is to be stored on
the right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the City.
      3.   The plans submitted by the utility to the City shall identify any
hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new
facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Public Works Director when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction
are those set forth in subsection
5-8-2G of this Code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility or wireless provider
proposing to construct facilities in the City shall contact JULIE and ascertain
the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City
will make its permit records available to a utility or wireless provider for
the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation
or when requested by the City or by JULIE, a utility or wireless provider shall
locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48)
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois
Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-12: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming
and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the City as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities Or Wireless Providers:
      1.   Permit Requirements:
         a.   Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility
or wireless provider with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
         b.   Application For Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits
shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers
with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree
trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring
that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The City may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection D2 of this section, no utility or
wireless provider shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any
trees, shrubs or vegetation in the City for any purpose, including the control
of growth, insects or disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Public Works Director that such spraying is the only practicable method
of vegetation control.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-13: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Compliance With Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written
notice from the City, a utility or wireless provider shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any facilities within the rights-of-way
whenever the Corporate Authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the City in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City, any utility or wireless provider that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The City retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility or wireless
provider, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify
the utility or wireless provider, if known, after cutting or removing a
facility.
   D.   Wireless Provider Options Upon Removal Of A City Utility Pole: The City
may eliminate aboveground utility poles as long as such decision is made on a
nondiscriminatory basis. In the event the City chooses to eliminate a utility
pole upon which a small wireless facility is collocated, the City will either:
1) install and maintain a reasonable alternative utility pole or wireless
support structure for the collocation of the small wireless facility; or 2)
offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable cost;
or 3) allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it can
maintain service from that location.
   E.   Abandonment Of Facilities:
      1.   Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the City,
the utility or wireless provider shall notify the City within ninety (90) days.
Following receipt of such notice, the City may direct the utility or wireless
provider to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Public Works
Director determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the City does not direct
the utility or wireless provider that abandoned the facility to remove it, by
giving notice of abandonment to the City, the abandoning utility or wireless
provider shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any
portion of the facility by another utility or person.
      2.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the
facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after
receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the
deemed abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of
the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within
ninety (90) days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of
such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for
Municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement
of nuisances (see section
5-4-4 of this Code) or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-14: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility or wireless provider shall remove all excess material and restore
all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion
of the rights-of-way is disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility or wireless provider, all to the satisfaction of the
City. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of
roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the City
engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. The time period may be extended by the Public
Works Director for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-15: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   General Maintenance Requirements: Facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the
utility or wireless provider in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the
utility's or wireless provider’s expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility or wireless provider shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Public Works Director or his or her duly authorized agent
of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall use all
means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility or wireless provider must file in
writing with the City a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-
way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-16: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility or wireless provider requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in
writing to the Public Works Director as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Public Works Director shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions:
      1.   The Public Works Director may authorize a variance only if the
utility or wireless provider requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
         a.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or
wireless provider (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line)
create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
         b.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
      2.   As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Public Works Director
may require the utility or wireless provider requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained
within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   D.   Right To Appeal: Any utility or wireless provider aggrieved by any
order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance,
made by the Public Works Director shall have the right to appeal to the City
Council. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City
Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The City Council shall consider the appeal at its
next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the
filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the appeal.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
9-4-17: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a new and separate offense. Additionally, there may
be times when the City will incur delay or other costs, including third party
claims, because the utility or wireless provider will not or cannot perform its
duties. Unless the utility or wireless provider shows that another allocation
of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility or
wireless provider shall bear the City’s costs of damages and its costs of
installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that
is the subject of the permit.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2516, 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 5: PARADES
Section
9-5-1: Application Of Other Provisions
9-5-2: Permit Required; Exemptions
9-5-3: Application For Permit
9-5-4: Standards Of Permit Issuance
9-5-5: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
9-5-6: Alternative Permit
9-5-7: Notice To Officials
9-5-8: Contents Of Permit
9-5-9: Permittee To Comply
9-5-10: Possession Of Permit
9-5-11: Revocation Of Permit
9-5-12: Public Conduct During Parade
9-5-13: Throwing Candy, Food Or Objects Prohibited
9-5-14: State Permit May Be Required
9-5-15: Penalty
9-5-1: APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
Except as is herein otherwise provided, the provisions of title 6, chapter 5,
article C of this Code regarding public demonstrations are hereby incorporated
into and made a part of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-41)
9-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade,
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police. This
chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Funeral processions.
   B.   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities.
   C.   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(1980 Code § 46-40)
9-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A person seeking the issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.
   A.   Filing Period: An application for a parade permit shall be filed with
the Chief of Police not less than three (3) days nor more than sixty (60) days
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
   B.   Contents: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
      2.   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization.
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chair and who will be responsible for its conduct.
      4.   The date when the parade is to be conducted.
      5.   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
      6.   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the
vehicles.
      7.   The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
      8.   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
      9.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
      10.   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
   11.   The interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
      12.   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file
with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person proposing
to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his
behalf.
      13.   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue.
(1980 Code § 46-42)
9-5-4: STANDARDS OF PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
   A.   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
   B.   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the City to police properly the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto so as to deprive the City of normal police
protection.
   C.   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
City other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto.
   D.   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas.
   E.   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment enroute to a fire.
   F.   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute.
   G.   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
(1980 Code § 46-43)
9-5-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within two (2) days after the filing thereof.
   B.   If the Chief of Police disapproves the application, he shall mail to
the applicant within two (2) days after the date upon which the application was
filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the
permit.
(1980 Code § 46-44)
   C.   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within ten days
(10) after notice. The City Council shall act upon the appeal within ten (10)
days after its receipt.
(1980 Code § 46-45)
9-5-6: ALTERNATIVE PERMIT:
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be
empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over
a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the
action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the
Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements
of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-46)
9-5-7: NOTICE TO OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall
send a copy thereof to the following:
   A.   The Mayor.
   B.   The City Attorney.
   C.   The Fire Chief.
   D.   The Public Works Director.
(1980 Code § 46-47)
9-5-8: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   A.   Starting time.
   B.   Minimum speed.
   C.   Maximum speed.
   D.   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
   E.   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
   F.   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
   G.   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-48)
9-5-9: PERMITTEE TO COMPLY:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(1980 Code § 46-49)
9-5-10: POSSESSION OF PERMIT:
The parade chair or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry
the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
(1980 Code § 46-50)
9-5-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this chapter may be
summarily revoked by the Chief of Police at any time when, by reason of
disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the Chief of Police
determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation.
Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the
permittee by personal service or by certified mail.
   B.   The permit may also be revoked by the Chief of Police upon his
determination that: 1) the information contained in the application is false in
any material detail; or 2) the permittee refuses to abide by or comply with all
the conditions of the permit or with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-51)
9-5-12: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES:
   A.   Interference With Parade: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct
or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
   B.   Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in
motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
   C.   Parking On Parade Route:
      1.   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or
part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade.
      2.   The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof.
      3.   No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in
violation of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 46-52)
9-5-13: THROWING CANDY, FOOD OR OBJECTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade to throw, cast
or deposit any candy, gum, food products, or other objects upon the streets or
other public ways during the course of the parade.
(1980 Code § 46-53)
9-5-14: STATE PERMIT MAY BE REQUIRED:
Should a permit from the State of Illinois be required, it shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to secure the said permit.
(1980 Code § 46-54)
9-5-15: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 46-59)
CHAPTER 6: CITY PARKS
Section
9-6-1: Supervision
9-6-2: Names Of Parks On City Map
9-6-3: Closing Hours
9-6-4: Entering, Exiting Parks
9-6-5: Amusements For Gain
9-6-6: Use Of Parks
9-6-7: Vehicles In Parks
9-6-8: Boating And Swimming
9-6-9: Prohibited Acts
9-6-10: Penalties
9-6-1: SUPERVISION:
The Public Works Committee shall have general charge and supervision of all
public parks, and shall look after the preservation, repair and improvement of
the same.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-2: NAMES OF PARKS ON CITY MAP:
The several public parks, squares and grounds in the City shall be known and
designated by the names applied thereto on the Map of the City or that may be
designated by ordinance.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-3: CLOSING HOURS:
All City parks shall be closed to the public from dusk to dawn each day.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-4: ENTERING, EXITING PARKS:
No person shall enter or leave any public park of the City except by its proper
entranceways.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-5: AMUSEMENTS FOR GAIN:
No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made can be conducted in a park
without the consent of the governing body of the park, and such amusement must
be conducted in accordance with any ordinance pertaining thereto (see title 4,
chapter 4 of this Code).
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-6: USE OF PARKS:
   A.   Picnics And Other Activities:
      1.   No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than
those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to
regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and
to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors
shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
      2.   No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of
any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics
to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
   B.   Clean Up Grounds; Extinguish Fires: Each person, firm or corporation
using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all
fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and
the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-7: VEHICLES IN PARKS:
It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile or vehicle except on a
street, driveway or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such
automobile or vehicle in any place other than one established for public
parking.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-8: BOATING AND SWIMMING:
   A.   Except for watercraft operated by authorized representatives of
Federal, State of Illinois, or local governmental authorities, the use and/or
operation of boats, canoes, paddle boats, rafts, watercraft, or any other
device capable of floating or being operated on water is hereby prohibited in
all ponds or other bodies of water owned by the City or within its corporate
limits. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of model boats or
other devices that are not capable of being occupied by humans.
   B.   Swimming is hereby prohibited in all ponds or other bodies of water
owned by the City or within its corporate limits.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using City parks to
perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts:
   A.   Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or
paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
   B.   Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing
into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will
or may result in the pollution of said waters.
   C.   Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash.
No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not so
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere (see
also subsection
5-6-2E of this Code).
   D.   Turn or take cattle, horses, goats, swine, poultry or other animals
into any park.
   E.   Carry firearms, or throw stones or other missiles, or cut, break or in
any way injure or deface the trees, shrubs, plants, turf or any of the
buildings, fountains or fixtures.
   F.   Post or otherwise use or fix any bills, notices or other papers upon
any structure, tree, building or thing, nor upon any enclosure.
   G.   Disturb the peace, or use any profane, obscene or blasphemous language.
   H.   Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
   I.   Commit any assault or battery or engage in fighting.
   J.   Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic liquor.
   K.   Violate any rule for the use of any park made or approved by the Public
Works Director.
   L.   Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or
interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and the rules
applicable to such use.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
9-6-10: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, for which no specific penalty is provided, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Whoever shall fail to obey the lawful orders of the Public Works
Committee given in enforcement of the provisions hereof shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2329, 8-24-2010)
CHAPTER 7: MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
Section
9-7-1: Pool Established
9-7-2: Supervisory Committee
9-7-3: Rules And Regulations
9-7-4: Hours Of Operation
9-7-5: Rates And Charges
9-7-6: Accounting
9-7-7: Penalty
9-7-1: POOL ESTABLISHED:
Whereas, pursuant to a quit claim deed dated April 16, 1973, and duly recorded
in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Iroquois County, Illinois, the
American Legion Post Number 23, a not for profit corporation, organized and
existing under the laws of the State of Illinois, and Melvin Muller, Donald W.
Pursley, Eugene Barragree, Virgil Busby, James E. Pickens, Donald D. Pew,
Lonnie N. Cluver, Howard E. Williams, and James J. Thomison, Trustees of the
Community Swimming Pool, appointed pursuant to the provisions of a deed of
trust dated July 6, 1953, and recorded in book 819 at page 266 of the records
of the Recorder of Iroquois County, Illinois, conveyed to the City of Watseka,
the facilities of the Community Swimming Pool operated theretofore by the
grantors; and
Whereas, by ordinance duly adopted on March 13, 1973, by the Iroquois County
Board of the County of Iroquois and State of Illinois, and thereafter by a quit
claim deed executed on its behalf by its Chair and County Clerk, the Board did
convey to the City of Watseka all interest which the Iroquois County Board had
in and to the facilities of the Community Swimming Pool; and
Whereas, all said conveyances were made to the City of Watseka for the purpose
of the Community Swimming Pool being operated by the City as a Municipal
Swimming Pool; and
Whereas, thereafter by resolution duly adopted, the City Council of the City of
Watseka did accept the conveyance of the facilities of the Community Swimming
Pool as a Municipal Swimming Pool, there is hereby established in and for the
City of Watseka, Illinois, pursuant to the authority of the Statutes of the
State of Illinois, a Municipal Swimming Pool for the City, which swimming pool
shall be operated on the following described real estate:
A tract of land in Lot 4 of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter and
in Lot I of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 5,
Township 26 North, Range 12 West of the Second Principal Meridian in Iroquois
County, Illinois, said lots being shown on plat recorded in Surveyor's Record
Book 2, Page 276, in the Iroquois County Records, said tract described as
beginning at a boulder at the Northeast corner of the Southeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter of said Section 5; thence South 14'-05' West 200.00 feet to
an iron pin; thence South 420-291-30" West 110.34 feet to an iron pin; thence
South 74'-54' West 164.45 feet to an iron pin; thence North 12'-53' West 257.77
feet to an iron pin; thence North 76'-56'-30" East 147.73 feet to an iron pin;
thence North 1'-51' West 227.38 feet to an iron pin; thence South 89'-55' East
199.52 feet to a PK nail on the East line of the Southeast Quarter of said
Section 5; thence South 1'-00' East on the East line 193.53 feet to the point
of beginning, containing a total area of 2.561 Acres, more or less, in Iroquois
County Illinois.
(1980 Code § 28-1)
9-7-2: SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Composition; Appointment: The Municipal Swimming Pool shall be managed
and operated for the City by a committee consisting of the members of the
Public Works Committee, the Mayor, and three (3) citizens of the City, not
members of the City Council, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
   B.   Terms Of Office: The terms of office of the citizen members of the
committee shall be three (3) years and until their respective successor shall
be appointed and qualified. For the first appointment of the citizens to the
committee, one shall be appointed to serve until the end of the current
Municipal year in which the appointment is made, another one shall be appointed
to serve until the end of the Municipal year next ensuing, and the third shall
be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, one citizen member
shall be annually appointed for a period of three (3) years.
(1980 Code § 28-3)
9-7-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The committee shall have power to make, publish and enforce all needful
rules for the operation and management of the pool and for the use of the pool
by the public.
(1980 Code § 28-4)
   B.   All regulations governing the use of parks, as set forth in chapter 6
of this title, insofar as they are applicable, shall apply to the use of the
swimming pool premises by the public.
(1980 Code § 28-7)
9-7-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Hours for public swimming shall be from one o'clock (1:00) P.M. until
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any one day from Memorial Day through Labor Day of
the same year; except, that the swimming pool may be closed during inclement
weather or where unsanitary water conditions exist, or for any special events.
   B.   Any section of the swimming pool may be declared closed to the public
at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or
stated intervals.
(1980 Code § 28-2)
9-7-5: RATES AND CHARGES:
The committee shall recommend to the City Council the charges and rates to be
made to the public for the use of the pool. Upon the enactment of an ordinance
or resolution, after said recommendation fixing and determining said charges
and rates, the charges and rates for the use of the pool, so approved, shall
thereupon become effective.
(1980 Code § 28-6)
9-7-6: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   The City shall install and maintain a proper system of accounts,
showing the revenues received from the operation of the pool, the receipts from
other sources for the operation and maintenance of the pool, and the amounts
paid out on account of the pool.
   B.   All monies received from the operation of the pool shall be deposited
daily with the City Collector.
   C.   All expenditures for the pool shall be made on appropriate vouchers
duly approved by the committee and the City Council.
   D.   The general rules of the City Council relative to purchases shall apply
to the pool.
   E.   An annual audit shall be made by the same auditor who audits the City’s
accounts.
(1980 Code § 28-5)
9-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 28-8; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 8: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
9-8-1: Permit Required For Planting Or Removal
9-8-2: Protection Of Trees And Shrubs
9-8-3: Dangerous Trees
9-8-4: South Carolina Poplar Prohibited
9-8-5: Penalty
9-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PLANTING OR REMOVAL:
   A.   Planting: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public
street or parkway or other public place without having secured permission
therefor. Applications for such permission shall be made to the Public Works
Director. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the
directions and approval of the Public Works Director.
(1980 Code § 45-91)
   B.   Removal: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub
in any public place without having secured permission therefor. Applications
for such permission shall be made to the Public Works Committee.
(1980 Code § 45-92)
9-8-2: PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   Injury To: It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted or
growing in any public place.
(1980 Code § 45-93)
   B.   Posting Advertisements Or Notices: It shall be unlawful to attach any
sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place.
(1980 Code § 45-94)
   C.   Wires:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire, cable or rope to any tree
or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the
permission of the City Council.
      2.   Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the
streets, alleys, or other public places shall, in the absence of a provision in
the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and
away from any trees and shrubs in such places so far as may be possible, and
shall keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly
trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Public Works Director, so that no
injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees by
their contact.
(1980 Code § 45-96)
   D.   Gas Pipes: Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the City
shall keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby
to any trees or shrubs.
(1980 Code § 45-97)
   E.   Excavations In Public Ways And Places: In making excavations in streets
or other public places, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots
of any tree or shrub, whenever possible.
(1980 Code § 45-98)
9-8-3: DANGEROUS TREES:
   A.   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the City in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or
travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the
premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
   B.   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across
any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which
the tree grows or stands.
   C.   The Public Works Director may trim any such tree or shrub or remove any
such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or
passage shall be eliminated.
(1980 Code § 45-95)
9-8-4: SOUTH CAROLINA POPLAR PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be planted in any of the public
streets of the City trees commonly known as South Carolina Poplar.
(1980 Code § 45-99)
9-8-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code § 45-105)
CHAPTER 9: ADOPT-A-LOT PROGRAM
Section
9-9-1: Program Established
9-9-2: Purpose
9-9-3: Administration
9-9-4: Eligibility
9-9-5: Application
9-9-6: Award
9-9-7: Required Submissions
9-9-8: No Warranties
9-9-9: Legal Right And Title
9-9-10: Program Agreement
9-9-11: Reservations
9-9-12: Adopter Responsibilities
9-9-13: Permitted Uses
9-9-14: Prohibited Uses
9-9-15: Penalty
9-9-1: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
The City of Watseka does hereby establish the “Adopt-A-Lot” Program (the
“program”).
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-2: PURPOSE:
The City was awarded a grant from the State of Illinois Department of Natural
Resources to be used to reimburse the City for monies expended to acquire and
clear repetitive flood loss properties located in the 100-year flood plain
within its corporate limits (the “project”). The project requires the City to
take ownership of the properties acquired and cleared, and to maintain those
lots as open space. The program is intended to reduce general taxpayer
responsibility for the cost of maintenance of lots acquired as a part of the
project, limit the potential for additional losses to property due to flooding,
and instill pride in the community by converting what would otherwise be vacant
lots into beautified gardens, recreational areas, and other approved open
spaces.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The Building Official shall be responsible for the administration and oversight
of the program. The Building Official shall be charged with the following
duties and responsibilities:
   A.   Drafting and making available to the public a program application;
   B.   Administering the application submission and review process;
   C.   Processing applications and recommending the awarding of licenses for
lots to the City Council;
   D.   Ensuring all required paperwork or documentation required by this
ordinance and the program agreement is submitted and maintained in complete and
proper form;
   E.   Executing program agreements as authorized by the City Council;
   F.   Maintaining a list of lots available through the program, along with
the names and information of caretakers of adopted lots, as applicable;
   G.   Approving uses and/or improvements to adopted lots;
   H.   Ensuring that caretakers are complying with the terms of this ordinance
and the program agreement; and,
   I.   All other things necessary and desirable for the efficient and fair
administration of the program.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-4: ELIGIBILITY:
All owner-occupiers of property, civic or non-profit organizations,
governmental entities, school groups, and neighborhood groups of the City are
eligible to participate in the program provided they are and remain current on
all property tax obligations affecting their real property within the City, and
are not in arrears of the payment of any debt or other financial obligation due
and owing the City.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-5: APPLICATIONS:
The Building Official shall open the application period for newly acquired and
other available lots each January and July of the calendar year, as
appropriate. Applications will be accepted the first two full business weeks of
the month of January and July. Licenses for lots will be awarded at the regular
city council meeting in January and July. Any lots offered during the
application period but not adopted may be adopted at any time through an “over-
the-counter” application to the Building Official and subsequent approval by
the city council. Each application shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information: (a) the name, residential address, and telephone number of the
applicant; (b) a copy of the deed demonstrating proof of ownership of property
corresponding to applicant’s address, as applicable; (c) identification of the
lot to be adopted and the term (i.e., period of time) of the license for which-
the applicant proposes to be responsible therefor; (d) an explanation as to how
the applicant will use the lot; and, (e) a signed and dated statement
acknowledging receipt of a copy of this ordinance and program agreement, as
well as a statement that the applicant will execute and deliver all documents
required thereby upon being awarded a license for the lot.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-6: AWARD:
The City Council shall award licenses for lots according to the following
priority:
   A.   First, to the owner-occupier of a lot whose side yard is adjacent to
the lot to be adopted; provided, that if there are more than one application,
the owner-occupier selected by lottery;
   B.   Second, the owner-occupier of a lot whose rear yard is adjacent to the
lot to be adopted; and,
   C.   Third, to any other eligible person or group applying as selected by
lottery.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-7: REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS:
No later ten (10) days following an award, as may be extended at the discretion
of the Building Official, an approved applicant shall deliver to the Building
Official the following: (a) a signed copy of a program agreement; (b) an
adoption fee, if any, established’ by the City Council; and, (c) certificate of
liability insurance in the form prescribed by the program agreement. Failure to
deliver the submissions required by this section shall invalidate the award and
may disqualify the applicant from future program proceedings. In such case,
consideration of awarding the license for the lot to another applicant will be
considered by the City Council at its next regular meeting.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-8: NO WARRANTIES:
The City makes no warranty, either express or implied, as to the condition of
any lot or that it is or will be suitable for any particular purpose or use.
Each caretaker that has adopted a lot shall be deemed to have accepted it in an
“as is” condition.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-9: LEGAL RIGHT AND TITLE:
All legal right, title, and interest in and to lots adopted through the program
are vested and shall remain in the City. Each caretaker shall be and remain a
licensee of the City and such license and the program agreement shall be
terminable at the discretion and will of the City at any time, without cause,
and without process, upon written notice. The license granted shall be personal
to the caretaker, and shall not be assignable, run with the land, or otherwise
be subject to transfer. A caretaker shall have no power or authority to do any
act which,shall impair the City’s title or interest in a lot.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-10: PROGRAM AGREEMENT:
The City and caretaker shall execute a program agreement, which shall grant and
establish the terms and conditions of the caretaker’s license to an adopted
lot. The term of the program agreement shall not exceed three (3) years, but
shall be renewable at the conclusion of the initial term or each renewal term
thereafter for the same or lesser period of time, at the discretion of the
parties.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-11: RESERVATIONS:
The City shall at all times, with respect to a lot, have the power and
authority to: (a) traverse, use, and inspect the same; (b) construct, maintain,
repair, reconfigure, or replace utilities, surfaces or other improvements
situated on, under and within the same; and (c) to grant such additional rights
and interests as may be deemed necessary and desirable, provided such rights
and interests do not unreasonably interfere with the caretaker’s use.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-12: ADOPTER RESPONSIBILITIES:
A caretaker of a lot shall have the following duties and responsibilities with
respect to such lot:
   A.   Comply with the terms and conditions of the program agreement;
   B.   Provide year-round maintenance of the adopted lot in a neat, clean, and
attractive manner;
   C.   Comply with the City of Watseka Municipal Code with respect to the lot
in the same manner as if the caretaker had legal title, and exclusive
possession and control thereof;
   D.   Comply with this chapter;
   E.   Comply with any deed restriction recorded against and imposed upon the
lot;
   F.   Comply with all orders, directives, rules and regulations of the City,
the IEPA, and/or FEMA regarding the use or improvement of land acquired through
flood hazard mitigation grant programming; and,
   G.   Notify the City not less than thirty (30) days before losing its status
as owner-occupant of the real property identified on its application.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-13: PERMITTED USES:
A caretaker may only utilize an adopted lot in the following manner:
   A.   For open space or recreational activities;
   B.   To plant, grow, and harvest (but not for profit) flowers, vegetables,
fruits, herbs, shrubs, and trees;
   C.   Install and maintain playground equipment; and,
   D.   In business and manufacturing zoning districts, with the prior approval
of the Building Official, allow parking on a lot in association with an
adjacent business that the Licensee owns and controls provided the improvement
is constructed of approved pervious materials, but not gravel.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-14: PROHIBITED USES:
Except as authorized by Section
9-9-13, a caretaker shall not utilize an adopted lot or engage in any of the
following activities thereon:
   A.   Construct, erect, or place any building, storage bin, or any other
permanent structure;
   B.   Place or erect permanent signs of any type;
   C.   Pave or make impervious any portion of a lot;
   D.   Alter the grading of a lot without the prior written approval of the
Building Official and City Engineer;
   E.   Use or permit the use of a lot for any commercial or for-profit
purpose, or for a driveway, vehicular ingress/egress, parking, or storage of
vehicles or equipment;
   F.   Store goods, wares, materials, and equipment of any sort;
   G.   Erect fencing or boundary barriers of any type;
   H.   Place, dump, or store grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, garbage, or
any other similar material or refuse;
   I.   Remove trees, shrubs, or flowers growing or present on the lot before
the caretaker was awarded a license therefor without the prior written approval
of the Building Official;
   J.   Violate any order, directive, law, rule, or regulation governing the
use or maintenance of real property, in general, or as may be applicable to the
caretaker or the lot; or,
   K.   Conduct or engage in any activity in violation of any Environmental Law
(as hereinafter defined), or to use, bring upon, transport, generate, store,
keep or cause or allow the discharge, spill or release (or allow a threatened
release) in each case an Hazardous Material (as hereinafter defined) on a lot.
For purposes hereof, the term “Hazardous Material” shall mean all toxic or
hazardous substances, materials or waste, petroleum or petroleum products,
petroleum additives or constituents or any other waste, contaminant or
pollutant regulated under or for which liability may be imposed by any
Environmental Law. “Environmental Law” shall mean all federal, provincial,
state and local environmental laws, regulations, ordinances and other
requirements (including common law) regulating or imposing standards of care
with respect to the handling, storage, use, emitting, discharge, disposal or
other release of Hazardous Materials, including, but not limited to, the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the
Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401, et seq., the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq., the Emergency Planning and Community Right to
Know Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1101, et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., the Toxic
Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§2601, et seq., the Oil Pollution Control
Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 2701, et seq., any successor statutes to the foregoing, or
any other comparable local, state or federal statute or ordinance pertaining to
protection of human health or safety, the environment or natural resources,
including without limitation the preservation of wetlands, and all regulations
pertaining thereto, as well as applicable judicial or administrative decrees,
orders or decisions, authorizations or permits.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
9-9-15: PENALTY:
In addition to such remedies as may be afforded to the City under a program
agreement or applicable law, any person found in violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that said violation
continues shall be considered to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 2572, 5-26-2020)
CHAPTER 10: RAILROAD OCCURRENCES
Section
9-10-1: Definitions
9-10-2: Railroad Occurrence Response
9-10-3: Responsible Party Liability
9-10-4: Railroad Occurrence Response Expenses
9-10-5: Administration
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HIGHWAY-RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING: The intersection of a railroad track and a
highway, street, roadway, sidewalk or other public way, or any combination of
the above, designated or intended for vehicle or pedestrian traffic, at the
same grade level.
RAILROAD OCCURRENCE: 
   A.   The activation of a safety device at a highway railroad grade crossing
indicating the presence or impending presence of railroad traffic when no train
is present and is not promptly anticipated at the intersection (i.e., false
activation);
   B.   The continued activation of safety devices after a train has left the
vicinity of a highway-railroad grade crossing and no other train is present or
impending immediate arrival at the intersection; or
   C.   A train is present in the highway-railroad grade crossing but has
stopped moving.
RAILROAD OCCURRENCE RESPONSE EXPENSE: Any expense for personnel and equipment
involved in responding to a railroad occurrence. Responses include, but are not
limited to, police services, auxiliary services, firefighting services,
emergency rescue services, emergency medical services, technical rescue teams,
public works services, and the services performed by a private contractor
responding to a railroad occurrence at the request of the City of Watseka.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person or entity owning, controlling, using, operating,
maintaining, having custody over, or conducting any activity upon any land,
infrastructure, facility, equipment, safety device, vehicles, cars or trains,
causing or contributing to a railroad occurrence.
SAFETY DEVICE: Any gate, light, bell, warning, or other signals at a highway
railroad grade crossing which is meant or designed to give warning of impending
or present railroad traffic.
(Ord. 2683, 6-27-2023)
9-10-2: RAILROAD OCCURRENCE RESPONSE:
In the event of a railroad occurrence, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall immediately attempt to contact a responsible party to advise of
the railroad occurrence. Thereafter, or in conjunction therewith, personnel and
equipment shall be dispatched to the highway-railroad grade crossing that is
the site of the railroad occurrence as deemed reasonably necessary by the Chief
of Police, or his or her designee, and such railroad occurrence shall be
documented and made of record. City officials from other departments shall
cooperate with the police department to provide personnel and equipment deemed
reasonably necessary at the highway-railroad grade crossing.
(Ord. 2683, 6-27-2023)
9-10-3: RESPONSIBLE PARTY LIABILITY:
It shall be the duty of any responsible party to reimburse the City of Watseka
for its railroad occurrence response expenses no later than twenty (20) days
after the issuance of an invoice detailing said expenses. The liability of a
responsible party shall be joint and severable.
(Ord. 2683, 6-27-2023)
9-10-4: RAILROAD OCCURRENCE RESPONSE EXPENSES:
The City of Watseka shall be reimbursed for its railroad occurrence response
expenses at the following hourly rates: two hundred and fifty dollars ($250)
per hour, or any portion thereof, for fire apparatus, equipment, ambulances or
emergency response vehicles; seventy-five dollars ($75) per hour, or any
portion thereof, for other motor vehicles, including police squad cars,
responding to the occurrence; and sixty dollars ($60) per hour, or any portion
thereof after the first hour, for personnel. All other expenses shall be billed
at their reasonable and customary rate.
(Ord. 2683, 6-27-2023)
9-10-5: ADMINISTRATION:
Any responsible party failing to reimburse the City of Watseka as provided
herein shall be subject to a judgment in the amount of the City of Watseka's
railroad occurrence response expenses. Violations of Section
9-10-3 may be administered through the provisions of Title 1, Administration,
Chapter 4, General Penalty, Article A, Administrative Adjudication of Non-
Vehicular Violations, of the Watseka City Code, or by any other means permitted
by law. Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or
penalties available to City of Watseka.
(Ord. 2683, 6-27-2023)
TITLE 10: WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1: WATER USE AND SERVICE
Section
10-1-1: Superintendent Of Water Department
10-1-2: New Connections To System; Fees And Costs
10-1-3: Authority To Turn On Water
10-1-4: Deposit For Service
10-1-5: Proper Plumbing Required
10-1-6: Meters
10-1-7: Service Pipes
10-1-8: Shutoff Boxes
10-1-9: Reconnections Or Disconnections
10-1-10: Resale Of Water
10-1-11: Water For Building Construction
10-1-12: Emergency Shutoffs
10-1-13: Tampering With, Obstructing Or Damaging System
10-1-14: Violation; Penalty
10-1-1: SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of the Superintendent of the Water
Department. In all parts of this Code relating to the Water Department, he may
be referred to as the “Superintendent”. Said Superintendent shall have charge
of the City Water Department and shall be responsible for its operation and
maintenance. He shall be subject to the directions of the Public Works
Committee of the City Council. He shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 35-20)
10-1-2: NEW CONNECTIONS TO SYSTEM; FEES AND COSTS:
   A.   Rights Of City: In the case of all new connections with the combined
waterworks and sewerage system, the City shall have the right to regulate and
control the manner and place of the connections and the location of meters so
that the meters shall be easily accessible to the City for reading.
(1980 Code § 35-34)
   B.   Permit And Inspection Required: No new connection with a water main
shall be made without a permit being issued and forty eight (48) hours' notice
having been given to the City Collector and to the Superintendent of the Water
Department. All such connections shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent, and no water connection shall be covered until the work has
been inspected by him. Applications for permits to make such connections must
be made to the City Collector and the appropriate fee and other costs paid for
the connection.
   C.   Tap Fees And Costs:
      1.   The fees for new connections with water mains of the City shall be
as follows:
 
1 inch tap          $400.00
11/4 inch tap       450.00
11/2 inch tap       550.00
2 inch tap          725.00
3 inch tap          800.00
4 inch tap and over 1,000.00
 
      2.   In addition to the fee set forth above and the other costs and
expenses set forth herein, the applicant shall pay the reasonable cost of all
materials (which term “materials” specifically includes the cost of a new meter
for all new construction) used in the new connection.
   D.   Relocation Of Connection Or Larger Service Line: In the event that the
applicant seeks to relocate an existing water connection and/or requires a
larger service line to the property, then all of the fees, costs, and expenses
set forth in this section shall be paid by the applicant. In the event that the
applicant requires a new meter to properly record the water consumption on the
property due to the increased size of the water service line or due to the need
for such meter arising from new construction, the cost of such meter shall be
borne by the applicant.
   E.   Taps For Apartment Complexes, Duplexes And Dwellings:
      1.   A separate tap charge shall apply to each unit and apartment complex
or duplex and for all new taps for apartments, dwelling houses and duplexes.
Each unit shall be required to have a separate tap and meter.
      2.   For all replacement water taps, the same fee as described above for
new taps shall apply.
      3.   No taps of less than one inch (1") shall be permitted.
      4.   No water tap made by the City for the above fees shall exceed sixty
feet (60') in length, unless the water users or property owners pay to the City
the costs of labor and materials in constructing and extending the water tap
beyond the sixty foot (60') limit; and in any event, the City, for the fee,
shall not be required to make any such connection on private property.
      5.   In the event that a meter well is necessary for the protection of
the water meter, the water user or property owner, in addition to the above
fees shall pay the City the cost of the meter well, which fee shall be for the
purpose of meeting and covering the costs of materials and installation of said
meter wells. A meter well is required of each user for every new water tap to
the water system of the City.
(Ord. 2116, 10-17-2005)
10-1-3: AUTHORITY TO TURN ON WATER:
No water from the Municipal water supply shall be turned on for service into
any premises by anyone but the Superintendent of the Water Department or some
other person authorized by him or the City Council to perform this service.
(1980 Code § 35-15)
10-1-4: DEPOSIT FOR SERVICE:
A deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be required of all water
users living or residing in, or operating a business in, any premises and/or
owning such premises before service shall be supplied. When service to any
outside water users is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amount
still due the City for services and charges herein provided, shall be refunded
without interest. The deposit may be refunded by the City to users having legal
title to the premises served, on request of such owners after a two-year period
of regular payment and if no charges are outstanding.
(Ord. 2330, 8-24-2010)
10-1-5: PROPER PLUMBING REQUIRED:
No water shall be turned on for service in a premises in which the plumbing
does not comply with the ordinances of the City (see title 11, chapter 6 of
this Code) and with State law; provided, that water may be turned on for
construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this
Code.
(1980 Code § 35-18)
10-1-6: METERS:
   A.   Meter Required And Provided; Responsibility For Costs: All premises
using water from the City water supply must be equipped with an adequate water
meter, but such water service may be supplied by the City at a flat rate of
charge until such meter may be installed by the City. All meters shall be
supplied by the City Water Department. The users shall be responsible for the
cost of the meter in addition to the tap charge for any line one inch (1") or
greater.
(1980 Code § 35-23)
   B.   Installation Of Meters: Meters shall be installed by the Superintendent
of the Water Department or someone authorized by him or by the City Council to
make said installations. The water meter shall be placed in a location of easy
access, to be approved by the Superintendent of the Water Department. Meters
shall be so placed and installed as to permit the meters to be read from the
outside of the building. The property owner shall provide a proper opening in
the piping for the installation of the meter and shall provide the necessary
couplings, unions and bypasses for said installation.
(1980 Code §§ 35-23, 35-24)
   C.   Replacement Meter: The Water Superintendent is authorized to replace
any meter that is not properly functioning. Should the user refuse to permit
replacement of the meter by the Water Superintendent, the water service may be
terminated in the same manner as provided for nonpayment of fees, in addition
to the applicable penalties provided by this chapter.
(1980 Code § 35-23)
   D.   Repairs: Property owners shall bear the expense of all repairs on their
water meters due to freezing, hot water or from any other cause owing to the
negligence of the property owner, his tenant or the user. The repairs shall be
made by the City and the cost thereof added to the water bill.
(1980 Code § 35-25)
10-1-7: SERVICE PIPES:
   A.   Installation: All service pipes from the lot line to the premises to be
served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property
involved or of the applicant for the service. Such installations shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent of the Water Department. The City
shall install all service pipes from the main to the lot line; provided, that
the proper fee or charge therefor has been paid.
(1980 Code § 35-26)
   B.   Specifications: No service pipe shall be installed unless it conforms
to specifications drawn up by the Superintendent of the Water Department and
approved by the City Council, a copy of which specifications shall be kept on
file by the City Collector and shall be open to inspection by any interested
person.
(1980 Code § 35-27)
   C.   Repairs: All repairs to service pipes and the plumbing systems of
buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises
served; except, that meters may be repaired by the City. The City may, in case
of an emergency, repair any service pipes, and if this is done, the cost of
such repair work shall be repaid to the City by the owner or user of the
premises served.
(1980 Code § 35-28)
   D.   Excavations: Excavations made for installing service pipes or repairing
the same shall be made in compliance with code provisions relating to
excavations in streets (see title 9, chapter 4 of this Code); provided, that it
shall be unlawful to place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or
directly over, any drainpipe or sewer pipe.
(1980 Code § 35-29)
   E.   Nonliability Of City: The City shall not be liable for any damage
caused by a leak or break in any service pipe, or for any damage caused by the
repair or installation of such pipes resulting therefrom, when such work is not
done by the City, nor shall the City be held liable for any damage caused by a
failure to repair any leak or break in any service pipe.
(1980 Code § 35-32)
10-1-8: SHUTOFF BOXES:
Shutoff boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe and shall
be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line, where this is
practicable. Such boxes shall be located so that they are easily accessible,
and shall be protected from frost.
(1980 Code § 35-30)
10-1-9: RECONNECTIONS AND DISCONNECTIONS:
No reconnections or disconnections with the City water supply shall be made
until an application to have the water turned on or disconnected shall have
been made in writing to the City Collector. When a user removes from any
serviced premises, the City shall automatically be entitled to the service
charge herein provided, to reimburse the City for disconnecting the service. A
service charge or fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid for
such reconnections or disconnections.
(1980 Code § 35-16)
10-1-10: RESALE OF WATER:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
Municipal water supply to any premises other than that for which application
has been made and the meter installed, except in the case of an emergency, and
except in the case of trailer parks and apartment buildings. In the case of
trailer parks or apartment buildings, they may be serviced by one single master
meter where the owner of the park or apartment building pays and is responsible
for the entire water bill, in which case, the charge shall be as established in
subsection
10-4-3A of this title for all water received by the trailer park or apartment
building, and the billing thereon shall be monthly.
(1980 Code § 35-21)
10-1-11: WATER FOR BUILDING CONSTRUCTION:
Whenever builders, brick masons, plasterers, contractors or anyone else uses
the water of the City in and about their work, the same shall be metered and
charged for at the regular rate, unless a special contract for the sale of the
water has been made with the City before the water is received by the consumer
or person receiving it.
(1980 Code § 35-33)
10-1-12: EMERGENCY SHUTOFFS:
In case of fire or other emergency, the City shall have the right to shut off
water from any of its users until the emergency is past.
(1980 Code § 35-35)
10-1-13: TAMPERING WITH, OBSTRUCTING OR DAMAGING SYSTEM:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the City Council
or Superintendent of the Water Department to tamper with, alter or injure any
part of the City waterworks or supply system or with any meter.
(1980 Code § 35-22)
   B.   No person shall in any manner obstruct the use of any fire hydrant, or
place any material in front thereof or within ten feet (10') of either side
thereof, or shall injure, damage, or deface a fire hydrant, or shall open,
without City authority, a fire hydrant, under a penalty set forth in section
10-1-14B of this chapter, and any and all material forming such an obstruction
may be forthwith removed by any member of the Fire Department and at the risk,
cost and expense of the owner or claimant thereof.
(1980 Code § 10-11)
10-1-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: The Superintendent shall notify the owner, or
authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which there is
found a violation of this chapter, of such violation. The Superintendent shall
set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected.
Upon failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of the
specified time interval, the Superintendent may, if in his judgment an imminent
health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be
terminated and/or recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as
herein may be provided.
(1980 Code § 35-39)
   B.   Penalty: The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the
maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building who knowingly permits a
violation to remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the
Superintendent shall, upon conviction thereof by the Court, be required to pay
a fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, after the specified time provided under subsection A of this section,
on notification of violation, shall constitute a separate violation.
(1980 Code § 35-39; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE A: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
10-1A-1: Definitions
10-1A-2: Potable Water Supply System Required
10-1A-3: Cross Connections Restricted
10-1A-4: Refrigerating Unit Condensers And Cooling Jackets
10-1A-5: Protection Against Backflow And Backsiphonage
10-1A-6: Maintenance Requirements
10-1A-7: Violation; Penalty
10-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between
the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing
fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
other than its intended source. "Backsiphonage" is one type of backflow.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: A device or means to prevent backflow.
BACKSIPHONAGE: Backflow resulting from negative pressures in the distributing
pipes of a potable water supply.
CHECK VALVE: A self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of
fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection between a potable water supply and
any unapproved source or system through which backflow can occur. Furthermore,
it is any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in
wastewater and/or any other source of contamination. See definitions of
Backflow and Backsiphonage.
DRAIN: Any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne wastes in a building
drainage system.
FLOOD LEVEL RIM: The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
OUTLET: The open end of the water supply pipe through which the water is
discharged into the plumbing fixture.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER: An assembly of differential
valves and check valves including an automatically opened spillage port to the
atmosphere designed to prevent backflow.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
VACUUM BREAKER, NONPRESSURE TYPE: A vacuum breaker designed so as not to be
subjected to static line pressure.
VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE TYPE: A vacuum breaker designed to operate under
conditions of static line pressure.
WATER, NONPOTABLE: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of
questionable potability.
WATER, POTABLE: Water free from contaminants in amounts sufficient to cause
disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and chemical
quality shall conform to the requirements of the Federal and State drinking
water regulations and to any regulations of the public health authority having
local jurisdiction.
(1980 Code § 35-36)
10-1A-2: POTABLE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM REQUIRED:
A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained by
the City in such manner as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids,
solids or gases from being introduced into the potable water supply through
cross connections or any other piping connections to the system, and all
potable water piping or connections to potable water piping shall be installed
in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code
890 et seq., and such Code is hereby incorporated herein by reference as it now
exists or may subsequently be modified or amended.
(1980 Code § 35-7)
10-1A-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Generally: Cross connections between the City water system and other
systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or
questionable quality are prohibited except where and when, as approved by the
City, suitable protective devices such as the reduced pressure zone backflow
preventer or equal are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis. A test report made by a person approved by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as a Cross Connection Control Device
Inspector and completed at the expense of the owner or operator shall be filed
with the Watseka Water Department Superintendent. Such test shall be made and
reported to the Superintendent annually, who shall keep and maintain a file of
the most current test reports.
   B.   Interconnections: Interconnection between two (2) or more public water
supplies shall be permitted only with the approval of the State authority
having jurisdiction.
   C.   Individual Water Supplies: Cross connections between an individual
water supply and the City public supply shall not be made unless specifically
approved by the State authority having jurisdiction.
   D.   Connections To Boilers: Potable water connections to boilers shall be
made through an air gap or provided with an approved backflow preventer.
   E.   Connections To Fixtures And Equipment: Connection to the City water
supply system is prohibited unless protected against backflow. Examples of
fixtures and equipment from which the City water supply system must be
protected include:
      1.   Bidets.
      2.   Operating, dissection, embalming, and mortuary tables or similar
equipment. In such installation, the hose used for water supply shall terminate
at least twelve inches (12") away from every point of the table or attachments.
      3.   Pumps for nonpotable water, chemicals, or other substances. Priming
connections may be made only through an air gap.
      4.   Building drainage, sewer, or vent systems.
(1980 Code § 35-37)
10-1A-4: REFRIGERATING UNIT CONDENSERS AND COOLING JACKETS:
Except where potable water provided for a refrigerator condenser or cooling
jacket is entirely outside the piping or tank containing a toxic refrigerant,
the inlet connection shall be provided with an approved check valve. Also
adjacent to and at the outlet side of the check valve, an approved pressure
relief valve set to relieve at five (5) pounds per square inch above the
maximum water pressure at the point of installation shall be provided if the
refrigeration units contain more than twenty (20) pounds of refrigerants.
(1980 Code § 35-37)
10-1A-5: PROTECTION AGAINST BACKFLOW AND BACKSIPHONAGE:
   A.   Water Outlets: The City water system shall be protected against and
backsiphonage by providing and maintaining backflow at each outlet:
      1.   Air Gap: An air gap between the potable water outlet and the flood
level rim of the fixture it supplies or between the outlet and any other source
of contamination; or
      2.   Backflow Preventer: An approved device or means to prevent backflow.
   B.   Minimum Required Air Gap:
      1.   How Measured: The minimum required air gap shall be measured
vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or
line of the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges.
      2.   Size: The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective
opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than
three (3) times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical
surface, in which case, the minimum required air gap shall be three (3) times
the effective opening of the outlet.
   C.   Approval Of Devices:
      1.   Before any device for the prevention of backflow or backsiphonage is
installed, it shall have first been certified by a recognized testing
laboratory acceptable to the City. Devices installed in a building potable
water supply distribution system for protection against backflow shall be
maintained in good working condition by the person responsible for the
maintenance of the system.
      2.   All such devices for the protection against backflow and
backsiphonage shall be inspected upon installation and not less often than
annually by a person approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
as a Cross Connection Control Device Inspector. The results of such inspection
shall be filed with the City Water Department Superintendent, and if such
devices are found to be defective or inoperative, the Water Department
Superintendent shall require the replacement of the devices.
   D.   Installation Of Devices:
      1.   Nonpressure-Type Vacuum Breakers: Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall
be installed with the critical level at least six inches (6") above the flood
level rim of the fixture they serve and on the discharge side of the last
control valve to the fixture. No shutoff valve or faucet shall be installed
beyond the vacuum breaker. For closed equipment or vessels such as pressure
sterilizers, the top of the vessel shall be treated as the flood level rim, but
a check valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the vacuum breaker.
      2.   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer: A reduced pressure
principle type backflow presenter may be installed subject to full static
pressure.
      3.   Devices Of All Types: Backflow and backsiphonage preventing devices
shall be accessibly located, preferably in the same room with the fixture they
serve. Installation in utility or service spaces, provided they are readily
accessible, is also permitted.
   E.   Protective Devices Required:
      1.   Approved devices to protect against backflow and backsiphonage shall
be installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or backsiphonage
may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided between the water
outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood level rim.
      2.   Where a water connection is not subject to back pressure, a vacuum
breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of the last valve on the line
serving the fixture or equipment.
      3.   Where a potable water connection is made to a line, fixture, tank,
vat, pump, or other equipment with a hazard of backflow or backsiphonage where
the water connection is subject to back pressure, and an air gap cannot be
installed, the City will require adequate protection, which may include the use
of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
(1980 Code § 35-37)
10-1A-6: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: It shall be the responsibility of building and
premises owners to maintain all backflow preventers and vacuum breakers within
the building or on the premises in good working order and to make no piping or
other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing backflow devices.
   B.   Backflow Preventers: Periodic testing and inspection schedules shall be
established by the Water Department Superintendent for all backflow preventers
and the interval between such testing and inspections, and overhauls of each
device shall be established in accordance with the age and condition of the
device. Inspection intervals shall not exceed one year, and overhaul intervals
shall not exceed five (5) years. These devices should be inspected frequently
after the initial installation to assure that they have been installed properly
and that debris resulting from the installation has not interfered with the
functioning of the device. The testing procedures shall be in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions.
(1980 Code § 35-38)
10-1A-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: The Water Department Superintendent shall notify
the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in
which there is found a violation of this article of such violation. The
Superintendent shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation
removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by
the end of the specified time interval, the Superintendent may, if in his
judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the
building or premises to be terminated and/or recommend such additional fines or
penalties to be invoked as herein may be provided.
(1980 Code § 35-39)
   B.   Penalty: The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the
maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building which knowingly permits a
violation to remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the Water
Department Superintendent shall, upon conviction thereof by the Court, be
required to pay a fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a failure to comply with the requirements of this
article, after the specified time provided under the subsection A of this
section on notification of violation, shall constitute a separate violation.
(1980 Code § 35-39; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B: ADDITIONAL EXTERIOR WATER METERS
Section
10-1B-1: Meters Authorized
10-1B-2: Registration Required
10-1B-3: Inspection And Regulation
10-1B-4: Determination Of Amount Of Water Used
10-1B-5: Water Shortages
10-1B-1: METERS AUTHORIZED:
Users of the City water and sewer systems are hereby authorized and permitted
to install additional water meters to be installed by them at a point exterior
to their residence or buildings for the purpose of measuring the flow of water
used for such purposes as watering lawns, trees, shrubs, washing cars, etc.,
which the flow of water would not be a burden to the City sewer system.
(1980 Code § 35A-1)
10-1B-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All users intending to install such a meter shall register with the City
Collector and provide such information as may be reasonably requested
concerning the installation for the purpose of measuring the external flow of
water not channeled into the City sewer. The meter shall be provided by the
City at a cost to be set and determined from time to time by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 35A-2)
10-1B-3: INSPECTION AND REGULATION:
The City, by and through the Superintendent of the Water Department, or other
appropriate agent or employee, shall have the right to inspect and regulate the
installation of all such external water meters.
(1980 Code § 35A-3)
10-1B-4: DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF WATER USED:
The wastewater volume for billing purposes shall be determined by subtracting
the volume shown by the external meter from the total metered amount of water
supplied to the premises.
(1980 Code § 35A-4)
10-1B-5: WATER SHORTAGES:
   A.   In the event the City or the surrounding area should suffer from a
water shortage, the City Council shall have the authority to suspend the
provisions of this article in order to encourage the conservation of water
resources.
   B.   In the event that the Mayor determines and declares that such water
shortage exists to such an extent and degree as to constitute an emergency,
then the Mayor is hereby empowered to suspend the provisions of this article
pending ratification by the City Council at its next regular meeting following
the suspension by the Mayor.
   C.   In determining whether a water shortage exists, the Mayor and City
Council may consider water shortage in the surrounding area in addition to the
adequacy of the supply of the City water system and may also suspend the
provisions of this article prior to the existence of an emergency where the
possibility of a shortage of water in the future appears evident.
(1980 Code § 35A-5)
ARTICLE C: WATER WELLS; USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER
Section
10-1C-1: Water Wells
10-1C-2: Groundwater As Potable Water Prohibited
10-1C-1: WATER WELLS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: The drilling or construction of water wells
within the corporate limits of the City is prohibited and shall be unlawful.
   B.   Variances: The City Council is empowered to grant variances from the
prohibition of subsection A of this section in the following circumstances:
      1.   Where the requirements of this section would impose undue hardship.
      2.   Where the public water supply of the City may be inadequate for the
purposes of the owner or user of a proposed private well.
      3.   Where such conditions exist, the owner or user may petition the City
Council for a variance for the requirements of this section, which variance
shall be in the form of an ordinance passed and adopted by a majority of the
City Council.
   C.   Penalties: Any person or entity violating the provisions of this
section or causing the violation of the provisions of this section shall be
fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The owner or occupant of any premises in which a water well
has been unlawfully drilled or constructed shall also be required to seal the
well in accordance with applicable State or other local regulations and
ordinances.
(1980 Code § 35-38.1)
10-1C-2: GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but
not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or
preparing foods.
   B.   Use Prohibited; Exceptions: Expect for such uses or methods in
existence before the effective date hereof, the use or attempted use of
groundwater from the properties identified on the map attached to ordinance
2323 that are within the corporate limits of the City as a potable water supply
by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby
prohibited. This prohibition expressly excludes the City of Watseka.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2323, 7-27-2010)
CHAPTER 2: LOCAL SEWER POLLUTANT LIMITS; SCHEDULE OF SEWER FEES AND CHARGES
Section
10-2-1: Local Sewer Pollutant Limits
10-2-2: Schedule Of Sewer Fees And Charges
10-2-3: Sewer Forms
10-2-1: LOCAL SEWER POLLUTANT LIMITS:
   A.   The City is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   B.   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the daily maximum limit.
Local Limits On Toxic Pollutants
Pollutant Concentration (mg/L)
Pollutant     Concentration (mg/L)
Arsenic       1.0
Cadmium       0.05
Chromium      6.9
Chromium (VI) 0.05
Copper        1.8
Lead          2.5
Mercury       0.0005
Nickel        0.35
Silver        3.0
Zinc          4.0
 
   C.   Local limit guidelines are used as benchmarks for nonresidential users
because the treatment of such pollutants is a loading issue rather than a
toxicity issue. Guidelines are not legally enforceable and are not subject to
escalated enforcement. Should a nonresidential user continually exceed the
listed guideline values, it must either pay for increased capacity provided if
the additional loading is not causing an impact to the City’s POTW, or it may
be required to be classified within the City’s pretreatment program with the
guideline concentrations or alternatives incorporated into a wastewater
discharge permit as limits if an impact to the POTW has occurred. At the point
of incorporation into a permit, the guideline discharge concentrations become
enforceable as local limits.
Local Limit Guidelines On Nontoxic Pollutants
 
Pollutant        Concentration (mg/L)
Ammonia-nitrogen 25
Phosphorus       10
BOD              225
TSS              260
FOG              150
 
   D.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may develop best management practices, by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to
implement local limits and the requirements published in section
10-3F-2 of this title.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-2-2: SCHEDULE OF SEWER FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   No permit shall be issued nor shall any work requiring a permit begin
until the fees hereinafter have been issued to the City and received by the
Building Official.
   B.   Nothing in this section or schedule of fees shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action required or existing,
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed, nor shall any just or legal right
of remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
   C.   The fees to be paid for permits, and the cash bonds or surety bonds to
be collected for projects under the jurisdiction of the City shall be as
follows:
Fees For Sanitary Sewer Users:
 
New sewer tap                 $500.00, plus the cost of materials
Jet sewer on private property 100.00 minimum
Engineering consultant        At the cost incurred for engineering consultation
 
User Charges For Sewer Use y (see also sections
10-4-2B,
10-4-3B and 10-4A-3 of this title)
 
Metered users $3.85 per 1,000 gallons; minimum of 2,000 gallons per month
 
   D.   The sewer rate is subject to change per ordinance approved by the City
Council. The basic user rate shall be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters and/or sewerage meters for wastes having a five-day, twenty degree
celsius (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand of two hundred one milligrams per
liter (201 mg/L) and a suspended solids concentration of two hundred thirty
nine milligrams per liter (239 mg/L). The City reserves the right to add
surcharges for discharges containing additional biochemical oxygen demand or
suspended solids.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-2-3: SEWER FORMS:
The sewer forms that are used to apply for permits issued by the City are on
file in the Office of the City Clerk for public use and inspection.
(2019 Code)
CHAPTER 3: SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10-3A-1: Purpose And Policy
10-3A-2: Intent
10-3A-3: Jurisdiction
10-3A-4: Administrative And Enforcement Official
10-3A-5: Miscellaneous Fees
10-3A-6: Public Information; Request For Confidentiality
10-3A-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
   A.   This chapter, composed of articles A through P, sets forth uniform
requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the
City and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws,
including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code (USC) section 1251 et
seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) part 403). These requirements enable the City to protect
public health and ensure a sound sewer infrastructure system in the future. The
objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
      3.   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by air,
wastewater and biosolids in the course of their employment and the general
public;
      4.   To promote reduction, reuse, and recycling of wastewater, biosolids,
and effluent from the POTW;
      5.   To enable the City to comply with its national pollutant discharge
elimination system permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements,
and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject;
      6.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and
      7.   To regulate private wastewater disposal systems.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW and provides for the
enforcement of general requirements for users. This chapter authorizes the
issuance of wastewater connection and discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs
established herein.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3A-2: INTENT:
It is the intent of the City to recover all costs associated with the
pretreatment program from the entities subject to the program.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3A-3: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall apply to the City and to persons outside the City who are,
by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City's POTW.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3A-4: ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Pretreatment Coordinator, and/or the
individual delegated by the Coordinator or the Mayor as such, shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the Coordinator, and/or the individual delegated by the
Coordinator or the Mayor, may be authorized by the City or the Coordinator to
other City personnel or other duly authorized agent(s) of the City.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3A-5: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
   A.   Pretreatment Charges And Fees: The City may adopt reasonable fees for
reimbursement of costs for setting up and operating the City’s pretreatment
program unique to a specific user which may include:
      1.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users.
      2.   Fees for reviewing plans or construction relating to spill
prevention/slug load plans as defined in section
10-3G-4 of this chapter.
      3.   Fees for responding to report of potential problems as defined in
section
10-3J-7 of this chapter.
      4.   Fees for filing appeals.
      5.   Fees for issuing permits.
      6.   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in
subsection A2 of this section) associated with the enforcement activity taken
by the Pretreatment Coordinator to address user noncompliance.
      7.   Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the City.
   B.   Additional Remedies:
      1.   In addition to remedies available to the City set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, if the City is fined by the State or USEPA for violation of its
NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of discharge
of pollutants by a user or group of users, then the fine, including all legal,
sampling, analytical and testing costs, and any other related costs incurred by
the City, shall be charged to the responsible user or group of users. Such
charges shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the
City may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.
      2.   If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction or
damage to any portion of the POTW, the Coordinator shall cause the deposit or
obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired.
The cost for such work, including materials, labor and supervision, shall be
borne by the person or nonresidential user causing such deposit, obstruction,
or damage.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3A-6: PUBLIC INFORMATION; REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIALITY:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual or general wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and the Pretreatment Coordinator inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Coordinator and City Attorney that such information is
exempt from the Illinois Freedom of Information Act, as amended (5 ILCS 140/
1 et seq.) Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report that such information is exempt from the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act, as amended, the portions of a report which are exempt from the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data”, as defined by 40
CFR, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available
to the public without restriction.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE B: ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
10-3B-1:   Abbreviations
10-3B-2:   Definitions
10-3B-1: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   ASTM: American Society of Testing and Materials.
   BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.
   BMP: Best Management Practices.
   BMR: Baseline monitoring report.
   CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
   CIU: Categorical industrial user.
   COD: Chemical oxygen demand.
   DPW: Director of Public Works.
   EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   FOG: Fats, oils and grease, interchangeable with oil and grease.
   FSE: Food service establishment.
   GI: Grease interceptor.
   gpd: Gallons per day.
   IAC: Illinois Administrative Code.
   IEPA: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   IU: Industrial user.
   mg/L: Milligrams per liter.
   NCPS: National categorical pretreatment standard.
   NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system.
   NSCIU: Nonsignificant categorical industrial user.
   NSRU: Nonsignificant regulated user.
   OM&R: Operation maintenance, and replacement.
   POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
   PSES: Pretreatment standards for existing sources.
   PSNS: Pretreatment standards for new sources.
   ppm: Parts per million (assumed equivalent to mg/L for water).
   RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
   SIU: Significant industrial user.
   SNC: Significant noncompliance.
   SPSCP: Spill prevention/slug control plan.
   SSO: Sewer system overflow.
   SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act.
   TSS: Total suspended solids.
   USC: United States Code.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings designated in this
section:
ACT OR THE ACT OR CLEAN WATER ACT OR FEDERAL ACT: The Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251
et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The IEPA Commissioner.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
   A.   If the user is a corporation:
      1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
      2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions
that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws, and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for individual wastewater permit (or general permit)
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
   C.   If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
   D.   The individuals described in situation A, B or C of this definition may
designate a duly authorized representative. The designation must be in writing,
and the authorized representative described in situations A, B and C of this
definition must designate an individual or position responsible for the overall
operation for environmental matters of the facility from which the discharge of
concern originates. The written designation of the individual or position as
the duly authorized representative must be submitted to the City.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter (40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)) and/or to prevent or
reduce the pollution conveyed to the POTW. "BMPs" include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, biosolids or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage. (Note: "BMPs" also include alternative means (i.e., management plans)
of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment
standards and effluent limits.)
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
approved in 40 CFR 136 for five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20°C),
usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).
BIOSOLIDS: The nutrient-rich organic materials resulting from the treatment of
sewage sludge.
BUILDING DRAIN PIPE: The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system of a
building which receives direct wastewater discharge and discharge from other
pipes carrying wastewater, and conveys the wastewater to the building sewer, or
other approved point of discharge. The building drain ends five feet (5') (1.5
meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. Discharge of stormwater
runoff to the building drain or sanitary sewer is prohibited.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user’s
treatment or pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU): An industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard or categorical standard. A “CIU” is also considered to be
a significant industrial user unless designated otherwise.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405-471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR COD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical
oxidation of all compounds, both organic and inorganic in water, under standard
laboratory procedures as described in 40 CFR 136 usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/L).
CITY: The City of Watseka or the City Council of Watseka.
COMBINED SEWER: A pipe or conduit that is designed and constructed to carry
both potable water that has been used, including sanitary sewage and
nondomestic waste, and untreated water, including stormwater, surface water and
groundwater.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula set forth in 40 CFR section 403.6
(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample of wastewater composed of two (2) or more discrete
samples collected, based on a flow-proportional or time-proportional method.
CONTRACTOR: A person under an agreement with an owner to provide services or
materials in exchange for compensation.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The City of Watseka.
COOLING WATER: Water used to remove heat from an industrial process by
conduction or any other means to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of pollutant amounts of all effluent
samples collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT: The maximum allowable pollutant discharge limit during a
calendar day. If daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily pollutant discharge is the arithmetic average of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where
daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily pollutant
discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day.
DISCHARGE PERMIT: An individual or general permit issued to a user which
specifies the requirements for discharge of wastewater to the Watseka POTW or
the requirements for zero discharge of wastewater to the Watseka POTW as
appropriate.
DISCHARGER: Any person, firm, establishment or institution that discharges
wastewater, excluding inflow and infiltration, into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act.
DISCHARGER is used interchangeably with USER.
DWELLING: A unit designed for domestic occupancy by one family or group of
individuals. It may be a house designed for the exclusive use of one family or
it may be a portion of a building designed and intended to be used by one
family.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: The criteria applied to the wastewater discharged from a
POTW to a surface water body as defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge that is not a NEW SOURCE.
FATS, OIL, AND GREASE (FOG): Is used interchangeably with OILS AND GREASE.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a state such that it will separate by
gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.
FLOW: Movement of a volume of wastewater per unit of time.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Any user engaged in the activities of
preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs
that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cold dairy and
frozen foodstuff preparation, cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all
methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods),
boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, and poaching. Also included are
infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity
that produces a receptacle that requires washing to be reused. A limited food
preparation establishment is not considered to be an FSF when only engaged in
reheating, hot holding, or assembly of ready-to-eat food products which do not
result in an associated wastewater discharge with more FOG than wastewater from
a residential source.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage, and sale of
produce or food.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
GREASE MITIGATION FEE: A fee charged to an owner/operator of a food service
establishment when there are physical limitations to the property that make the
installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor or grease control
device for the FSE under consideration, impossible or impracticable. The GREASE
MITIGATION FEE is intended to cover the costs of the increased maintenance of
the sewer system for inspection and cleaning of FOG and other viscous or
solidifying agents that a properly employed grease control device would
otherwise prevent from entering the sewer system.
HAULED WASTE: Wastewater that is transported to the City’s POTW.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the City’s
POTW from any nondomestic source.
INDUSTRIAL USER (IU): A source of indirect discharge from a nonresidential
source.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT: The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE OR INTERFERE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its biosolids processes, use or disposal;
and therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or
of the prevention of wastewater or biosolids use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): section 405
of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title
11, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State biosolids
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substance Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT: Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City upon
nonresidential users or facilities to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent representing 0.001 gram of the constituent in one liter of water.
MONTHLY AVERAGE: The sum of the concentrations of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured
during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT: The highest allowable MONTHLY AVERAGE for a calendar
month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD,
OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act
(33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in
40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES: The national program
for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and
enforcing permits from point sources to waters of the United States, and
imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318
and 405 of the Clean Water Act.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT): A permit
issued pursuant to section 402 of the CWA, or section 12(f) of the act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE:
   A.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c)
of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided,
that one of the following is true:
      1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site on which no other source is located;
      2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installations are substantially independent of an
existing source at the site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated
with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in
the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
   C.   CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW SOURCE, as defined herein, has commenced if the
owner or operator has done one of the following:
      1.   Begun, or caused one of the following to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:
         a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
         b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation,
or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection C2.
   D.   New sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall
"start up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest
feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources shall meet all applicable
standards.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER: All users not defined as residential users in this
section.
NONSIGNIFICANT REGULATED USER: A source of indirect discharge from a
nonresidential source that is regulated through a control mechanism issued by
the City’s pretreatment program that the Pretreatment Coordinator deems as
having the potential to negatively impact the City’s POTW, but is not
classified as a significant industrial user.
OILS AND GREASE: Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils and
any other material that is extracted by a solvent in a method approved in 40
CPR 136.
OVERHEAD SEWER: A sewer that does not discharge to a public or private sewer
main through the use of gravity. Overhead sewers utilize a pump to lift the
sewage to an elevation where gravity can then carry the wastewater to the
City's sewer system. Nonresidential wastes discharged from overhead sewers are
subject to all the same limits and requirements of sanitary sewers.
OWNER: The entity which holds fee simple title to the real property upon which
a user's facility is located.
ppm: Parts per million and is equivalent to milligrams per liter when water is
the solvent.
PASS THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants that exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This
definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, calculated by taking
the base ten (10) logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration, expressed in standard units.
PHOSPHORUS: The concentration, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L), of
total phosphorus derived through acid hydrolysis of the sample conducted in
accordance with 40 CFR 136.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, wastewater, biosolids, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons (380 liters) of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound (77
g) of BOD5 (5-day carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand at 20° C) and 0.20
pound (91 g) of total suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is
evaluated as the highest equivalent of the three (3) parameters. Impact on a
stream is the higher equivalent of the BOD5 and suspended solids parameters.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentrations of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR OR COORDINATOR: The Director of Public Works or the
designee of the Mayor of the City of Watseka and shall be responsible for the
implementation of the pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a riser, other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: That for any specified pollutant, City
prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section
10-3F-2  of this chapter, City-specific limitations on discharge as set forth
as local limits in chapter 2 of this title, State of Illinois pretreatment
standards, or the national categorical pretreatment standards, whichever
standard is most stringent.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL: Any facility constructed on private property indented
or used for the disposal of sewage, such as a privy, privy vault, septic tank,
septic leach field, or cesspool.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in
section
10-3F-2  of this chapter and sections 327 IAC 5-1-1.5 and 327 IAC 5-2-7 of the
Illinois Administrative Code.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (½") (1.27 centimeters) in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City.
It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve
one or more persons and, ultimately, discharge into the City sanitary system,
even though those sewers may not have been constructed with City funds.
PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A “treatment works”, as defined by
section 212 of the act, (33 USC section 1292) which is owned by the City. This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature that are connected to the City’s POTW regardless of ownership,
but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the
City's sanitary collection system.
RESIDENTIAL SOURCE OR RESIDENTIAL USER: Any single-family or multi-family
dwelling unit designed primarily as a place of human habitation which
discharges only domestic wastewater to the City’s sanitary collection system.
SANITARY SEWER: A pipe or conduit designed and/or intended to carry wastewater
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and
to which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and unpolluted noncontact
cooling water are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY WASTEWATER: See definition of Wastewater.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: Water containing human excrement and other waste generated in domestic
water use (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
SHALL; MAY: “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER OR SIU: A user of the POTW (except as provided by
subsections A and B), who:
   A.   Is subject to any national categorical pretreatment standards; or
   B.   A user that:
      1.   Has an average process wastewater discharge flow of twenty five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more per workday (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
      2.   Has a discharge flow of process wastewater that makes up five
percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
      3.   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   C.   The City may determine that a user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user rather than a
significant industrial user on a finding that the user never discharges more
than one hundred (100) gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The user, prior to the City's finding, has consistently complied
with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
      2.   he user annually submits the certification statement required in
subsection
10-3J-4C of this chapter (see 40 CFR 403.12(q)), together with any additional
information necessary to support the certification statement; and
      3.   The user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
   D.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from a user, determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.
SLUDGE OR SEWAGE SLUDGE: Solid, semisolid or liquid untreated residue generated
during the treatment of domestic sewage in a POTW.
SLUG OR SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which is a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge that could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter. A “slug discharge” is any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference of pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries rainwater, snowmelt and surface drainage, but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the City of Watseka to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter. The term also means a duly authorized
representative of the Superintendent.
T: As In Cyanide-T: Total or the sum of the amounts of a substance in all
phases and species.
TAP: The connection to the sewer main through the use of a factory “wye” or
“tee”, a saddle connection, an Inserta tee ©, or other plumber connection
(i.e., hammer tap).
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR TSS: Total suspended matter,
expressed in milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is
in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by
laboratory filtration, under standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR
136.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The summation of all quantifiable values greater than
0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organics specified in the applicable 40
CFR 405-471 categorical regulation.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and
wastewater treatment facilities provided.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user. An "upset" does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER: Any person or source, excluding residential users, that contributes,
causes or permits the source of indirect discharge into the POTW, or such
persons or sources that are prohibited from discharging specific pollutants or
waste streams to the POTW.
WASTEWATER: The combination of the liquid- and water-carried wastes from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: A combination of liquid- and water-carried wastes
discharged from any industrial user, including the wastewater from pretreatment
facilities and polluted cooling water.
SANITARY WASTEWATER: The combination of liquid- and water-carried wastes
discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The document or documents issued to a user by the
City pursuant to article I of this chapter (synonymous with control mechanism).
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT OR WWTP: That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of Municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Those standards defined in the Water Quality Standards
of Illinois, section 302 of Illinois Administrative Code 35.
WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Illinois or any
portion thereof.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE C: SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
Section
10-3C-1: Compliance Required
10-3C-2: Prohibited And Restricted Discharges
10-3C-3: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
10-3C-4: Sanitary Facilities Required
10-3C-5: Exemptions
10-3C-6: Properties Outside City; Annexation Required For Use Of System
10-3C-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause discharge to the POTW, without
having first complied with the terms of this chapter. At minimum, all users are
subject to the prohibited discharge standards in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter, change notification in subsection
10-3J-6A of this chapter and hazardous waste notification in section
10-3J-9 of this chapter, if applicable. Spill/slug control planning may also be
necessary for some nonresidential users as identified in section
10-3G-4 of this chapter
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3C-2: PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED DISCHARGES:
   A.   Discharge Of Stormwater And Surface Waters: No user(s) shall make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other sources of rainwater, surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain
or building sewer which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sewer.
   B.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste in an unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City.
   C.   Treatment Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City,
without the expressed approval from the Pretreatment Coordinator, that all
State and Federal effluent limitations have been met and there are no
reasonable alternative methods of disposal.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3C-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
Except as provided in section
10-3D-1 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other private sewage disposal
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3C-4: SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED:
   A.   The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby
required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and section
10-3D-2 of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice
to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of
the property line.
   B.   If such public sewer benefits other properties, the City shall enact a
recapture ordinance and make best efforts to collect and return to the owner
amounts received from the benefited properties.
   C.   All public sewer extensions shall be made in accordance with section
10-3D-2 of this chapter. When any of the properties lies more than one hundred
feet (100') from the point of the nearest City public water or sewer supply
pipe, the mandatory connection provisions of subsection A of this section shall
be suspended. From the date that any of such properties is within one hundred
feet (100') from the nearest point of either City public water supply or sewer
pipe, then the ninety (90) day connection requirement of subsection A of this
section shall commence.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3C-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The City recognizes that certain circumstances might be present or arise so
that strict enforcement of the provisions of this article would operate as a
distinct hardship. To be exempted from the provisions of this article, the
owner of any such property shall apply to the Building Official and submit
evidences of the hardship. The Building Official may find that such
extraordinary hardship exists, but no such finding shall be made unless the
evidence discloses that:
   A.   As a result of the particular physical surroundings, shape, topography,
or location with reference to the nearest connection to the sanitary sewerage
or waterworks system of the City, of the tract or parcel of land on which the
particular building or structure involved is situated, a particular hardship to
the owner would result, as distinguished from mere inconvenience.
   B.   The conditions upon which the request for the exemption is based are
unique to the tract or parcel of land on which the building or structure
involved is situated and are not generally applicable to other tracts or
parcels of land; and
   C.   The granting of the exemption will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property in the neighborhood in
which the particular building or structure is located.
   D.   A denial of hardship found by the Building Official may be appealed to
the Board of Appeals, if such appeal is filed with the City Clerk within thirty
(30) days following such denial. The reversal of a denial of hardship shall
require a vote in favor of reversal by at least two (2) members of the Board of
Appeals.
   E.   All water users who are served by the City water system, as defined by
this article, and who previously were served by private wells, shall, upon
connection to the City water system, abandon and properly cap the existing
well. Utilization of private wells as an alternative or supplement to the City
water delivery system shall be prohibited (see subsection
10-1C-1B of this title for exceptions).
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3C-6: PROPERTIES OUTSIDE CITY; ANNEXATION REQUIRED FOR USE OF SYSTEM:
Any parcel and/or building located outside the City shall be required to annex
into the City prior to connecting onto the City sewerage system, and any and
all expenses incurred to extend said sewer system would be completely at the
property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE D: SEWER CONNECTION PROCEDURES
Section
10-3D-1: Private Sewage Disposal
10-3D-2: Sewer Extension Requirements
10-3D-3: Building Sewers And Connections
10-3D-4: Monitoring Facilities
10-3D-5: Additional Structures Required For Use Of Public Sewers
10-3D-6: Food Service Establishments
10-3D-7: Sewer Line Maintenance And Replacement
10-3D-1: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
      2.   Application For Permit: The application for such permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by
any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
      3.   Permit Fee: The permit and inspection fee for private sewage
disposal published in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this title shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed.
   C.   Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department or his representative. He shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent of the Sewer
Department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within three (3)
working days of the receipt of written notice by the Superintendent of the
Sewer Department.
   D.   Specifications:
      1.   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code (225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.) and
with the IEPA.
      2.   No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than required by State and Federal regulations.
      3.   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
   E.   Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
City. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the County Health
Officer.
   F.   Availability Of Public Sewer: At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter,
and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities
shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. The building sewer shall
be connected to the sewer within sixty (60) days thereafter, and the private
sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and biosolids and filled with
suitable material complying with section
10-3D-2B of this article.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3D-2: SEWER EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   The extension of a sanitary sewer that will serve or in the future
may serve more than one building and will connect either directly or indirectly
to the POTW of the City by any entity shall be made only after an application
for a City permit has been made in writing on forms prescribed and furnished by
the City and an extension permit is issued by the City.
      2.   Required Information:
         a.   Persons desiring such extension of the sewer system shall file
with the Superintendent of the Sewer Department four (4) copies of the
following documents:
            (1)   Detailed plans and specifications prepared by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Illinois.
            (2)   IEPA permit application with such supporting documents
required by the IEPA, completely filled out and ready for the City's signature.
            (3)   Detailed estimate of the cost of the extension.
         b.   The person or persons extending the sewer shall pay all costs of
plan review by the City engineer to the City prior to the City signing the IEPA
permit application.
      3.   Issuance Of Permit; Conditions: The City will issue an extension
permit in accordance with the following:
         a.   It has been demonstrated that the downstream treatment works,
including City sewers and pump stations, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
         b.   A permit has been issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. The City permit shall expire on the expiration date of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency permit. Those portions of the work for which a
City permit has been issued and the work has been approved by the City shall be
completed within the permit time. Future construction on the project for which
the original permit was issued shall require a new permit that will be issued
in compliance with the ordinances of the City at the time of the application
for the new permit. All fees and charges assessed under the conditions of the
City permit are forfeited by the applicant/owner upon the expiration of the
permit.
         c.   The City has received an agreement and bond executed by the
permittee wherein the permittee agrees to make and install the improvements in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City and will adhere
to subsection B of this section.
   B.   Construction Requirements:
      1.   The rules, regulations, ordinances and policies listed hereafter and
issued by the authorities indicated are incorporated herein by reference and
shall govern the work so far as they apply to said work:
         a.   The City’s rules, regulations, resolutions, policies, directives
and instructions that may be adopted or issued from time to time by the City.
         b.   “Recommended Standards for Water Works”, latest edition.
         c.   “The State of Illinois Plumbing Code”, latest edition.
         d.   “The Illinois Recommended Standards for Sewage Works”, IEPA,
latest edition.
         e.   “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction” in
Illinois, latest edition.
         f.   Materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the American Society of Testing and Materials.
         g.   “Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9",
latest edition.
         h.   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s rules,
regulations, technical releases and requirements.
      2.   The permittee agrees that he or she shall provide adequate
inspection during the entire construction period which, at the option of the
City, may require a full-time resident engineer. The City reserves the right to
review the construction.
      3.   Any changes in the work to be done or materials to be used from
those shown on the plans or set forth in the specifications, as submitted to
the City, shall be approved by the City prior to the changed work being done or
the changed materials being installed.
      4.   The contractor or the contractor's representative constructing the
sewer extension shall notify the City at least two (2) City workdays prior to
commencing construction. When the construction of the sewer extension is
interrupted for a period of seven (7) calendar days or more, the City shall be
notified at least two (2) City workdays prior to continuing construction of the
sewer extension.
      5.   At the time a sewer extension is connected to an existing sewer, the
connection shall be made at an existing manhole or in a manhole constructed
over the existing sewer in accordance with this subsection. If an existing
manhole is the point of connection and a suitable stub is not provided for the
extension, the existing manhole shall be core drilled and a suitable connection
stub installed. The sewer extension shall be plugged with a watertight concrete
plug by the contractor at the time the connection to the existing sewer is
made. Such plug must be removable from the surface without entrance to the
sewer. The plug shall be maintained in place at all times until the sewer
extension is approved in writing by the City. If the plug is not maintained in
place, the City shall install a concrete plug and charge a fee to the
contractor for each time a plug is installed by the City.
      6.   Upon completion of construction, the contractor shall notify the
appropriate City department requesting final review of the work. The City shall
review the work for compliance with this chapter and adherence to the approved
plans and specifications for which the City's sewer extension permit was
issued. If deficiencies are found in the work, the City shall furnish the
contractor with a listing of such deficiencies. When the contractor believes
that the deficiencies have been corrected, the contractor shall request a re-
review of the work. Should the re-review of the work show that the deficiencies
as set forth have not been corrected, the contractor shall make the necessary
corrections, and subsequent to that, shall notify the City and request another
review. The City shall charge a fee for each additional review and/or
inspection after the first inspection following the issuance of the list of
deficiencies. The fee for each additional review and/or inspection is published
in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this title.
      7.   All sanitary sewers shall be constructed within public rights-of-way
or within easements dedicated for public utilities. No sanitary sewer mains
shall be installed in the rear or side yard of any property unless first
approved by the City engineer.
   C.   Project Completion: No connection permits shall be issued or building
permits released until such time that final approval of the improvement has
been made in writing by the City. Final approval is contingent upon the
following:
      1.   All punch list work has been completed;
      2.   As-built plans prepared by a registered Illinois professional
engineer are furnished to the City;
      3.   The sewer has been inspected for compliance with subsection B of
this section and tested as specified in subsection
10-3D-3E11 of this article.
   D.   Connections To Extension: No connection shall be made to the sanitary
sewer until sewer connection permits have been issued by the City under this
title.
   E.   Performance Bond Release: The performance bond will not be released
until the guarantee period has expired and the following documents are filed
with the City Clerk and approved by the City Council:
      1.   As-built drawings: One reproducible set on electronic format on a
disk, and two (2) sets of prints;
      2.   Release of all permits; and
      3.   Copies of all tests required by the City engineer and/or designee.
      4.   Bill of sale for all constructed public improvements.
      5.   Such other documents as may be reasonably requested by the City.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3D-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required:
         a.   No person shall construct a new wastewater source or alter,
repair or reconstruct an existing source and connect same to the POTW of the
City without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
         b.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent of the
Sewer Department and receipt of an IEPA permit when required under 35 IAC 309.
         c.   No connection, addition to or alteration of any building sewer
shall be made or caused to be made by any person without a permit. Such
connections, additions or alterations shall only be made through a licensed
sewer contractor. No permit shall authorize anything not explicitly stated in
the application.
      2.   Classes Of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits: residential user, and nonresidential user which includes commercial,
institutional, and industrial facilities or other nonresidential sources.
      3.   Application For Permit: The application to be used to obtain a
permit for residential or commercial users shall be on the form on file in the
Office of the City Clerk, named “Residential or Commercial Building Sewer
Application”. The permit application shall be supplemented by plans,
specifications, and other information considered necessary in the judgment of
the Building Official and/or the Pretreatment Coordinator.
      4.   Term Of Permit: The building sewer connection permit shall be issued
for a period of twenty four (24) months consistent with the IEPA permits.
      5.   Permit And Inspection Fees:
         a.   The permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit published in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this title shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed. Nonresidential user fees shall be based on an individual case basis
measured by the impact on the existing POTW and current POTW capacity coupled
with the water meter size as defined in this section. A minimum sewer
connection fee shall be established for any nonresidential users at four (4)
population equivalents (PE). The review and connection fee includes the first
inspection required for a service. A separate review fee may be charged based
on the cost and expense to review equalization and/or pretreatment facilities
required at a nonresidential user site.
         b.   Additional inspection fees shall be paid for any additional
inspections. The term "additional inspections" includes, but is not limited to,
inspections of sampling manholes, flow metering or sampling equipment, garbage
grinders, grease, oil and sand interceptors, and grease traps. Fees for
inspections of equalization and pretreatment facilities shall be paid for based
on the cost and expense to conduct the inspection.
      6.   Required Information: Persons desiring to construct a new waste
source and connect it to the POTW of the City shall state the quantity, quality
and rate of discharge into the public sewer. A nonresidential user, as a
condition of permit authorization, shall also provide information describing
its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity per section
10-3H-5 of this chapter.
      7.   Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit shall only be issued
and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load based on the
population equivalent.
      8.   Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued in this section may be
revoked with sections
10-3I-7 and
10-3I-8 of this chapter.
      9.   Additional Permits Required:
         a.   Building Permit: The user shall secure a building permit if the
waste source is new equipment to be installed in an existing building with an
existing sewer.
         b.   Excavation Permit: Each excavation for connection to the sanitary
sewer collection system shall require a separate connection permit.
   B.   Use Of Existing Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department or his designee, to meet all
requirements of this chapter. All costs shall be borne by the applicant.
   C.   Responsibility For Costs And Expenses:
      1.   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be paid by the applicant.
      2.   All costs and expenses incident to the disconnection of the building
sewer shall also be paid by the applicant.
   D.   Reimbursement For Repair Costs: In order to be eligible for any
reimbursement from the City, or payment by the City, for the cost of any sewer
repair, a customer must proceed in the following manner:
      1.   Prior to undertaking any investigation to determine the cause of any
sewer blockage being experienced by a residential customer, the customer must
first contact City Hall and request that a representative of the City Public
Works Department visit the residence of the customer.
      2.   The representative shall then make a determination as to whether the
cause of such sewer blockage is within the City's portion of the sewer system
or within the customer's portion of the sewer system.
      3.   If such representative determines that the cause of the sewer
blockage is not within the City’s portion of the sewer system, then the
customer shall pay all costs and expenses associated with the repair or
replacement of the customer's portion of the sewer system.
      4.   If such representative cannot determine whether the cause of the
sewer blockage is within the City’s portion of the sewer system or within the
customer’s portion of the sewer system, then the City shall reimburse the
customer for a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) incurred by the
customer in retaining the services of a licensed plumber to determine the cause
of the sewer blockage, who shall proceed in the following manner:
         a.   The licensed plumber shall enter upon the customer's property and
make reasonable efforts to rod the customer's sewer line. If he determines
after rodding the sewer line that the cause of the sewer blockage is within the
City’s portion of the sewer system, then such licensed plumber shall, prior to
commencing any repair or replacement of any portion of the City sewer system or
the customer’s sewer system, immediately contact the representative of the City
Public Works Department.
         b.   If the licensed plumber determines that a new sewer line or
portion thereof is needed on the customer's property, the licensed plumber
shall install a cleanout within the sewer line for the future use of the City.
   E.   Building Sewer Connections: Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials contained herein must be approved by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department before installation.
      1.   No new or additional connections to any of the sewers of the City
shall be made by anyone without first having made application therefor to the
City Collector and having paid the City Collector the fees hereinafter
provided. Upon the payment of said fees, the City Collector shall issue a
permit for the connections.
      2.   For all new or additional sewer connections, the new sewer tap fee
published in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this title shall be paid to the City at the time of application. In
any event, the City shall not be required to extend the sewer tap for a
distance of more than sixty feet (60'). The property owner making the new
connection shall furnish and pay for all materials used in making the
connection, and the actual physical connection to the City sewer system shall
then be made by City sewer employees and approved by the City engineer.
      3.   Connection fees involving extra strength wastewater are as follows:
         a.   All nonresidential users are required to provide information to
the Pretreatment Coordinator on proposed discharges which may include
concentrations and flow rates of wastewater discharged to the POTW. For
wastewater that contains higher concentrations of PE-determining constituents
than residential wastewater, the fees shall be based as follows:
            (1)   The new sewer tap fee for nonresidential users, published in
the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this title, shall be calculated on the basis of the impact on a
treatment works as the equivalent of the highest PE of the following
parameters: flow, BOD5, ammonia, or TSS. Any increase in PE will be added to
the baseline PE of the property for the purpose of establishing the connection
fee.
            (2)   In the event that the wastewater exhibits a ratio of COD to
BOD5 that is greater than three to one (3:1), the BOD5/PE will be calculated on
the basis of 0.33 of the COD value.
         b.   When the volume and strength of the wastewater to be discharged
to the public sewer is not known at the time of the connection, the fee shall
be estimated and adjusted to reflect actual conditions during the billing
period after a full year of operation.
         c.   The volume and strength of the wastewater, for fee purposes,
shall be based on the maximum workday discharge of constituents.
         d.   When a connection is made based on the applicant’s statement that
the strength of the wastewater does not exceed residential wastewater in any
constituent, and at the end of the billing period after a full year of
operation it is determined that the wastewater does exceed residential
wastewater in strength, the Pretreatment Coordinator may accept or reject the
wastewater and back- charge the user for fees plus penalties for the extra
strength wastewater or have the service disconnected.
         e.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may review the nonresidential user's
flow and loadings on an intermittent frequency, to identify increases to the
baseline PE. The City shall bill a connection fee to the nonresidential user
for increases to the baseline PE. Upon payment of the fee, the current site
baseline PE shall be adjusted to the newly established site baseline PE.
      4.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building; except, that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer and may be done only with the
written authorization of the Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
      5.   An existing building sewer may be used in connection with a new
building only when it is found, on examination and test by the City engineer or
Superintendent of the Sewer Department or the designee of the Superintendent of
the Sewer Department, to meet all requirements of this section and article C of
this chapter. All costs and expenses for this examination shall be paid by the
applicant.
      6.   Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet (10')
of a water service pipe shall be laid in a separate trench and at such an
elevation that the top of the sewer is at least eighteen inches (18") below the
bottom of the water service pipe. If it is impossible to obtain a horizontal
separation of at least ten feet (10') and a vertical separation of at least
eighteen inches (18"), as stipulated above, the sewer shall be constructed of
mechanical or slip-on rubber gasketed joint water main quality pipe and shall
be pressure tested to assure watertightness.
      7.   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet
(3') of any bearing wall. No building sewer shall be installed in any place
where it may be subject to freezing temperatures unless adequate provisions are
made to protect it from frost. Changes in direction shall be made only with
properly curbed pipe and fittings, or a manhole, as determined by the
Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
      8.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved by the Public Works Committee and discharged to the building sewer.
      9.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the branch fitting, if such is available at the suitable location. If
the public sewer is twelve inches (12") in diameter or less, and no properly
located branch fitting is available, the applicant shall, at its expense,
install a branch fitting in the public sewer at the location specified and an
installation approved by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department.
      10.   All sewage facilities within a distance of one hundred fifty feet
(150') radially from all Municipal water supply wells shall be constructed and
shall be located in conformity with the minimum requirements of the State
Department of Public Health.
      11.   Building sewers shall be tested for leakage prior to acceptance by
the City by smoke testing, exfiltration testing, low pressure air testing, or
other suitable method of testing approved by the Superintendent of the Sewer
Department.
      12.   A goal of the City is to separate the combined portion of the sewer
system. All new connections tributary to the combined portion of the sewer
system shall comply with the following provisions:
         a.   New construction tributary to the sewer system shall be designed
to minimize inflow contributions to the sewer system.
         b.   New building domestic waste connections to the combined sewer
system shall be distinct from building inflow connections to facilitate
disconnection if a storm sewer becomes available within two hundred feet (200')
of the building.
         c.   Inflow sources to the combined sewer system of the City shall be
removed from the combined sewer system and connected to a storm sewer within
ninety (90) days if a storm sewer becomes available within two hundred feet
(200') of the inflow source.
   F.   Construction Requirements: Construction of a building sewer connection
shall not be started until fees are paid consistent with the schedule of fees
in section
10-2-2 of this chapter and a written building sewer connection permit is issued
by the City after issuance and receipt of an IEPA permit for the project when
applicable. The following conditions are also required:
      1.   The applicant shall secure a street opening permit from the City in
conformance with the provisions of the applicable City Code provisions.
      2.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall comply with
all applicable requirements in title 9, chapter 4 of this Code and be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Public
Works Director. Failure to properly barricade shall be cause for the
construction site to be shut down, and a fee shall be paid before any further
work can commence.
      3.   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent of
the Sewer Department. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance
with the appropriate specifications of the ASTM or the Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois; except, that no backfill
shall be placed above the top of the building sewer until the work has been
inspected. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
      4.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Building Department two (2) City workdays prior to the start of any underground
piping installation and when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of a qualified duly authorized agent of the City during regular
City working hours.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3D-4: MONITORING FACILITIES:
The inspection fee(s) as provided in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this chapter shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the
building sewer connection permit if the City determines that the user is
required to install any of the following structures:
   A.   Sampling Manhole:
      1.   All nonresidential users are required to install a monitoring
manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the City. Each manhole shall be
situated on the user's premises in an easement dedicated to the City.
      2.   The sampling manhole shall be located on the sewer connection pipe
at a point where there are no changes in grade or alignment for at least
fifteen (15) pipe diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole. The grade
(slope) of the pipe shall not exceed one percent (1%) (1 foot per 100 feet)
through the manhole and for a distance of fifteen (15) pipe diameters upstream
and downstream from the manhole.
      3.   The sampling manhole shall be installed upstream of the City sewer
at a distance approved by the City.
      4.   a.   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The manhole
shall be installed and maintained by the owner and/or user at its sole cost and
expense and shall be safe and accessible to the authorized agents of the City
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are not representative of its discharge.
         b.   Where such a sampling manhole location would be impractical or
cause extreme hardship on the user, the City may permit the sampling manhole to
be constructed in the public right-of-way, provided the sampling manhole is
located so that it shall not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
If a sampling manhole is located in a parking lot, a permanent barricade, such
as a vertical pipe, shall be placed around the sampling manhole to prevent
vehicles from driving or parking over the sampling manhole cover.
         c.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may postpone the installation of the
sampling manhole when specific circumstances (e.g., weather) prevent the
installation of a manhole.
         d.   When a postponement for a sampling manhole installation is
granted by the Pretreatment Coordinator, an affidavit shall be signed by the
property owner indicating that the sampling manhole shall be installed at a
later date should business practices change at the location. The affidavit for
sampling manhole installation postponement may be recorded by the City against
the property.
         e.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may determine sub-classes of
business that do not require the installation of a sampling manhole; provided,
however, sampling manholes shall be required in zoned business or industrial
parks.
   B.   Liquid Quantity Measurements:
      1.   All significant industrial users and users subjected to wastewater
surcharges may be required to install an open channel flow measuring device in
said sampling manhole. When required, the sampling chamber shall contain a
Palmer-Bowlus or Parshall flume or equivalent, unless a weir or similar device
is approved by the City.
      2.   The City may, at its option, based on the water usage and/or waste
loadings, require the user to install a device with a recording and totalizing
register for measurement of the liquid quantity. The device shall include a
recorder suitable to display seven (7) calendar days of flow at a time. The
equipment required to indicate, record and totalize the flow shall be located
in a warm, dry location and be accessible to the City for reading. This
equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at the user's sole cost
and expense. The user shall complete installation of the flume and secondary
flow measuring device based on the installation schedule approved for such
device by the City.
      3.   The user shall be required to calibrate and maintain the flow
metering equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended procedures
and frequencies. Users who operate flow measuring devices shall submit the
procedure for operation and maintenance (O&M) to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
The user shall further document O&M in a log which shall be available for
inspection by authorized agents of the City. At a minimum, the user shall
submit a semiannual calibration report performed by an outside representative
by the deadline defined in the user's discharge permit. The user may be
required to submit flow records to the Pretreatment Coordinator monthly.
   C.   Sampling Equipment:
      1.   The City may, at its option, based on water usage and/or waste
loadings or when the waste loads cannot be accurately evaluated by time
composite samples, require the user to install sampling equipment. This
equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at its sole cost and
expense.
      2.   Users shall submit the procedure for O&M to the Pretreatment
Coordinator. The user shall further document O&M in a log which shall be
available for inspection by duly authorized agents of the City. At minimum, the
user shall submit an annual report confirming the accurate operation of the
equipment performed by an outside representative by the deadline defined in the
discharge permit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3D-5: ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRED FOR USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Inspection Fees:
      1.   Inspection fee(s) as provided in the schedule of fees published in
section
10-2-2 of this chapter shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the
building sewer connection permit should it be determined that the user is
required to install any of the following structures:
         a.   Garbage Grinders: Garbage is required to be property shredded in
order to be approved to be discharged to the public sewer. Wastes classified as
properly shredded garbage contain all particles being carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and
approval of the Building Department. Garbage grinders are prohibited to be
connected to a grease interceptor.
         b.   Grease, Oil, And Sand Interceptors: Interceptors shall be
provided in facilities connected to the public sewer where it is determined
that they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater that contains
excessive amounts of grease, oil, and sand; except, that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Building
Department and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Oil and sand interceptors used for petroleum grease and oils may be
located inside the building. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and
repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at its sole cost and expense.
         c.   Neutralizing Basin: Laboratory and facilities commonly using acid
or alkaline chemicals or compounds shall install a neutralizing basin to treat
process wastewater prior to the discharge to the public sewer. All basins shall
be of type and capacity approved by the Building Department and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
      2.   Equipment and devices installed under this section are not defined
as pretreatment facilities for wastewater. Any user operating devices installed
pursuant to this section shall submit operating data as may be required by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
   B.   Equalization And Pretreatment Of Wastewater:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter, or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D,
Water Programs, part 403 - “General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and
New Sources of Pollution”, published in Federal Register Volume 46, No. 18,
Wednesday, January 28, 1981, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the
judgment of the City, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
reject the wastes, require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sanitary sewer, or require control over the quantities
and rates of discharge. If the Coordinator permits the pretreatment or
equalization of wastewater flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Coordinator and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
      2.   Review fee(s) as provided in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this chapter shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the
building sewer connection permit should it be determined that the user is
required to install equalization or pretreatment of wastewater. The design and
installation of such equalization and pretreatment equipment or facilities
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Pretreatment Coordinator,
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, chapters and laws. The
Coordinator shall require the user to submit the equalization and pretreatment
equipment to IEPA for its approval consistent with IEPA regulations or issuance
of a written determination that a permit is not needed.
      3.   Inspection fees(s) as provided in the schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this chapter shall be paid to the City after the inspection is
completed based on cost and expenses.
      4.   All equalization and pretreatment equipment or facilities shall be
properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
user at the user's sole cost and expense.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3D-6: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
Food service establishments (FSE) shall be required to comply with the
following requirements, as determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
Inspections of food service establishments will determine the potential for
adverse impact to the POTW. Facilities determined to have the potential to
adversely impact the POTW will be subject to the requirements in this section.
   A.   Grease Traps And Interceptors:
      1.   General Requirements: Grease traps and interceptors (collectively
referred to as grease interceptors or GI) shall be installed in all new food
service establishments as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator. All GI
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Coordinator based on an
evaluation of the volume and characteristics of the discharge in conjunction
with the operating plan of the FSE. The Coordinator may require GI to be
installed or modified in an existing FSE where said FSE has caused or
contributed to overflows and/or blockages in a public sewer or is suspected of
contributing to other fats, oil, or grease related problems, or at an existing
FSE that significantly remodels its site or when streetscapes or street/sewer
replacements are installed.
      2.   Location: All GI shall be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All GI shall be located on the exterior to the building for all new
construction and, when feasible, at an existing FSE. The GI shall not be
located in drive-through lanes.
      3.   Sizing: Each FSE GI shall be sized to continuously produce an
effluent containing less than the guideline limit of fats, oil and grease (FOG)
based on the GI's hauling frequency. Minimum GI size shall be according to
section 840.510 of the Illinois Administrative Code.
      4.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee as provided by the schedule of
fees in section
10-2-2 of this chapter shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the
permit should it be determined that the user is required to install a GI.
      5.   Maintenance: Such grease traps shall be inspected, the grease cap
and solids blanket cleaned every three (3) months, the entire contents of the
trap cleaned annually and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner and/or
user at its sole cost and expense. It shall be the responsibility of the FSE to
inspect its GI during the pumping procedure to ensure the trap is properly
cleaned out and that all fittings and fixtures inside the trap are in working
condition and functioning properly. In the event that actual operations of the
GI fail to produce results that consistently prevent prohibitive discharges as
defined in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter, the owner and/or user of the FSE shall be required by
the Pretreatment Coordinator to have the GI cleaned at a more frequent rate or
install additional pretreatment as necessary.
      6.   Modifications: The Pretreatment Coordinator may make determinations
of GI adequacy, need, design, appropriateness, application, location,
modification(s), and conditional usage based on review of all relevant
information regarding GI performance, facility site and building plan review by
all regulatory reviewing agencies and may require repairs to, or modification
or replacement of, the GI.
      7.   General Permit Requirements: All FSE shall be required to be issued
a general permit as provided by articles H and I of this chapter.
   B.   External Grease Interceptor Criteria: GI installed at new and existing
FSE must meet the following criteria:
      1.   Size: The size shall be determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator
using a formula that is approved by the City. The minimum capacity of any one
unit shall be five hundred (500) gallons, and the maximum capacity shall be one
thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. Where sufficient capacity cannot be
achieved with a single unit, installation of GI in series shall be required.
      2.   Twenty Five Percent Requirement: The GI shall provide for a minimum
hydraulic retention time of twenty four (24) minutes at actual peak flow
between the influent and effluent baffles, with twenty five percent (25%) of
the total volume of the GI being allowed for any food-derived solids to settle
or accumulate and floatable grease-derived materials to rise and accumulate,
identified as a solids blanket and grease cap, respectively.
      3.   Access Manholes: Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty
four inches (24"), shall be provided over each exterior GI chamber and each
sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and
be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The
manholes shall have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease
removal, and wastewater sampling activities.
      4.   Prohibitions: Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be
connected to or discharged into any GI.
   C.   Waivers: Waivers that are available to FSE are set forth below. A
request for a waiver is required to be filed with the Pretreatment Coordinator
on a form provided by the City and the waiver review fee published in the
schedule of fees in section
10-2-2 of this chapter shall be paid to the City at the time of the filing.
Waiver requests are not considered to be filed until the request has been
reviewed and determined complete. If the Coordinator fails to act on a
completed waiver request within forty five (45) calendar days, a request for
waiver shall be deemed to be denied. The issuance of a waiver does not
eliminate the requirement to prevent prohibitive discharges through alternate
technologies and best management practices plans.
      1.   Existing External FSE Of Installation Waiver: The requirement to
install and to properly operate and maintain a GI is conditionally stayed by
the Pretreatment Coordinator. Terms and conditions for the waiver issued for a
GI installation shall be set forth in a permit. The terms may include the
requirement to install grease trap(s) inside the FSE, alternate technology and
the use of Best Management Practices. The waiver shall not apply to any
existing FSE that has not operated as an FSE for the last twelve (12)
consecutive months prior to the effective date hereof. Such FSEs shall be
required to install a GI in order to operate an FSE in the City sanitary sewer
service area.
      2.   Common GI Waiver: “Common GI” means one or more interceptors
receiving FOG laden wastewater from more than one establishment. Common
interceptors may be used in lieu of an individual GI at each FSE, provided a
waiver has been issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator. A common GI may be
located at shopping centers, malls, entertainment complexes, sporting arenas,
hotels, multi-tenant "flex" spaces, mixed use spaces, and other sites where
multiple establishments are connected to a single GI. The owner of the property
on which the common GI is located shall be responsible for operation and
maintenance of the common GI including program documentation, upkeep, and
repair. In such cases, a permit will be issued to the owner of the property for
the GI, and general permits will also be issued to each FSE connected to the
common GI that contains Best Management Practices requirements.
      3.   GI Installation Waiver For Limited Food Preparation Establishments:
Waivers for installations at FSEs with only a snack bar with no food
preparation other than food warming will be handled on a case-by-case basis by
the Pretreatment Coordinator and are deemed to be limited food preparation
establishments.
      4.   Constraint Waivers At Existing FSE: Where the installation of a GI
is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can be installed, a
waiver from the installation of the GI requirement may be granted. The
Pretreatment Coordinator's determination to grant the waiver shall be based
upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions:
         a.   There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of
a GI; or
         b.   There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between the kitchen
plumbing fixtures and the GI and/or between the GI and the private collection
lines or public sewer; and
         c.   The use of alternative pretreatment technology is not possible
that is equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge.
      5.   Alternate Technology Waiver: The use of an automatic grease removal
system is permissible only upon the written approval of the Pretreatment
Coordinator, the plumbing inspector of the City, and the Iroquois County Health
Department. Approval of the technology shall be based on empirical data
acceptable to the DPW demonstrating removal efficiencies and reliability of
operation. The DPW may approve these types of technologies dependent on
manufacturer's specifications on a case- by-case basis. The DPW shall require
in a permit that any user of an alternate technology shall attain a grease
wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit's outlet. Any user
utilizing an alternative technology may be subject to additional operational
requirements imposed by the DPW.
      6.   Cleaning Cycle Waiver: The FSE may petition the Pretreatment
Coordinator to reduce the cleaning and servicing of the GI from every three (3)
months to a maximum of every six (6) months upon demonstration that the amount
removed every three (3) months is significantly less than what would have to be
removed to allow for a hydraulic retention time of twenty four (24) minutes
using seventy five percent (75%) of the basin capacity and the discharge does
not exceed the oil and grease local limit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3D-7: SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Responsibility Of Owner: The owner of real property shall be
responsible for the maintenance and repair of all sewer lines, including the
tap into the public sewer, located on its property.
   B.   Excavations In Public Ways: In those instances when a property owner
must excavate in order to maintain or replace a sewer line and, as a result,
the sidewalk, curb and/or street are removed or damaged, the property owner
shall be responsible for the restoration of the sidewalk, curb and/or street
(surface and sub-surface). Tunneling under the curb and sidewalk is recommended
whenever practical, but such improvements shall be saw-cut when removal is
required.
   C.   Compliance Required: All work, as it is related to the maintenance and/
or replacement of sewer lines shall be in conformance with the provisions of
the Watseka City Code and shall be inspected by a duly authorized agent of the
City during the repair and replacement.
   D.   City Involvement: With respect to sewer lines on private property
connecting to a single-family residence, the City may agree, in its sole and
absolute discretion, and only on the written request of a property owner, to
open and clean (i.e., jet or rod) a sewer line located on private property
immediate adjacent to and connecting to a public sewer, provided the City is
contemporaneously engaged in public sewer maintenance or replacement in the
public right-of-way adjacent to such property. No work shall be undertaken by
the City unless the Superintendent of the Sewer Department is satisfied that
there is no obvious indication that the sewer line will be damaged on account
of such work due its age or condition and, the City's involvement will not
adversely affect its ability to complete other work through the diversion of
manpower and/or equipment. Prior to engaging in such work, the property owner
shall:
      1.   Agree in writing to reimburse the City for its costs to complete the
work, including labor and equipment in accordance with such rates as may be
established by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department; and
      2.   Execute a release and waiver absolving the City of responsibility
for any and all damage to persons or property on account of such work.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013; amd. Ord. 2658, 8-23-2022)
ARTICLE E: INFORMATION REQUIRED OF NONRESIDENTIAL USERS
Section
10-3E-1: Initial Survey (Questionnaire)
10-3E-2: Affirmation To Initial Survey
10-3E-3: Reports Of Changed Conditions
10-3E-4: Additional Survey Information
10-3E-1: INITIAL SURVEY (QUESTIONNAIRE):
A survey (initial survey) shall be completed by all nonresidential users and
submitted to the City in order to ensure that said nonresidential users of the
POTW of the City adhere to and comply with the restrictions and prohibitions
pertaining to pretreatment standards of wastes discharged into the POTW of the
City set forth in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter, spill and slug control of raw materials, intermediates
and waste as set forth in section
10-3G-4 of this chapter, and to facilitate the City’s investigation of apparent
or suspected violations thereof. The requirements of the initial survey are as
follows:
   A.   All existing or new nonresidential users required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall complete and submit an initial survey on a form provided by
the City when requested by the City.
   B.   All nonresidential users defined in subsection A of this section
seeking to establish a new account for water and/or sanitary sewer service in
an existing location from the City or to establish a new connection to the POTW
of the City shall file a completed initial survey with the City as a condition
to the establishment of such new water/sanitary sewer service account or
connection to the POTW of the City.
   C.   All nonresidential users defined above that fail to complete and submit
to the City an initial survey shall be in violation of the provisions of this
section and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties therefor,
including, but not limited to, the revocation of all permits and approvals
previously granted to the nonresidential user in question for the discharge of
sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the City.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3E-2: AFFIRMATION TO INITIAL SURVEY:
   A.   Determination Of Survey Requirement: The Pretreatment Coordinator shall
determine, based on building, zoning and occupant usage, whether a
nonresidential user shall be required to file an affirmation of survey with the
annual business license renewal. The nonresidential user’s status will be
defined by the Coordinator after review of the initial survey submitted as
required in section
10-3E-1 of this article.
   B.   Statement Information:
      1.   Any nonresidential user, defined in section
10-3E-1 of this article, which previously filed an initial survey and the
information remains true, complete and correct in all respects shall be
required to submit a statement that the information remains current.
      2.   The statement shall be filed with the Pretreatment Coordinator not
later than January 31 of the year in which it is required.
   C.   Failure To File Survey: All nonresidential users defined above that
fail to file an affirmation of survey with the City shall be in violation of
the provisions of section
10-3E-1 of this article and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties
thereof, including, but not limited to, the revocation of all permits and
approvals previously granted to the nonresidential user in question for the
discharge of sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the City.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3E-3: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Any nonresidential user that makes any changes determined to be substantial as
defined in subsection
10-3J-6B of this chapter shall report the changes as required in said
subsection
10-3J-6B prior to making any of the changes. The nonresidential user shall be
required to file an updated survey as a result of changed conditions.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3E-4: ADDITIONAL SURVEY INFORMATION:
   A.   Wastewater Survey:
      1.   Required: After review of the initial survey completed per section
10-3E-1 of this article, all nonresidential users that the Pretreatment
Coordinator has defined to have the potential to be defined as either a
significant industrial user (SIU) or a nonsignificant regulated user (NSRU)
shall be required to complete and file a more detailed wastewater survey on a
form provided by the City.
      2.   Contents: At a minimum, a description of processes, water usage and
wastewater characteristics for the facility will be required to be submitted.
The wastewater survey shall contain a statement affirming the truth,
completeness and correctness of information submitted, signed by an authorized
representative of the “user”, as defined in section
10-3B-2 of this chapter.
      3.   Evaluation: This information will be evaluated by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to determine if an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general wastewater discharge permit per articles H and I of this chapter is
required.
      4.   Periodic Updates Of Information: The information provided in the
wastewater survey shall be revised and/or updated for the following conditions:
         a.   A report of changed conditions is filed as required in subsection
10-3J-6B of this chapter;
         b.   An application for a wastewater discharge permit is required, to
be filed per articles H and I of this chapter;
         c.   A re-application for a wastewater discharge permit is required to
be filed as a result of a re-issuance of a wastewater discharge permit per
section
10-3I-6 of this chapter; or
         d.   At any other time the Pretreatment Coordinator may require,
provided a nonresidential user shall not be required to update wastewater
survey information more than once per twelve-month period unless one of the
conditions set forth in subsection A4a, A4b or A4c of this section apply.
   B.   Category-Specific Survey: In addition to the wastewater survey defined
in subsection A of this section, categorical industrial users shall be required
by the Pretreatment Coordinator to complete a category-specific survey that
identifies sub-processes and processes performed at the site in order to define
which sub-processes and processes are regulated by a USEPA effluent guideline
category.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE F: GENERAL DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
Section
10-3F-1: Compliance Required
10-3F-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
10-3F-3: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
10-3F-4: State Limits
10-3F-5: City's Right Of Revision
10-3F-6: Monitoring Of Discharges
10-3F-7: Tampering With, Damage To System Prohibited
10-3F-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged into POTW
of the City, without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
   B.   A user shall meet the most stringent applicable requirements and
limitations at all times either as set forth in this chapter, or in an
individual or general wastewater discharge permit, Federal pretreatment
standards as established by 40 CFR 403, or State of Illinois standards as
codified in 35 IAC 307. A user shall provide the necessary wastewater treatment
to achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements within the time limitations as specified by the Federal
pretreatment regulations and with any other pretreatment standards and
requirements, including local limits, by applicable deadlines.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3F-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
The following general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or
not they are subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or any other
national, State or local pretreatment standard:
   A.   Prohibited Wastes:
      1.   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, to the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater contaminant which will
pass through or cause interference with, inhibition of or upset to the
operation of the City’s POTW;
      2.   No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any
other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment in order to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and in a wastewater discharge
permit; and
      3.   No user shall introduce, or cause to be introduced, either directly
or indirectly, any of the following described pollutants, substances or
wastewater into the POTW:
         a.   Unpolluted water including, but not limited to, uncontaminated
noncontact cooling water, stormwater, surface water and groundwater, subsurface
drainage, roof runoff, spill contaminant area runoff, footing drains or
construction drainage except as specifically permitted by the Pretreatment
Coordinator:
         b.   Solids, solid wastes, liquids or gases which, by reason of their
nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction,
to cause safety hazards, fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the facilities or personnel of the City, or to the operation of City’s POTW.
Materials considered in this regard are those with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees Celsius
(60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
         c.   Any solid, solid waste or viscous substance in amounts which
shall or may cause obstruction to the flow in a public sewer, or other
interference to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to: waste cooking oil, grease, grease interceptor wastes,
garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (½") in any direction, animal
guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains or hops,
paper, wood, plastics, residues from gas, tar or asphalt, residues from
refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oils, mud or glass grinding or
polishing waste, fatty acids or esters of fatty acids, or any material which
can be disposed of as trash;
         d.   Milk or any liquid milk waste products in quantities in excess of
ten (10) gallons during each twenty four (24) hour period;
         e.   Wastewater containing noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or
gases which, either singly or by their interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or to interfere with,
inhibit or upset any operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to,
prevention of entry into public sewer for their maintenance and repair;
         f.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems for a duly authorized agent of the City or which necessitates
the City taking special measures to counteract and/or alleviate the impact of
the pollutant(s);
         g.   Wastewater containing substances in sufficient quantity to
interfere with the POTW;
         h.   Wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction, to injure, interfere with or upset the
wastewater treatment processes or facilities, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or exceed limitations as set forth in the act;
         i.   Wastewater having a temperature which could inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant, but in no case wastewater which causes
the temperature at the POTW treatment plant to exceed forty degrees Celsius
(40°C) (104°F);
         j.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing structural damage or hazard to
the POTW or a duly authorized agent of the City. The pH limits are
instantaneous limits that shall be met at all times, and are not subject to
averaging;
         k.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in
a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration (including any slug
load), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, which may
interfere with, inhibit, or upset the POTW;
         l.   Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would cause a violation of the
water quality standards of the receiving waters of the City POTW;
         m.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligram per liter except as
permitted by the Pretreatment Coordinator in compliance with applicable Federal
regulations;
         n.   Wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, aqueous
firefighting foam or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
collection system or the treatment process that result in POTW interferences or
upset or is shown to inhibit the nitrification process or pass through to the
receiving waters. Such prohibited wastes shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that may result in discharge to the POTW;
         o.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference, pass through or
upset the POTW;
         p.   Wastewater containing any organism, including viruses, considered
pathogenic and/or detrimental to treatment plant process organisms other than
those discharged by direct excrement and any other medical wastes including,
but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes;
         q.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except
in accordance with City, State and Federal Statutes, laws, regulations and
rules governing such discharges;
         r.   Wastewater or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
         s.   Leachate or remediation wastewater, except at discharge points
designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator; (40 CFR.403.5b8)
         t.   All trucked or hauled wastes unless approved by the Coordinator;
         u.   Biosolids, sludge, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of nonresidential wastewaters;
         v.   Solids, solid wastes or viscous substances that cause an
obstruction to the flow in a building drain or sewer or public sewer that is
eliminated by a professional service or contractor;
         w.   Unusual concentrations or solutions of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         x.   Substances with objectionable color which is not removed in the
treatment processes, such as, but not limited to, dye waste, ink waste and
vegetable tanning solutions;
         y.   Substances that inhibit the use of ultraviolet light for
disinfection purposes;
         z.   Wastewater or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet
the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters;
         aa.   Substances, alone or in combination with other substances, which
could cause the City's POTW to violate its NPDES permit(s), and/or the City's
receiving stream water quality and/or general effluent discharge standards;
         bb.   Any wastewater causing the City’s effluent to fail a toxicity
test;
         cc.   Any substance which may cause the City’s effluent or biosolids
to be unsuitable for reclamation and re-use, or interfere with the reclamation
processes. In no case shall a substance discharged to the City’s POTW cause the
City to be in noncompliance with any biosolids use or disposal regulations
developed under section 405 of the act; or any regulations affecting biosolids
use or disposal developed pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, Solid Waste Disposal Act, Toxic Substance Control Act, or any State or
local standards applicable to any biosolids management methods either being
used or considered by the City;
         dd.   Any gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
carbides, hydrides, stoddard solvents, sulfides, epoxides, esters, amines,
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, pyridines, new and used motor oils, or
antifreeze, except at concentrations which do not exceed levels of such
substances which are routinely present in the normal wastewater discharge and
do not otherwise violate any section of this chapter of the conditions of an
industrial discharge permit or special agreement; or
         ee.   Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in any detectable
concentrations.
Wastes prohibited in this subsection shall not be processed or stored in such
manner that could result in their discharge or introduction to the POTW. All
users with prohibited wastes described in this subsection or those that have
hazardous wastes as defined in section
10-3J-9 of this chapter shall develop and implement a spill prevention/slug
control plan (SPSCP) consistent with the requirements in section
10-3G-4 of this chapter. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also determine that a
SPSCP is required for liquids and solids not previously described in previous
plans based on an evaluation of a site potential to cause spills or slug loads
to be introduced to the POTW.
   B.   Discharge Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge into
any natural outlet within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
City, any wastewaters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with USEPA or IEPA requirements.
   C.   Discharge Into Storm Drainage Systems:
      1.   For reasons of the protection of the health, safety and welfare of
the inhabitants of the City, it is the policy of the City to prohibit
wastewaters from entering into any stormwater drainage system, and any such
discharge to the stormwater drainage systems is determined to be injurious to
the public health and welfare and is hereby declared a public nuisance.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be
connected any drain carrying, or designed to carry, any toilet, sink, basement,
septic tank, cesspool, or industrial waste, or any fixture or device
discharging polluting substances to any storm sewer or stormwater drainage
system within the corporate limits of the City.
      3.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent of the Sewer Department. Industrial
cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of
the EPA, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   D.   Discharge Of Unpolluted Waters Upon Adjacent Property Or Public Ways
Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge in such manner as
to cause such waters to overflow onto adjacent property or to be discharged
upon any public street or public way, any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage, including the use of a sump
pump for such purpose.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which such person, firm or corporation violates the provisions of
this section.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
10-3F-3: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   All nonresidential users subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards, promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c)
of the act, currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall
comply with all pretreatment standards and requirements. The national
categorical pretreatment standards set forth in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter.
   B.   Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the
discharge from the process regulated by the standard or as otherwise specified
by the standard. Compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards is
mandatory. The national categorical standards may be contained in the IEPA
operating permit.
      1.   Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment
standard for a particular user, the said standard, if more stringent than the
limitation imposed under this chapter for sources in that category, shall, when
effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions imposed under
this chapter. The City shall notify all known affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR section 403.12
      2.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c) unless specifically restricted by the
categorical pretreatment standard. These equivalent limitations calculated in
accordance with the following requirements are deemed pretreatment standards.
Users shall be required to comply with the equivalent limitations instead of
the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations
were derived. An alternative pretreatment limit shall not be used if the
alternative limit is below the analytical detection limit for any of the
regulated pollutants.
      3.   a.   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit production, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may convert the limits to equivalent limitations
expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to
individual users.
         b.   The Coordinator calculating equivalent mass-per-day limitations
shall calculate such limitations by multiplying the limits in the standard by
the user’s average rate of production. This average rate of production shall be
based on a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-term daily production
during a representative year and not based on design production capacity. For
new sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected production.
         c.   The Coordinator shall calculate such limitations by dividing the
mass limitations by the average daily flow rate of the user’s regulated process
wastewater. The average daily flow rate shall be based upon a reasonable
measure of the user’s actual long-term average flow rate, such as the average
daily flow rate during the representative year.
      4.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard prior to any
pretreatment, the Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined waste stream formula set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(e); provided, that the
applicable categorical regulation allows the wastewaters to be mixed, and the
user can supply the information necessary to allow issuance of an alternative
limit.
      5.   A user may request a variance from USEPA based on fundamentally
different factors. The request must comply with the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
      6.   A user may request an adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard to account for pollutant loadings in the user's intake water (a net/
gross adjustment) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
      7.   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of pollutant concentrations, a user may request that the City convert the
limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration
limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator.
The City may establish equivalent mass limits only if the user meets all the
conditions set forth in subsection B7a below.
         a.   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the user must:
            (1)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water
conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water during
the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;
            (2)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
            (3)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's
actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
            (4)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
            (5)   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the user’s request for
equivalent mass limits.
         b.   A user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
            (1)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
            (2)   Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use
of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
            (3)   Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator whenever production rates are expected to vary by
more than twenty percent (20%) from its baseline production rates determined in
subsection B7a(3) of this section. Upon notification of a revised production
rate, the Coordinator will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the
limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
            (4)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to subsection B7a(1) of
this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
         c.   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Pretreatment
Coordinator:
            (1)   Shall calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the user by the
concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
            (2)   Shall reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the
limit necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility upon notification
of a revised production rate from the user; and
            (3)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the user's actual average daily
flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water
conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates
used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on
the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to subsection
10-3F-2A2 of this article.
      8.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may convert the mass limits of the
categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR parts 414, 419 and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Coordinator.
      9.   Once included in its wastewater discharge permit, the user must
comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.
      10.   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitations.
      11.   Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit
incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a
production-based standard shall notify the Coordinator within two (2) workdays
after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user which fails to
timely notify the Coordinator of such anticipated change will be required to
meet the mass or concentration limits in its wastewater discharge permit that
were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate.
   C.   All users that are subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards are required to file reports as required in sections
10-3J-3 and
10-3J-4 of this chapter, signed by an authorized representative. Such reports
shall include all information that the Coordinator deems necessary to make
compliance determinations.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3F-4: STATE LIMITS:
All users are subject to State water quality standards and requirements as set
forth in 35 Illinois Administrative Code (IAC) 307. Specifically, the standards
for discharge of mercury and cyanide are as follows:
   A.   Mercury Section (Amended at 28 Ill. Reg. 3076, effective February 6,
2004):
      1.   Except as provided below, no person may cause or allow the
concentration of mercury in any discharge to a publicly owned or publicly
regulated sewer system to exceed the following level, subject to the averaging
rule contained in 35 Illinois Administrative Code 304.104(a):
 
Constituent STORET Number Concentration
                          mg/L
Mercury     71990         0.0005
 
      2.   It will be an exception to subsection A1 of this section if the
discharge is to a publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system that is
required to meet a limitation less stringent than the 0.0005 milligrams per
liter mercury concentration, in which case, the discharge limitation must be
the same as that applicable to the publicly owned or regulated sewer system to
which it discharges.
      3.   It will be an exception to subsection A1 of this section if all the
following conditions are met:
         a.   The discharger does not use mercury, the discharger uses mercury
and this use cannot be eliminated, or the discharger uses mercury only in
chemical analysis or in the laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable
care to avoid contamination of wastewater;
         b.   The discharger mercury concentration is less than 0.003
milligrams per liter, as determined by application of the averaging rules of 35
Illinois Administrative Code 304.104(a);
         c.   The discharger is providing the best degree of treatment
consistent with technological feasibility, economic reasonableness, and sound
engineering judgment. This may include no treatment for mercury; and
         d.   The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program likely
to reduce or to prevent an increase in the level of mercury discharges.
      4.   The discharge of wastes from medicinal or therapeutic use of
mercury, exclusive of laboratory use, will be exempt from the limitations of
subsection A1 of this section if all the following conditions are met:
         a.   The total plant discharge is less than two hundred twenty seven
grams (227 g) (½ pound) as Hg in any year;
         b.   This discharge is to a public sewer system; and
         c.   The discharge does not, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, cause the effluent from the sewer system or treatment plant to exceed
0.0005 milligram per liter of mercury.
      5.   No person may cause or allow any discharge of mercury to a publicly
owned or publicly regulated sewer system which, alone or in combination with
other sources, causes a violation by the sewer treatment plant discharge of the
water quality standard of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 302 for mercury
applicable in the receiving stream.
      6.   For purposes of permit issuance, the agency may consider application
of the exception of subsection A2 or A3 of this section to determine compliance
with this section. The agency may impose permit conditions necessary or
required to assure continued application of the exception. When subsection A2
or A3 of this section applies, the agency may impose an effluent limitation in
the permit that allows the discharge of a concentration of mercury greater than
0.0005 milligram per liter but not more than 0.003 milligram per liter.
   B.   Cyanide Section (Amended at 28111, Reg. 3076, effective February 6,
2004):
      1.   No waste to any public sewer system must contain more than ten
milligrams per liter (10 mg/L) total cyanide (STORET number 00720), provided
any sample tested must not release more than two milligrams per liter (2 mg/L)
of cyanide when tested at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature of sixty six degrees
Celsius (66°C) (150°F) for a period of thirty (30) minutes, except as permitted
by subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   Upon application by the City and approval by the agency, based upon
determination by the agency that no violation of the effluent standards of 35
Illinois Administrative Code 304 will result and that no hazard to workers in
such sewage works will result, limited additional amounts of cyanide exceeding
the standards in subsection B1 of this section may be discharged to the sewage
works of the City.
      3.   Nothing in this section may be construed as limiting the authority
of the City to impose any more stringent standards or limitations on cyanide
discharges to its sewage works.
      4.   Any actions undertaken pursuant to subsection B2 of this section
will be subject to the limitations of 35 IAC section 307.2400(b)(7).
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3F-5: CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION:
   A.   The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits or general wastewater discharge permits, more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with
the purpose of this chapter. The specific limitations on discharges are derived
from the Maximum Allowable Industrial Loading (MAIL) calculation. The MAILs are
allocated only to those users, at the City's discretion, that contribute the
regulated pollutant. All remaining users are held to either the background
concentration or slightly higher than background but lower than the specific
discharge limit. In no case shall the sum of allocations exceed the MAIL.
   B.   The City will maintain a reserve of the maximum allowable headworks
pollutant loading for each pollutant for new industries or increase of
pollutant loading from existing industries. The City will recalculate the
maximum concentrations from time to time using site specific data and will
consider revisions to State and Federal regulations that may impact the
calculations.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3F-6: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Monitoring Facilities:
      1.   Sampling Manhole Applicability:
         a.   All nonresidential users are required to install a sampling
manhole for each separate discharge of a building sewer into the public sewer
in accordance with section
10-3D-3 of this chapter with the plans and specifications approved by the City.
When required by the City, an SIU or NSRU that does not have a unique sampling
chamber at the end of the pipe shall install a monitoring manhole or sampling
chamber for use as the local limits regulatory sampling location along the
building sewer, in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
City. A sampling chamber may be required to be installed within the building.
         b.   When required by the Pretreatment Coordinator, a categorical
industrial user shall install a monitoring manhole or sampling chamber for use
as the regulatory sampling location of the categorically regulated discharge in
the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
City. This sampling chamber may be required to be installed within the building
and may be in addition to an end-of-pipe manhole.
         c.   In the event that a suitable sampling facility does not exist at
an existing building, the “sampling manhole” shall be considered to be either
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the
building sewer is connected or the point of process wastewater discharge if
accessible by the City.
      2.   Wastewater Monitoring And/Or Flow Measurement Facility Operation And
Maintenance:
         a.   Such facilities shall be installed and maintained at all times at
the user's sole cost and expense. The failure of a user to maintain its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for a user to
assert that the sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
Installation of such facilities will be consistent with the requirements of
section
10-3D-4 of this chapter.
         b.   The manhole or chamber located on a building sewer discharge
located in dedicated easements shall be easily accessible to duly authorized
agents twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
         c.   The manhole or chamber at a discharge location within the
building shall be accessible to representatives of the City or their duly
authorized agents during normal operating hours.
         d.   The sampling chamber, flow metering device, sampling equipment
and documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses
of samples shall be subject, at all reasonable times, to inspection by a duly
authorized agent.
         e.   Metered water supply may be used to determine wastewater flow if
it is substantiated to the City that the metered water supply and wastewater
quantities are approximately the same, or where an adjustment agreed to by the
Pretreatment Coordinator is made in the metered water supply to determine
wastewater flow and is documented through the use of sub-meters and/or
production records. In the event that the wastewater flow cannot be
substantiated at any regulated location, the user shall be required to install
flow monitoring consistent with section
10-3D-4 of this chapter.
         f.   Under authorization from the City, users may be permitted to
install additional water meters on the exterior of the user's structure at the
user’s sole cost and expense for the purpose of measuring water not discharged
to the City sanitary sewer system. All users shall register with the City and
provide information requested by the City concerning the installation of
additional water meters. The Building Official shall have the right to inspect
and regulate the installation of additional water meters. The wastewater volume
discharged to the City sanitary sewer system shall be determined by subtracting
the volume shown on the additional water meter(s) from the total metered amount
of water supplied to the premises.
         g.   In the event the City, or surrounding area, should suffer from a
water shortage, the City Council shall have the authority to suspend the
provisions of subsection A2e of this section, in order to encourage the
conservation of water resources. In the event that the Mayor of the City
determines and declares that such water shortage exists to such an extent and
degree as to constitute an emergency, then the Mayor shall have the authority
to suspend the provisions of subsection A2e of this section, pending
ratification by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting
following the suspension by the Mayor. In determining whether a water shortage
exists, the Mayor and City Council may consider water shortages in the
surrounding area in addition to the adequacy of the supply of the City water
system. In the event that a future water shortage appears evident, the
provisions of subsection A2e of this section may also be suspended by the Mayor
or City Council prior to the existence of an emergency.
   B.   Monitoring Requirements:
      1.   Applicability: All significant industrial users (including
categorical industrial users) and nonsignificant regulated users are required
to sample based on the monitoring frequency as stated in the applicable
wastewater discharge permit other users are required to sample upon the request
of the City. A user shall pay the cost of sampling of its discharge and the
cost of analyses of its samples, whether or not the sampling and analyses are
performed by the user or by the POTW.
      2.   Frequency:
         a.   All significant industrial users, including categorical
industrial users, shall sample their effluent(s) for the parameters specified
in its wastewater discharge permit, and report the results to the Pretreatment
Coordinator at a minimum of at least twice per year or more frequently as
designated in the permit. The City shall have the right to perform its own
sampling at any time.
         b.   Any nonsignificant regulated users with an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall sample their effluent and report the results
to the Coordinator consistent with the requirements of the wastewater discharge
permit and the City monitoring frequency.
         c.   The sampling frequency listed in a wastewater discharge permit
may be modified by the Coordinator in the event that additional samples are
needed to demonstrate consistent compliance.
      3.   Sample Collection:
         a.   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements shall be
based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative
of conditions occurring during the reporting period as defined in the
wastewater discharge permit.
         b.   Except as indicated in subsection B3c of this section, the user
shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.
         c.   In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the
Coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling at minimum
collecting samples every fifteen (15) minutes during a 24-hour workday; or a
minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will
provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. A
proportional number of samples shall be collected for wastewater discharges
less than twenty four (24) hours.
         d.   Single grab samples shall be required by the Coordinator in the
event of an infrequent batch discharge or to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.
         e.   Samples for fats, oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
hexavalent chromium, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be
obtained using the number of grab samples determined by the Coordinator to
assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. Multiple grab samples that are individually preserved as
specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate USEPA guidance that are collected
during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis, as follows:
            (1)   For, cyanide, hexavalent chromium, phenols, and sulfides,
multiple grab samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field.
            (2)   For volatile organics and oil and grease, multiple grab
samples may only be composited in the laboratory.
         f.   Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved USEPA methodologies may be
authorized by the Coordinator, as appropriate.
   C.   Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the USEPA
determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling
and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the Coordinator or
other parties approved by USEPA.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3F-7: TAMPERING WITH, DAMAGE TO SYSTEM PROHIBITED:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is owned or
contracted by the City. Any person violating this section shall be subject to
immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE G: GENERAL DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE
Section
10-3G-1: Compliance Required
10-3G-2: Pretreatment Facilities
10-3G-3: Additional Pretreatment Measures
10-3G-4: Spill Prevention/Slug Control Plan
10-3G-5: Closure Plan
10-3G-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Each user that discharges wastewater to the POTW shall provide wastewater
treatment and best management practices as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall comply with all categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and the prohibitions set forth in article F of this chapter within the
time limitations specified by USEPA, the State, or the Pretreatment
Coordinator, whichever is more stringent.
10-3G-2: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
   A.   Any pretreatment facility(s) necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's sole cost and expense.
Detailed plans and specifications describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Coordinator for review and approval prior
to the construction and operation of such facilities. The review of such plans
and specifications shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facilities as necessary to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   All users are required to comply with IEPA permitting requirements. A
user shall file an IEPA application for a construction-operating permit prior
to construction or significant modification of a pretreatment system that has
been signed off by the City and obtain either a permit from the IEPA or a
letter indicating no permit is needed prior to the City connection and/or
wastewater discharge permit(s) being issued. No sources of nonresidential
wastewater shall be discharged to the POTW until all permitting requirements
have been satisfied. All pretreatment facilities designated by the Coordinator
shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA-certified wastewater
operator even if the user is not issued an IEPA operating permit.
   C.   Any subsequent proposed modification, alteration, or change to the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be submitted to the City
and IEPA for review and approval prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
Users shall obtain all necessary additional construction-operating permits from
IEPA and the City for the changes prior to making said modification, alteration
or change.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3G-3: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   A.   The City may require the additional pretreatment measures set forth
below. The City reserves the right to make unannounced inspections of any
additional pretreatment measures during normal business hours whether or not
the user has been issued an individual or general wastewater discharge permit.
      1.   Whenever deemed necessary, the Coordinator may require a user to
restrict its discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific public sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams, and make other such actions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The Coordinator may require any user discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on its property and at its sole cost and expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. This
device shall be approved by the Coordinator. The City may issue an individual
or general wastewater discharge permit solely for flow equalization.
      3.   The Coordinator may require a user discharging to the POTW to
install and maintain facilities to limit the amount of grease, oil, and sand
entering the POTW through the procedures outlined in subsection
10-3D-4B of this chapter.
      4.   The Coordinator may require a user with the potential to discharge
flammable substances into any public sewer to install and maintain, on its
property and at its own cost and expense, a combustible gas detection meter.
This meter shall be approved by the Coordinator.
      5.   No statement contained in this subsection shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to the conditions of the
City's general pretreatment program.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
Coordinator, duly authorized employees of the City, consultants retained by the
City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the City employees, and the City shall indemnify the user against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the user, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
user to maintain safe conditions.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3G-4: SPILL PREVENTION/SLUG CONTROL PLAN:
   A.   Required:
      1.   A user shall develop, implement and maintain a spill prevention/slug
control plan hereafter referred to as an SPSC plan if the user has:
         a.   Chemicals (raw materials, chemical intermediates, wastes to be
recycled, final products, or utility chemicals) that total or exceed two
hundred fifty (250) gallons or five (5) 55-gallon drums at or on its site;
         b.   Prohibited discharge materials as defined in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter at or on its site; or
         c.   Hazardous waste as defined in section
10-3J-9 of this chapter at or on its site; or
         d.   Been defined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to have a need to
control slug discharges.
      2.   Any user that meets the above criteria shall develop and implement
an SPSC plan regardless of whether or not that user is regulated by an
individual or general wastewater discharge permit.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: The SPSC plan, which is required to be submitted
to the City if the user's discharge is regulated, shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      1.   Specifics Of SPSC Plan:
         a.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
         b.   Description of stored chemicals, including quantity of chemicals
and type and number of storage containers;
         c.   Site diagram showing location of all tanks holding greater than
or equal to two hundred fifty (250) gallons or areas containing five (5) 55-
gallon drums or more of raw materials, prohibited wastes, hazardous wastes,
wastes to be recycled, or final product;
         d.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to, routine
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
measures specific to slug discharge control, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, inventory of spill response equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and
measures and equipment for emergency response. Building containment structures
or production equipment changes are considered procedures to prevent adverse
spills. If containment structures are connected to the public sewer, a shutoff
valve is required and shall be left in a closed position;
         e.   Location of notices/signs posted in conspicuous places advising
employees in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event
of a spill, accidental discharge of prohibited materials, slug discharge or a
bypass of any part of a pretreatment system; and
         f.   Emergency telephone number(s) (24-hour) off-site and backup
telephone number(s) and other contact information (e.g., address, e-mail
address, etc.) for responsible site staff. Once an SPSC plan has been filed
with the City, any change in such information should be submitted within five
(5) workdays after revision.
      2.   Notification Procedure: The SPSC plan shall contain procedures for
immediately notifying the Pretreatment Coordinator of any accidental or slug
discharge, as required by section
10-3J-7 of this chapter.
      3.   Documentation: The SPSC plan shall contain a sample of the
documentation maintained at the site that:
         a.   Ensures that all employees who are in a position to cause,
discover, or observe such discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures and the training is documented with the date and time of training
and the employee’s signature; and
         b.   Verifies inspection and maintenance procedures to prevent adverse
impacts and confirm that said procedures are being performed on a regular
basis. At minimum, logs are required to verify valves in containment
structures, if present, are closed.
   C.   Submission Of Plan: The SPSC plan shall be submitted to the Coordinator
when the plan is required in an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit. Review of an SPSC plan by the City shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify the user's facility or SPSC plan as necessary to meet
all requirements of this chapter. Review by the City does not constitute an
approval of the SPSC plan, and the City and its duly authorized agent(s) are
not responsible for the actions of the user and any impacts the user may cause
as a result of a spill or slug load.
   D.   Evaluation And Revisions To Plan:
      1.   At least once every two (2) years, the Coordinator shall require
each significant industrial user to evaluate the need to revise its SPSC plan.
The Coordinator may require any user to submit, at a frequency less than two
(2) years, such SPSC plan or require modification of an existing SPSC plan
based on changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident
that had the potential to impact the POTW.
      2.   In alternate years, the Coordinator shall evaluate whether each
nonsignificant regulated user is required to file a revision to its SPSC plan
based on changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident
that had the potential to impact the POTW.
   E.   Implementation Of Plan: All SPSC plans shall be implemented by the user
whether or not they have been reviewed by the City.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3G-5: CLOSURE PLAN:
Any user meeting the requirements of section
10-3G-4 of this article that decides to cease or terminate any operations that
classify the user as an SIU for more than ninety (90) days must file a written
closure plan with the City. The closure plan shall be submitted ten (10)
workdays prior to the initiation of the plan and shall contain, at a minimum,
the following:
   A.   A description of each wastewater generating process that will cease
operations for more than ninety (90) consecutive days;
   B.   A description of how the facility will be closed and the extent of
operations during the closure period;
   C.   An inventory and estimate of the volume of all process wastewater,
chemicals, and hazardous waste on site. A description of the methods for
disposal, including procedures for removing, transporting, treating, storing,
or disposing of all waste and identifying all off-site waste management
facilities to be used;
   D.   A schedule of the closure activities indicating the time required to
complete each closure step; and
   E.   A schedule of additional monitoring to identify compliance with
pretreatment standards during the closure operations.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE H: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Section
10-3H-1: Information Required
10-3H-2: Permit Issuance Authority And Conditions
10-3H-3: Permits For Existing Connections
10-3H-4: Permits For New Connections
10-3H-5: Applications For Permits
10-3H-6: Application Signatures And Certification
10-3H-7: Review Of Application; Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
10-3H-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
A user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within thirty (30) calendar days of a written request by the
Pretreatment Coordinator. Information shall be submitted on a form provided by
the City. The Pretreatment Coordinator may periodically require users to update
information on file with the City. Information that may be required will be
consistent with the information identified in articles E and F of this chapter.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3H-2: PERMIT ISSUANCE AUTHORITY AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   The Coordinator may issue a user a wastewater discharge permit as
follows:
      1.   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issued To Significant
Industrial Users (SIUs) (Which Includes Categorical Industrial Users (CIUs) Not
Identified As Nonsignificant CIUs): No SIU, including any CIU, shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater
discharge permit issued by the City; except, that an existing SIU that has
filed a timely application pursuant to section
10-3H-3 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified
herein. Alternately, the City may issue general wastewater discharge permits to
an SIU or CIU if the conditions in subsection A2 of this section are met.
      2.   General Wastewater Discharge Permit Issued To SIUs And CIUs: At the
discretion of the Coordinator, the City may issue a general wastewater
discharge permit to control discharges from SIUs or CIUs to the POTW if the
following conditions are true of all facilities controlled by a general
wastewater discharge permit:
         a.   Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
         b.   Discharge the same types of waste;
         c.   Require the same effluent limitations or best management
practices;
         d.   Require the same or similar monitoring and/or reporting
requirements; and
         e.   In the opinion of the Coordinator, are more appropriately
controlled under a general wastewater discharge permit than under an individual
wastewater discharge permit.
      3.   Other Wastewater Discharge Permits: The Coordinator may require
other nonresidential users to obtain either individual or general wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Such
a wastewater discharge permit shall state that the holder of such a permit
issued under this section is not classified as an SIU or CIU. A user with a
wastewater discharge permit in this class may include, but is not limited to:
         a.   Any user that has been determined to be a nonsignificant
categorical industrial user, as defined in section
10-3B-2 of this chapter, definition of “significant industrial user or SIU”,
subsection C.
         b.   Any user that has been determined not to be a “significant
industrial user”, as defined in section
10-3B-2 of this chapter, that requires regulation by a wastewater discharge
permit;
         c.   Any user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards
that opts not to discharge process waste shall be issued a zero process
wastewater discharge permit;
         d.   Any user that is a noncategorical zero process wastewater
discharger that the Coordinator determines shall be permitted;
         e.   Any nonsignificant regulated user (NSRU) set forth below:
            (1)   An NSRU that discharges a process wastewater flow greater
than or equal to 0.005 percent of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic
capacity, or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller;
            (2)   An NSRU that discharges more than or equal to 0.005 percent
of the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW;
            (3)   An NSRU that discharges 0.005 percent of the maximum
allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by a local limit set
forth in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter; or
            (4)   An NSRU that intermittently discharges any individual batch
or batches that would meet the criteria in subsections A3e(1), (2), or (3)
above when discharged or otherwise have the potential to discharge a slug load
to the POTW;
         f.   Any user that has device(s) installed to remove oils, grease and
sand;
         g.   Any food service establishment (FSE); and
         h.   Any user required to eliminate or control specified pollutants
from its wastewater through the development and implementation of a Best
Management Practice (BMP) Plan.
   B.   A scenario may arise that a user that is subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards opts not to discharge, as described in
subsection A of this section, but the wastewater discharged is classified as
significant. Both an SIU permit and a zero process wastewater discharge permit
should be issued in this case.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subject the user to the sanctions set out in articles L, M, and N of this
chapter. Obtaining an individual or general wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3H-3: PERMITS FOR EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Any existing SIU, including CIU, required to obtain an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the
POTW prior to September 15, 2013, and who wishes to continue such discharges in
the future, shall, within sixty (60) calendar days after said date, apply to
the Coordinator for the appropriate wastewater discharge permit in accordance
with section
10-3H-5 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of September 15, 2013,
except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the
Coordinator.
   B.   Any existing non-SIU required to obtain an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall file an application within the time period
specified in a notification provided by the Coordinator.
   C.   No user shall discharge, or cause to discharge, any wastewater from a
food service establishment (FSE) directly or indirectly into the POTW without
first obtaining an FSE wastewater discharge permit. The City will implement the
FSE permit process by issuing a survey as provided by article E of this chapter
specific to FSE. Any FSE that completes and submits a survey in the time frame
required by the City will be deemed to have complied with the permit
requirements during the implementation of this program. The completed survey
shall serve as the wastewater discharge permit application for the FSE.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3H-4: PERMITS FOR NEW CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Any CIU proposing to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must
obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of
such discharge. An application for this individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, in accordance with section
10-3H-5 of this article, must be filed at least ninety (90) calendar days prior
to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
   B.   Any non-CIU proposing to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW
that is required to obtain an individual or general wastewater discharge permit
must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge, or operations in the case of a zero process discharger, in
accordance with section
10-3H-5 of this chapter. An application for this individual or general
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least sixty (60) calendar days
prior to the date upon which any discharge or operations will begin or
recommence.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3H-5: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
   A.   Individual Application:
      1.   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge
permit or zero process wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for completion and/or revision.
      2.   The Coordinator may require all users to submit as part of an
application all or some of the following information:
         a.   All information required by sections
10-3E-1,
10-3E-3 and
10-3E-4 of this chapter;
         b.   Identifying information for the site including name and contact
information of the operator and owner and authorized representative;
         c.   Description of operations as follows:
            (1)   A brief description of the nature of the activities,
services, production, and plant processes carried out by the user including
information concerning each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and a general rate of production;
            (2)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;
            (3)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day) including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be,
discharged to the POTW;
         d.   Time and duration of discharges with an estimate of the average
daily and maximum flow;
         e.   Information showing the nature and concentration of the discharge
in relation to applicable pretreatment standards and local limits;
         f.   Requests for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant regulated as a
categorical pretreatment pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge based on 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2). Representative sampling and
analysis shall be required to substantiate the request;
         g.   Plans and diagrams for:
            (1)   Site plans/floor plans that show the footprint of the
building with an outline of major equipment similar to an emergency exit plan;
            (2)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all building sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation, and all points of discharge;
            (3)   A diagram showing the location for monitoring the discharge
of all wastewaters covered by the permit; and
         h.   Any other information and/or documentation as may be deemed
necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator to evaluate and process the
wastewater discharge permit application.
   B.   General Application:
      1.   Users Generally: The Coordinator may require all users that are
required to obtain a general wastewater discharge permit to submit an
application, on a form provided by the City, which is specific to the category
regulated by the general wastewater discharge permit. The form may require, but
is not limited to, contact information, production processes, the types of
wastes generated, and the location for monitoring all wastewaters if regulated
by the general wastewater discharge permit. If a pretreatment standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall
submit documentation as required by the Coordinator.
      2.   Food Service Establishments (FSE): The Coordinator may require all
FSE that are required to obtain a general wastewater discharge permit to submit
an application on a form provided by the City which is specific to the FSE. The
form may require, but is not limited to, contact information; general business
information; facility operation; kitchen fixtures; fats, oil and grease
handling; kitchen cleanup and water usage; grease interceptor or alternatives
used; and sampling locations. The City requires the FSE to comply with a BMP,
and the FSE shall submit documentation as required by the Coordinator.
   C.   Categorical Monitoring Waivers:
      1.   Authority: The City may authorize a user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling
and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from
intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
user. This waiver is not available to users whose concentration standards are
derived from mass standards or production-based standards. This waiver is
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The monitoring waiver may only be authorized where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the
facility; provided, that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process
wastewater.
         b.   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for each subsequently issued individual
wastewater discharge permit.
         c.   This subsection C1 does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
      2.   Application Requirements:
         a.   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
         b.   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with section
10-3H-6 of this article, and include the certification statement in said
section
10-3H-6.
         c.   Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the USEPA approved method from 40 CFR part
136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
      3.   Documentation And Record Retention For CIU Monitoring Waivers: Any
grant of the monitoring waiver by the Coordinator shall be included as a
condition in the user’s wastewater discharge permit. The reasons supporting the
waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver
shall be maintained by the Coordinator for three (3) years after expiration of
the waiver.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3H-6: APPLICATION SIGNATURES AND CERTIFICATION:
   A.   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the following certification statement:
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
for knowing violations.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the user, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements
of this section must be submitted to the Coordinator within thirty (30)
calendar days of the change.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3H-7: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information and/or documentation. Within thirty (30) calendar days
of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the
Coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit. The Coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit. If the Coordinator fails to act within ninety (90) calendar days, an
application for a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed to be denied.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE I: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
Section
10-3I-1: Duration Of Permits
10-3I-2: Contents Of Permits
10-3I-3: Appeals
10-3I-4: Permit Modifications
10-3I-5: Transfer Of Permits
10-3I-6: Re-Issuance Of Permits
10-3I-7: Revocation Of Permits
10-3I-8: Voiding Permits
10-3I-9: Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions
10-3I-1: DURATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Individual Permit: An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be
issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the
effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five (5) years at the discretion of the
Pretreatment Coordinator. Each individual wastewater discharge permit shall
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   B.   General Permit: A general wastewater discharge permit shall be issued
for a specific time period and may contain a specific date upon which it will
expire.
   C.   Identifying A Significant Industrial User: The City will identify in
the individual or general wastewater discharge permit whether or not the user
is defined as a significant industrial user (SIU).
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-2: CONTENTS OF PERMITS:
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Coordinator to prevent pass through, interference
or upset, protect the quality of the water body receiving the City’s wastewater
treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
biosolids management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits shall contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration;
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the City in accordance with section
10-3I-5 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
      4.   Requirements for the development and implementation of a spill
prevention/slug control plan or other special conditions including best
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated,
or nonroutine discharges;
      5.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; and
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
      6.   A statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such
schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable Federal, State, or local law.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   An individual wastewater discharge permit may contain the process for
seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge in accordance with subsection
10-3H-5C of this chapter. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Coordinator
shall be included as a condition of the user’s permit.
   C.   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits may contain, but
need not be limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to equalize, reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the POTW;
      3.   Requirements that govern, regulate and/or restrict the use of bypass
of the pretreatment system conditions consistent with 40 CFR 403.17 and section
10-3O-3 of this chapter;
      4.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
prevention and slug control plans or other special conditions, including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated,
or nonroutine discharges;
      5.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Development and implementation of best management practices plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      7.   The unit charge and/or schedule of strength fees for the management
of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      8.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      9.   Requirements for the zero discharge of process waste regulated by a
national categorical pretreatment standard or local standard;
      10.   Documentation of any monitoring waiver approved by the Coordinator
for categorically regulated pollutants found to be not present and requirements
to re-institute monitoring in the event that a waived pollutant is found to be
present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the
user’s operation.
      11.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the user of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      12.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Coordinator to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   D.   1. The general permit for food service establishments (FSE) will
include grease interceptor requirements with operation and maintenance
requirements. Every FSE shall implement a best management practices (BMP) plan
in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the POTW, Detailed
requirements for BMP plans shall be specified in the permit. This may include,
but is not limited to:
         a.   Installation of drain screens;
         b.   Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil;
         c.   Disposal of food waste into the trash or garbage;
         d.   Employee training;
         e.   Recordkeeping requirements;
         f.   Notifications required; and
         g.   Kitchen signage:
      2.   If the FSE has a waiver for some aspect of the program, that waiver
will be documented in an attachment to the permit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-3: APPEALS:
Any person, including the user, may petition the Coordinator to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) calendar days of
notice of its issuance. The following conditions apply to wastewater discharge
permit appeals:
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for such objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   If the Coordinator fails to act within thirty (30) calendar days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court for Iroquois County within sixty (60) calendar days.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-4: PERMIT MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Individual Permit: The Coordinator may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      2.   To address substantial alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
issuance of the individual wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   To address introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver
had been obtained;
      4.   A change in the user or POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      5.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
      6.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
      7.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      8.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      9.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
      10.   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation
to either a new owner or operator as provided by section
10-3I-5 of this article.
   B.   General Permit: The Coordinator may modify a general wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      2.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      3.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
      4.   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation
to either a new owner or operator as provided by section
10-3I-5 of this article.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-5: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
   A.   A wastewater discharge permit shall not be transferred, assigned, or
sold to a new owner or new user in a different premises or to a new or
different operation in the same or different premises without the expressed
written approval of the Coordinator. If the premises is sold or otherwise
transferred by the current permitted user to a new owner or user who will
maintain the operation in the same premises, the permit held by the current
permitted user and/or owner shall be reissued by the City to the new owner and/
or user as a temporary wastewater discharge permit whether or not the current
permitted user will continue to operate the equipment at the site or the
equipment is leased to another user for its operation at the site of the
current permitted user, provided:
      1.   The new owner and/or user notified the City thirty (30) calendar
days in advance of the transaction; and
      2.   The new owner and/or user confirmed to the City, within five (5)
workdays of the transaction, the completion of the date of the sale or transfer
or execution of an operating contract; and
      3.   The new owner and/or user shall apply for a new wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with this chapter within sixty (60) calendar days of the
ownership transaction date.
   B.   Failure to provide the sale/transfer notification defined in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section renders the wastewater discharge permit
void as of said sale and/or transfer date. It is further provided, that the
temporary wastewater discharge permit shall only be effective for one hundred
twenty (120) calendar days after the date of sale or transfer. The City shall
have the same remedies for violation of temporary wastewater discharge permits
as it has for violation of other wastewater discharge permits. 
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-6: RE-ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater
discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, in accordance with section
10-3H-5 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the
expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-7: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The Coordinator may revoke an individual or a general wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to timely notify the Coordinator of substantial changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Coordinator of changed
conditions pursuant to section
10-3J-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   D.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
   E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   F.   Refusing to allow the Coordinator and/or duly authorized agents timely
access to the facility premises and records;
   G.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   H.   Failure to pay fines;
   I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   K.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
   L.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business or
operation ownership of a permitted facility; or
   M.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit, or this chapter.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-8: VOIDING PERMITS:
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable by the Coordinator upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business or operation ownership. Any
existing wastewater discharge permit issued to a particular user is void upon
the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3I-9: WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
   A.   If another municipality or user(s) located within another municipality
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City shall enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality or users(s)
regarding the discharge of wastewater to the POTW.
   B.   The City shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality or users(s) at a frequency determined by the City:
      1.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality or users(s);
      2.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging wastewater to the POTW; and
      3.   Such other information as the Coordinator may deem necessary.
   C.   An intergovernmental agreement required by subsection A of this section
shall contain the following conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use
chapter which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which
are at least as stringent as those set forth in section
10-3F-2 of this chapter and chapter 2 of this title for the area to be served
by the City. The requirement shall specify that the chapter and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's chapter or local
limits. The agreement shall include a clause that states the users in the
contributing municipality will abide by this chapter;
      2.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit an updated
nonresidential user inventory at a frequency determined by the City;
      3.   A provision specifying that pretreatment implementation activities,
including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be under the jurisdiction of the Coordinator;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Coordinator with access to all information and documentation that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s
wastewater discharge to the POTW;
      7.   A provision ensuring the Coordinator access to the facilities of
users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries
for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary
by the Coordinator; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intergovernmental agreement.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE J: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Section
10-3J-1: Compliance Required
10-3J-2: Pretreatment Requirements For Noncategorical Users
10-3J-3: Pretreatment Requirements For Categorical Industrial Users
10-3J-4: Periodic Compliance Reports; Self-Monitoring Reports
10-3J-5: Reports From Users Not Requiring A Permit
10-3J-6: Changed Conditions
10-3J-7: Reports Of Potential Problems
10-3J-8: Notice Of Violation; Repeat Sampling And Reporting
10-3J-9: Notification Of Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
10-3J-10: Due Dates Of Reports
10-3J-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Each user of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) of the City shall comply
with the reporting requirements within this chapter and such user's wastewater
discharge permit. Some reporting requirements may apply to users that are not
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-2: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NONCATEGORICAL USERS:
   A.   General Provisions: Should the City find that a user not subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards does not meet pretreatment
standards and/or requirements applicable to its discharge, causes or
contributes to the City’s wastewater treatment plant interference or upset,
causes pass through, or creates conditions which are injurious to the POTW,
including treatment processes or polluting the natural waters within the City,
its service areas, or the waters of the State of Illinois, additional
pretreatment and/or O&M shall be required by the City to meet pretreatment
standards and requirements. Such facilities as the City may deem necessary for
pretreatment of the wastewaters shall be furnished by and at the expense of the
user as a condition of the discharge of said wastewaters into the POTW or to
any natural water within the City service area.
   B.   Pretreatment Review: The Pretreatment Coordinator will require the user
to initiate a pretreatment review through a telephone call, letter or certified
letter to the authorized representative of the user.
   C.   Pretreatment Initiation Meeting: A pretreatment initiation meeting
shall be held between the Coordinator and the user to discuss the problem and
the solution to said problem. If it is determined that changes in operation and
maintenance, plant modifications, and/or the installation of pretreatment
equipment shall occur to resolve noncompliance, a schedule shall be established
with events and completion deadlines agreeable to both parties to resolve the
noncompliance. If appropriate, a compliance agreement defining the agreed upon
schedule shall be sent from the City to the user. The user shall sign the
compliance agreement and return it to the Coordinator. If a schedule for
compliance acceptable to the Coordinator and the user cannot be established,
the matter will be referred for further enforcement action consistent with the
provisions of article L of this chapter as appropriate.
   D.   Progress Reports: Progress reports shall be filed by the user on a
schedule agreed to by the Coordinator and the user concerning the completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation). In the progress report(s), the user shall
identify whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason
for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return
to the established compliance schedule.
   E.   Final Report: A final report shall be filed with the Coordinator by the
user within ninety (90) calendar days from the end of the compliance schedule
deadline to verify the success or failure of the entire schedule. The final
report will, if appropriate, identify the steps being taken by the user to
resolve noncompliance.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-3: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USERS:
In the event that either the City, a user or IEPA determines that the user is
regulated as a categorical industrial user by standards and requirements
promulgated by the IEPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act,
the following reports are required to be filed by the user with the City.
   A.   Baseline Monitoring Reports:
      1.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging
to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Coordinator a
report which contains the information listed in subsection A3 of this section.
      2.   At least ninety (90) calendar days prior to commencement of its
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall
submit to the Coordinator a report which contains the information listed in
subsection A3 of this section. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards, and
shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to
be discharged.
      3.   Users described in subsections A1 and A2 of this section shall
submit the information set forth below to the Coordinator:
         a.   Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
         b.   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
         c.   Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
         d.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
         e.   Measurements Of Pollutants:
            (1)   The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment
standards applicable to each regulated process;
            (2)   The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
categorical pretreatment standard or by the Coordinator of regulated pollutants
in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations. In cases where the categorical pretreatment
standard requires a best management practice or pollution prevention
alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the Coordinator
or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standard;
            (3)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
complete the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection
A3. A maximum of four (4) grab samples may be required to be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, hexavalent chromium, and
volatile organic compounds.
            (4)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow the use of the combined waste
stream formula of 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with all
pretreatment standards. Similar methodology may be used to evaluate limits for
users that combine waste streams after pretreatment but before monitoring at
the discretion of the Coordinator. Where an alternate concentration or mass
limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted
limit, along with supporting data, may be submitted to the USEPA or IEPA;
            (5)   Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in subsection
10-3F-6B of this chapter, and samples shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in subsection
10-3F-6C of this chapter;
            (6)   The Coordinator may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
            (7)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the City;
         f.   Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative (as defined in section
10-3B-2 of this chapter, definition of "authorized representative of the
user"), and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the CIU to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements; and
         g.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to
this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection B of this
section.
         h.   Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section
10-3H-6 of this chapter.
   B.   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports: The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection A3g of this section:
      1.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to:
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
      2.   No increment referred to in subsection B1 of this section shall
exceed nine (9) calendar months;
      3.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Coordinator no later
than fourteen (14) calendar days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule;
      4.   In no event shall more than nine (9) calendar months elapse between
such progress reports to the Coordinator; and
      5.   All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with section
10-3H-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline:
      1.   Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements
shall submit to the Coordinator a report containing the information described
in subsection A of this section.
      2.   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report
shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long- term production rate.
      3.   For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period.
      4.   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with section
10-3H-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-4: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS; SELF-MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Significant Industrial Users:
      1.   Significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the
Coordinator but in no case less than twice per year (normally in July and
January on dates specified by the City in the wastewater discharge permit),
submit a report to the City with a description of the nature, concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and
the measured or estimated average and daily flows for the reporting period.
      2.   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the user's discharge and comply with the
requirements of subsections
10-3F-6B and C of this chapter.
      3.   All sampling and analysis may be performed by the City in lieu of
the significant industrial user at the discretion of the Coordinator. In such
cases, the City will issue an attachment to the wastewater discharge permit
that specifies the City will perform sampling and analysis semiannually at
minimum. The significant industrial user shall reimburse the City for all costs
and expenses incurred for such sampling and analysis.
      4.   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user
must submit documentation required by the Coordinator or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      5.   Where the City itself collects all the information required for the
report, the significant industrial user will not be required to submit the
report.
   B.   Categorical Industrial Users (CIU):
      1.   All CIUs shall, at a frequency determined by the Coordinator but in
no case less than twice per year (normally in July and January on dates
specified by the City in a wastewater discharge permit), submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with section
10-3H-6 of this chapter.
      2.   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the CIU’s discharge and comply with the
requirements of subsections
10-3F-6B and C of this chapter.
      3.   This sampling and analysis may be performed by the City in lieu of
the CIU at the discretion of the Coordinator. In such cases, the City will
issue an attachment to the wastewater discharge permit that specifies the City
will perform sampling and analysis semiannually at minimum. The CIU shall
reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred for such sampling and
analysis.
      4.   If a CIU subject to the reporting requirements in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Coordinator, using
the procedures prescribed in subsections
10-3F-6B and C of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
      5.   Where the City has imposed mass limitations on a CIU as provided for
by 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report required by subsection B1 of this section shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the pretreatment standards in the
discharge from the CIU.
      6.   For a CIU subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the City in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c),
the report required by subsection B1 of this section shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user's long- term production rate. For all other CIUs subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the
report required by subsection B1 of this section shall include the user's
actual average production rate for the reporting period.
      7.   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the CIU
must submit documentation required by the Coordinator or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      8.   Upon approval of a monitoring waiver for pollutants found to be not
present and revision of the user’s permit by the Coordinator, the CIU must
certify on each periodic report with the statement in section
10-3H-6 of this chapter that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
waste stream due to activities of the user with the following statement:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ________ (specify
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard part(s)), I certify that,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level
of the ________ (list the categorically regulated pollutant(s)) in the
Wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last
periodic report.
      9.   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection
B1 of this section or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by
the Coordinator, and notify the Coordinator.
   C.   Nonsignificant Categorical Users: “Nonsignificant categorical
industrial users”, as defined in section
10-3B-2 of this chapter, definition of “significant industrial user or SIU”,
subsection C, shall, at a frequency determined by the Coordinator but no less
frequently than annually (on dates specified by the City in a wastewater
discharge permit), submit a report which contains the certification statement
named “Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User Certification Form” on file
in the Office of the City Clerk.
   D.   Other Nonsignificant Regulated Users:
      1.   Categorical zero process dischargers, noncategorical zero process
dischargers, batch dischargers, food service establishments and any firms
regulated by individual or general wastewater discharge permit requirements
including, but not limited to, best management practices shall, at a frequency
determined by the Coordinator, submit a periodic report at a frequency defined
in the applicable wastewater discharge permit.
      2.   The reports may require sampling and analyses or some other measure
to determine compliance with permit pretreatment standards and requirements.
The user must submit documentation necessary to determine the compliance status
of the user as defined by the Coordinator and identified in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-5: REPORTS FROM USERS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT:
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports under the conditions required by the Coordinator. These
reports may include, but are not limited to, surveys of business activities,
water usage, wastes discharged, spill and slug loading potential, pretreatment
equipment, waste hauling and facility layout.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-6: CHANGED CONDITIONS:
   A.   Authorized Representative Change Notification: Any significant
industrial user that changes the authorized representative of its company shall
file a change notice with the City within thirty (30) calendar days of the
effective date of the change.
   B.   Reports Of Changed Conditions:
      1.   Each user must notify the Coordinator of any planned substantial
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) calendar days before
the change. Immediate shutdowns or deletions of products are required to be
noticed within five (5) workdays of determination.
      2.   The Coordinator may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section
10-3H-5 of this chapter.
      3.   The Coordinator may issue or modify an existing individual or
general wastewater discharge permit under sections
10-3I-2 and
10-3I-4 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
      4.   For purposes of this requirement, substantial changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, the
addition or deletion of a shift, the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants including changes to the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes
for which the user has submitted initial notification under section
10-3J-9 of this article, introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring
waiver had been obtained, the addition of a new process regardless of waste
discharge or lack of discharge, shutdown of a process, or addition or deletion
of a product.
      5.   Significant industrial users and categorical industrial users are
required to notify the Coordinator of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-7: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, or a slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, any
user shall immediately telephone (within 15 minutes) and notify the Coordinator
of the incident. If this notification cannot be made to the POTW staff during
routine business hours, the user shall notify the ICOM (Iroquois County
Communications Dispatch Center) at (815)432-7224. This notification shall
include the name of the caller, location of the discharge, physical state of
the discharge, chemical composition, concentration and volume, if known, and
date and time of discharge as well as duration of the discharge, and corrective
actions taken by the user. The notification shall include what Federal, State
and local entities have also been notified by the user.
   B.   The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   C.   Within five (5) workdays following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Coordinator, submit a detailed written report describing
the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences.
   D.   Such notifications shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   E.   A notice/sign shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees in English and the language of
common use whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection A
of this section, as described in the user's spill prevention/slug control plan.
Employers shall ensure through documentation that all employees who may cause
such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the Coordinator within thirty (30) calendar days after
becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the
City monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the City
samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the
results of this sampling. If the City performed the sampling and analysis in
lieu of the user, the City will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless
it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the
repeat sampling and analysis.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-9: NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(P), any user who commences the discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the USEPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the USEPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other). If the user discharges more than one hundred kilograms (100 kg) of such
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and is readily
available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take
place no later than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once
for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under subsection
10-3J-6B of this article. The notification requirement in this subsection does
not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections
10-3J-3A and C and 10-3J-4B of this chapter.
   B.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one- time notification. Subsequent months during which
the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Coordinator, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substances within
ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date of such regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
   E.   This section does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit issued hereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3J-10: DUE DATES OF REPORTS:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked.
For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern. In order to meet deadlines, reports may be faxed or e-mailed on
the due date to the City. The original of the fax or e-mail is required to be
mailed to the City postmarked within one workday of the transmission.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE K: COMPLIANCE MONITORING
Section
10-3K-1: Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling
10-3K-2: Search Warrant
10-3K-3: Recordkeeping
10-3K-4: Publication Of Significant Noncompliant Users
10-3K-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
   A.   The Pretreatment Coordinator and his designee(s), duly authorized
agents of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), and
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, hereafter referred to as
“the above-named entities”, shall have the right to enter the premises of any
user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
chapter and any individual or general wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the above-named entities ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, analyses, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties.
   B.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the above-named entities will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   C.   The above-named entities shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations, inspect the premises for
leaks or stoppages, or place dye in the sanitary pipe so to ascertain whether
or not the sanitary pipe is draining into the proper City sewer system.
   D.   The Coordinator may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
cost and expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall
be calibrated twice yearly (at 6 month intervals) to ensure their accuracy. The
user shall submit these calibration reports semiannually to the Coordinator
with the periodic compliance reports required in section
10-3J-4 of this chapter.
   E.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Coordinator and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   F.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the above-named entities access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   G.   In the event that a suitable sampling facility does not exist, pursuant
to section
10-3D-4 of this chapter, the “sampling facility” shall be considered to be the
more feasible location of the following locations based on the sampling
conditions and assurance of compliance: the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected, or the
point of process wastewater discharge within the building.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3K-2: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If any of the above-named entities have been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, of the user, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the above-
named entity may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of
Iroquois County.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3K-3: RECORDKEEPING:
   A.   Users: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements,
and documentation associated with best management practices established under
section
10-3I-2 of this chapter. Records shall include the date, exact place, method,
and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Coordinator.
   B.   City: The City will maintain documentation of any monitoring waiver
issued pursuant to subsection 10-3H-5C of this chapter for a period of three
(3) years after the expiration of the waiver. The documentation will include
the reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in
its request for the waiver.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3K-4: PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANT USERS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall be
applicable to all significant industrial users and categorical industrial users
(or any other user that violates subsection C, D or H of this section) and
shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in article
F of this chapter;
   B.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a 6-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by article F of this chapter, multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
   C.   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by article F of this chapter (daily maximum long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Coordinator has determined
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
   D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Coordinator's exercise
of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide, within forty five (45) calendar days after the due
date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, that the Coordinator determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE L: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Section
10-3L-1: Notice Of Violation (NOV)
10-3L-2: Compliance Agreements
10-3L-3: Show Cause Order
10-3L-4: Compliance Orders
10-3L-5: Cease And Desist Orders
10-3L-6: Emergency Suspensions
10-3L-7: Termination Of Discharge
10-3L-1: NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV):
   A.   Issuance And Response: When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may serve
upon that user a written NOV. The user shall respond to the NOV by the deadline
defined therein (usually within 20 workdays of issuance). The user's response
shall provide an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction of the cause of the violation and prevention of future violations
and shall include specific required actions. The response in no way relieves
the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the NOV.
   B.   Pretreatment Review: The Coordinator may initiate a pretreatment review
("pretreatment review") for any violation issued under subsection
10-3J-2B of this chapter, but will most likely initiate the process for the
first violation of any individual parameter. Once the need for a pretreatment
review has been identified, the Coordinator shall send the authorized
representative of the user the date that the pretreatment review meeting is
scheduled, normally within thirty (30) calendar days of the determination that
a pretreatment review is required.
   C.   Compliance Directive: After such pretreatment review meeting, the City
may issue a compliance directive stating that the user is in a “corrective
action” status. A plan for correction and compliance schedule illustrating
milestones may be issued by the City to the user. The plan for correction and
compliance schedule may become part of the user’s wastewater discharge permit.
The user shall meet the wastewater discharge permit pretreatment standards and
requirements at all times. The plan for correction, compliance schedule and
revised wastewater discharge permit do not relieve the user of meeting the
wastewater discharge permit limits or requirements of this chapter. The user
shall take whatever actions are necessary to meet the wastewater discharge
permit limits and conditions.
   D.   Continued Sampling: The City may continue to sample the wastewater of
the user and determine the user's progress towards meeting milestones as needed
to determine if the user is complying with the conditions of the plan of
action, compliance schedule and/or wastewater discharge permit. In the event
the City detects and documents any violation, an NOV shall be issued to the
user.
   E.   NOV For Each Violation: An NOV shall be issued for each identified
violation of the plan of action, compliance schedule, and wastewater discharge
permit conditions.
   F.   Termination Of Corrective Action Status: When the user has met the
conditions of the plan of action, compliance schedule, and permit, the City may
notify the user in writing that the conditions have been satisfied and they are
no longer under a “corrective action” status.
   G.   Other Actions Authorized: Issuance of a notice of violation shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3L-2: COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS:
The Coordinator may enter into compliance agreements, (i.e., “consent orders”,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance). Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
10-3L-4 and
10-3L-5 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3L-3: SHOW CAUSE ORDER:
The Coordinator may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear for a
hearing before representatives of the City and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken against the user. Notice of such hearing
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the
proposed enforcement action to be taken, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken against the user. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10)
workdays prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3L-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
   A.   When the Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Coordinator may issue an order to the user directing that the user comply with
this chapter, the wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement within a specified time.
   B.   If the user does not comply within the time provided, sanitary sewer
service may be discontinued by the City. Compliance orders may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including the installation of
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or related appurtenances, additional
self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW.
   C.   A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation.
   D.   Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3L-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
   A.   When the Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the Coordinator may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge of wastewater.
   B.   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3L-6: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
   A.   The Coordinator may immediately suspend a user's discharge of
wastewater, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of wastewater which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The Coordinator may also immediately
suspend a user’s discharge of wastewater, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   B.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Coordinator may
take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance,
disconnection or blocking of the building sewer connection, to prevent, or
minimize damage to, the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The Coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge
when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Coordinator that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
section
10-3L-7 of this article are initiated against the user.
   C.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge of
wastewater presenting imminent endangerment as identified by the Coordinator
shall submit a detailed written statement, signed by the authorized
representative of the user, describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Coordinator
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section
10-3L-3 or 10-3L-7 of this chapter.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3L-7: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
   A.   In addition to the provisions in section
10-3L-6 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to termination of its wastewater discharge:
      1.   Violation of one or more wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      3.   Failure to report substantial changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      4.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      5.   Violation of one or more of the pretreatment standards in article F
of this chapter.
   B.   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
of wastewater and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section
10-3L-3 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the Coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE M: PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Section
10-3M-1: Failure To Report Or Notify
10-3M-2: Recovery Of Costs Incurred
10-3M-3: Administrative Fines
10-3M-4: Injunctive Relief
10-3M-5: Civil Penalties
10-3M-6: Remedies Nonexclusive
10-3M-1: FAILURE TO REPORT OR NOTIFY:
   A.   Sewer Extension And Connection Permits: Any user who fails to file for
and obtain a sewer extension or connection permit prior to commencing
construction of said extension or connection required by this chapter may be
subject to the following late filing fees in addition to extension and/or
connection or annexation fees:
 
1. First notice                                Issuance of warning/citation
2. Second notice                               $250.00
3. Cost per day per PE for each additional day 100.00
   past the second notice deadline
 
   B.   City Reports Or Notifications: Any user who fails to file any report or
notification so required by this chapter shall be subject to the following late
filing fees:
1. First offense - less than 30 calendar days past due    Issuance of warning
2. Recurring reporting violations or 30 or more calendar  $100.00
   days past due
   NOV response noncompliance                             Cost of contractor
   Cost per additional day past final request deadline    $50.00
3. Substantial change notification:
   No written notification of substantial changes whether
   discharged or not:
   At startup or shutdown                                 500.00
   Per each additional 15 days in excess of 30 calendar   100.00
   days
 
   C.   Reports Or Notifications Required By Significant Industrial User (SIU)
Or Categorical Industrial User (CIU): Any SIU or CIU who fails to file any
periodic pretreatment report (semiannual), baseline monitoring report, or
ninety (90) day final compliance report required by this chapter shall be
subject to the following late filing fees:
1. First offense - less than 30 calendar days past due    Issuance of warning
2. Recurring reporting violations or 30 or more calendar  $250.00
   days past due
   NOV response noncompliance                             Cost of contractor
   Cost per additional day past final request deadline    $100.00
3. Substantial changes:
   No written notification of substantial changes whether
   discharged or not:
   At startup or shutdown                                 750.00
   Per each additional 15 days in excess of 30 calendar   200.00
   days
 
   D.   Ownership Notification Specific To Entities With Wastewater Discharge
Permits:
 
   No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of
1. facility, or any portion thereof, with an individual wastewater       750.00
   discharge permit
   No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of
2. facility, or any portion thereof, with a general wastewater discharge 500.00
   permit
 
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3M-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED:
   A.   Generally: Any person or user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, or who causes damage to or impairs the POTW is liable to the City for
all expenses, costs, losses and damages caused directly or indirectly by such
violation. The City may invoice the costs and expenses, including, but not
limited to, sampling and analyses associated with the investigation, costs and
expenses of mitigating impact to the POTW, costs and expenses of preparing the
administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders; investigative
and/or correction actions, and review of response(s) from the user. The City
shall invoice the user for the costs and expenses incurred by the City for any
and all cleaning, repair, replacement or other investigative and/or corrective
action(s) as a response to the violation. Any user that does not pay to the
City all such assessed costs and expenses shall constitute a violation of this
chapter enforceable under the provisions of article L of this chapter.
   B.   Food Service Establishments (FSEs):
      1.   Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee:
         a.   An FSE that operates without a grease interceptor may be required
to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to equitably cover the costs of
increased maintenance of the POTW as a result of the FSE's inability to
adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. This subsection B1a shall
not be interpreted to allow the new construction of an FSE, or existing FSE
undergoing remodeling, to operate without an approved grease interceptor.
         b.   The grease disposal mitigation fee is be based on the estimated
annual increased cost of maintaining the sewer system for inspection and
removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE
resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or in the case a grease
interceptor or alternate grease control device exists but has been determined
to be inadequate.
      2.   Sewer System Overflows; Public Nuisance; Abatement And Cleanup
Costs: Notwithstanding the waiver of grease interceptor installation for
existing FSE established in section
10-3D-5 of this chapter, an FSE found to have contributed to a sewer blockage,
sewer system overflow (SSO) or any public sewer interference resulting from the
discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG may be subject to costs and
expenses incurred by the City. SSOs cause threats and injuries to public
health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public
nuisances. Building sewer failures and SSOs caused by FSE alone or collectively
are the responsibility of the private property owner or FSE, and the individual
(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the City must act
immediately to contain and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a building
sewer or public sewer, or at the request of the property owner or operator of
the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the
condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or
property of the public, the City's costs and expenses of such abatement shall
be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE, and the
individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s), and shall
constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon the City's
request for reimbursement of such costs and expenses.
   C.   Lien Provisions:
      1.   Notice Of Lien:
         a.   If any person refuses to remedy a violation of the provisions of
this section and said violation is remedied by the City, a notice of lien for
the cost and expenses incurred shall be recorded in the following manner: The
City, or the person performing the service by authority of the City, may file
notice of lien in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
         b.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            (1)   A description of the real estate involved sufficient for
identification;
            (2)   An amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the service; and
            (3)   The date or dates when the expense was incurred.
         c.   The notice of lien shall be filed within sixty (60) days after
the cost and expense is incurred.
      2.   Release Of Lien: If payment of the cost and expense is made after
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the City, and the
release filed in the same manner as the notice of lien.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3M-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Coordinator may fine such user in an
amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Such fines shall be
assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other
long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during
the period of violation.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after fifteen (15) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance. If the charges for such services are not paid within forty five (45)
days after the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be
discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all
claims are settled. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) disconnect and reconnect fee
shall be applied to the unpaid balance. A lien against the user’s property
shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring reconsideration of such fines must file a written
request for the Coordinator to reconsider the fine along with full payment of
the fine amount within thirty (30) calendar days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the Coordinator may convene a hearing on the matter.
In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3M-4: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Attorney
may petition the Circuit Court of Iroquois County for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The Coordinator
may also seek such environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3M-5: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to
the City for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
   B.   The Coordinator may recover costs, including, but not limited to,
filing fees, witness fees, attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
   C.   In determining the amount of fines and/or civil liability, the court or
judicial administrator shall take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through
the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of
the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
   D.   Issuing a notice of local ordinance violation or the filing of a suit
for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against a user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3M-6: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided in this article are not exclusive. The Coordinator may
take any or all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the City’s enforcement response plan. However, the Coordinator may take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the
Coordinator is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE N: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
Section
10-3N-1: Performance Bond Required
10-3N-2: Liability Insurance Required
10-3N-3: Failure To Pay For Outstanding Fees And Penalties
10-3N-4: Water Supply Severance; Recommencement Of Service
10-3N-5: Public Nuisance Declared
10-3N-6: Contractor Violations
10-3N-1: PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to
the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Coordinator to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3N-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
The Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused
by the user's discharge of wastewater.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3N-3: FAILURE TO PAY FOR OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES:
The Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding
fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3N-4: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE; RECOMMENCEMENT OF SERVICE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the
user may be severed. Water service will recommence, at the user’s expense, only
after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply with the
violation(s) giving rise to the termination of the service.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3N-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Coordinator. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in removing,
abating, or remedying the nuisance.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3N-6: CONTRACTOR VIOLATIONS:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are hereby declared to be nonresponsible users and therefore
are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or
services to the City. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to
the City held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with
pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of
the Coordinator.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE O: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
Section
10-3O-1: Upsets
10-3O-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
10-3O-3: Bypasses
10-3O-1: UPSETS:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An "upset" does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An UPSET shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of subsection C of this section are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workerlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the Pretreatment
Coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written report must be provided within
five (5) workdays):
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3O-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsections
10-3F-2A1 and A2 of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in subsection
10-3F-2A3 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason
to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference or that either:
   A.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or
interference; or
   B.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable biosolids use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3O-3: BYPASSES:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   BYPASS: The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of a user's
treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur
in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
   B.   Bypasses Permitted: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provisions of subsections C and D of this section.
   C.   Notice Of Bypass:
      1.   Anticipated: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Coordinator at least ten (10) workdays before
the date of the bypass, if possible.
      2.   Unanticipated: A user shall submit oral notice to the Coordinator of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) workdays of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it
is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Coordinator may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within
twenty four (24) hours.
   D.   City Actions:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Coordinator may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         a.   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed, in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment, to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this
section.
      2.   The Coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass after considering
its adverse effects, if the Coordinator determines that it will meet the three
(3) conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
ARTICLE P: USER AND SURCHARGE INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
Section
10-3P-1: User And Surcharge Rates
10-3P-2: Bills For Service; Payments
10-3P-3: Disposition Of Revenues
10-3P-4: Accounting
10-3P-5: Notice Of Rates
10-3P-6: Access To Records
10-3P-7: Responsibilities Of City Employees
10-3P-8: Penalty
10-3P-1: USER AND SURCHARGE RATES:
   A.   There has heretofore been and continues to be a minimum charge and
basic user rate for the use and service supplied by the wastewater works of the
City. Such rate shall apply as established and scheduled from time to time by
the Corporate Authorities of the City.
   B.   The user rate is set forth in the section
10-2-2 of this title (see also subsections
10-4-2B and 10-4-3B of this title). The City may issue default rates for
defined classes of users. The basic user rate shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having a 5-day, twenty
degree Celsius (20°C) BOD of two hundred one milligrams per liter (201 mg/L)
and an SS concentration of two hundred thirty nine milligrams per liter (239
mg/L) (see also subsections
10-2-1C and 10-4A-1C1 of this title).
   C.   For users that cannot be defined in a default class, the surcharge rate
is based on the following three (3) components: volume discharged, surcharged
BOD, and surcharged TSS. The Pretreatment Coordinator may choose to not bill
users for surchargeable discharges if the Coordinator estimates that issuing
the surcharge would be cost prohibitive or have minimal benefit.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-2: BILLS FOR SERVICE; PAYMENTS:
   A.   Monthly Payments; Liability Of User: The rates or charges for service
under this article shall be payable monthly. The user of the service shall be
liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to
the premises by the City only upon the condition that the user of the service
is liable therefor to the City.
   B.   Rendition Of Bills; Due Date: Bills for sewer service shall be sent out
by the City on the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the
service is billed. All sewer bills are due and payable fifteen (15) calendar
days after issuance.
   C.   Delinquent Payments:
      1.   An invoice not paid by the due date and which has an outstanding
balance of at least the minimum shown on the invoice shall have a late fee
assessed of ten percent (10%) of the outstanding balance.
      2.   If the charges for the services under this chapter with a balance of
any balance after 30 days are not paid within ninety (90) calendar days after
the issuance of the bill for such services, the City may proceed with
termination of such services shall be discontinued without further notice and
shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled.
   D.   Collection Agencies May Collect; City Fee: In addition to any other
method of collection as herein provided or as provided by laws, the City may
turn delinquent users over to collection agencies. Any user being turned over
to such an agency for collection shall first be sent a notice of the City
intent to do so. Any outstanding water invoices will also be added to the sewer
use charges being turned over to the collection agency. The City may impose a
collection agent turnover fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) on any customer
so turned over to such an agency, If so, the notice must state to the customer
the amount of such fee.
   E.   Lien Provisions:
      1.   Statement Of Lien Claim; Notice Requirements:
         a.   Whenever a bill for a sewer service having any balance remains
unpaid for thirty (30) calendar days for monthly service after it has been
issued, the City Collector shall file with the Recorder of Deeds of Iroquois
County, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice
that the City claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
         b.   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises
and the City Secretary has notice of this condition, a notice shall be mailed
to the owner of the premises, if known to the Secretary, whenever such bill
remains unpaid for one hundred five (105) calendar days after it has been
issued.
         c.   The failure of the City Secretary to record such lien or to mail
such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in subsection E2
of this section.
      2.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to lien for unpaid charges
under this chapter shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds
of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting the costs, as
is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by
bill in equity in the name of the City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized
and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the City of Watseka
in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against the property for
which the bill has remained unpaid one hundred five (105) calendar days in the
case of a quarterly bill after it has been issued.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-3: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the POTW shall be
deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All such revenues and
monies shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart from his private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City, and all of said
sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City Financial
Clerk not more than ten (10) workdays after receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Chair of
the Finance, Legal, Audit and Insurance Committee and City Council.
   B.   The City Financial Clerk shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
the account of the fund designated as the “Sewerage Fund of the City of
Watseka”. Said Financial Clerk shall administer such fund in every respect in
the manner provided by statute in the Illinois Municipal Code, effective July
1, 1961, as amended.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-4: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   The City Financial Clerk shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the Sewerage Fund, and at
regular intervals, the Financial Clerk shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   B.   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system meet these regulations. In
this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year;
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      3.   Number of users connected to the system;
      4.   Number of nonmetered users; and
      5.   A list of users discharging nonresidential wastes and volume and
strength of waste discharged.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-5: NOTICE OF RATES:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the City Financial Clerk, shall
be recorded in the Office of Recorder of Deeds of Iroquois County and shall be
deemed notice to all users of the sewerage system of the contents of this
chapter, including the charges of the system by the City on their properties.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-6: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the City which are applicable to the City
system of user charges or industrial cost recovery, for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant or
loan.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
The City Secretary shall maintain the necessary records for determination of
the user share of the cost and shall provide the billing and collection
services as required by this article, and the City Financial Clerk shall be
responsible for the investment and expenditure of all monies collected for
industrial cost recovery in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013)
10-3P-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this article, for
each offense, shall be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2408, 11-26-2013; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 4: COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM RATES AND CHARGES
Section
10-4-1:    System Continued
10-4-2: Water And Sewer Rates For Commercial Users
10-4-3: Water And Sewer Rates For Residential Users
10-4-4:    Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
10-4-5:    Filling Private Swimming Pools
10-4-6:    Water Or Sewer Service Outside Corporate Limits
10-4-7:    Bills For Service; Delinquencies
10-4-8:    Discontinuance Of Service For Nonpayment
10-4-9:    Refusal Of Service When There Are Delinquent Charges
10-4-10: Lien Provisions
10-4-11: Disposition Of Revenues
10-4-12: Accounting
10-4-1:   SYSTEM CONTINUED:
The combined waterworks and sewerage system, created by ordinance 824, adopted
and passed March 8, 1948, is hereby continued by this chapter and is
incorporated in this chapter by reference.
(1980 Code § 35-1)
10-4-2:   WATER AND SEWER RATES FOR COMMERCIAL USERS:
The rates and charges to commercial users for the use of and for the service
supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be determined by
water meter readings as follows:
   A.   Water Service:
      1.   From May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $10.00 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $19.99 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      2.   From May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $10.35 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $20.69 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      3.   From May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $10.71 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $21.41 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      4.   From May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $11.09 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $22.16 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      5.   From May 1, 2029 through April 30, 2030:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $11.47 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $22.93 per month for 2,000 gallons.
   B.   Sewer Service:
      1.   From May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $12.16 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $24.32 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      2.   From May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $12.59 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $25.17 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      3.   From May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $13.03 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $26.05 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      4.   From May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $13.48 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $26.97 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      5.   From May 1, 2029 through April 30, 2030:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $13.96 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $27.91 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      6.   The rate of sewer service for commercial users that shall have their
own source of water in whole or in part shall be a minimum charge set forth
above, as applicable, except where more than four thousand (4,000) gallons of
water or effluent is discharged into the sewer system per month, the charge for
sewer service only shall be based upon the same gallonage charge as other users
of the sewer service shall pay. Sewer service to users for water-cooled air-
conditioning units and water-cooled condensers, who shall have their own source
of water in whole or in part, shall be the minimum charge set forth above.
(Ord. 2485, 9-26-2017; amd. Ord. 2498A, 2-5-2018; Ord 2532, 2-26-2019; Ord.
2548, 10-24-2019; Ord. 2707, 2-27-2024; Ord. 2747, 5-27-2025)
10-4-3:   WATER AND SEWER RATES FOR RESIDENTIAL USERS:
The rates and charges to residential users for the use of and for the service
supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be determined by
water meter readings as follows:
   A.   Water Service:
      1.   From May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $10.00 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $19.99 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      2.   From May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $10.00 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $19.99 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      3.   From May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $10.71 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $21.41 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      4.   From May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $11.09 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $22.16 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      5.   From May 1, 2029 through April 30, 2030:
         a.   For all quantities of water at the rate of $11.47 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for water service for residential users shall
be $22.93 per month for 2,000 gallons.
   B.   Sewer Service:
      1.   From May 1, 2025 through April 30, 2026:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $12.16 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $24.32 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      2.   From May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $12.16 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $24.32 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      3.   From May 1, 2027 through April 30, 2028:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $13.03 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $26.05 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      4.   From May 1, 2028 through April 30, 2029:
         a.   For all quantities ofsewer at the rate of $13.48 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $26.97 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      5.   From May 1, 2029 through April 30, 2030:
         a.   For all quantities of sewer at the rate of $13.96 per 1,000
gallons per month.
         b.   The minimum charge for sewer service for residential users shall
be $27.91 per month for 2,000 gallons.
      6.   The rate of sewer service for residential users that shall have
their own source of water in whole or in part shall be a minimum charge set
forth above, as applicable, except where more than two thousand (2,000) gallons
of water or effluent is discharged into the sewer system per month, the charge
for sewer service only shall be based upon the same gallonage charge as other
users of the sewer service shall pay. Sewer service to users for water-cooled
air-conditioning units and water-cooled condensers, who shall have their own
source of water in whole or in part, shall be the minimum charge set forth
above.
(Ord. 2485, 9-26-2017; amd. 2019 Code; Ord 2532, 2-26-2019; Ord. 2548, 10-24-
2019; Ord. 2707, 2-27-2024; Ord. 2747, 5-27-2025)
10-4-4:   INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
An infrastructure maintenance fee of five dollars ($5.00) per month shall be
paid by all commercial, industrial, and residential water users, commencing
January 1, 2019, to provide funds for the maintenance, extension, improvement,
and reconstruction of the water supply, water storage, water treatment works,
water infrastructure, and other water improvements.
(Ord. 2527, 12-18-2018)
10-4-5:   FILLING PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   All persons seeking to fill a private swimming pool from a City fire
hydrant shall:
      1.   Contact City Hall to obtain permission and to coordinate obtaining
the water from a fire hydrant with the assistance of a representative of the
City.
      2.   Pay a service fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the City of
Watseka, Illinois.
      3.   Pay ten dollars ($10.00) per thousand gallons or part thereof for
all such water obtained.
   B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject
to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation
thereof.
(Ord. 2465, 9-27-2016)
10-4-6:   WATER OR SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS:
   A.   No service shall be supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage
system outside the corporate limits of the City, unless each user thereof
outside the corporate limits pays double the rates and charges set forth in
this chapter for users of the services within the corporate limits of the City.
   B.   No new users outside the corporate limits shall be accepted and no
further extensions of service shall be made outside of the corporate limits,
unless the same shall have been approved by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 35-5)
10-4-7:   BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Types Of Payments; Liability For Service: Rates and charges for service
shall be payable monthly, bi-monthly or quarterly as the City Council shall
direct. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the City, only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises and occupant and user of the
service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the City.
   B.   Rendition Of Bills; Due Date: All bills for service shall be rendered
as of the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed, and shall be payable not later than the close of business on the
fifteenth day of the same month.
   C.   Late Payment Penalties: A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added
to all residential billings and a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added
to all commercial billings not paid within fifteen (15) days of the date of
billing. An additional penalty of three percent (3%) for residential and one
and one-half percent (11/2%) for commercial billings shall be added to the
cumulative total of such billings for each billing period where such billings
remain unpaid for more than one billing period. When the tenth day of any month
shall be Sunday or a legal holiday, then such bills for service shall be
payable on the next succeeding secular day without any additional penalty.
(1980 Code § 35-6)
10-4-8:   DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT:
   A.   The supply may be shut off from any premises for which the water bill,
water tap charge, sewer bill, sewer tap charge, or other water charges or sewer
charges remain unpaid for thirty (30) days after the bill or charge is rendered
or mailed. When shut off, the water supply shall not again be turned on, except
upon the payment of the usual fee for disconnecting service and upon payment of
the usual fee for turning on water (see subsection
10-3M-3B of this title for sewer disconnect and reconnect fee), and upon
payment of all delinquent charges in full. When any service is disconnected
under this section, the procedure outlined in the form on file in the Office of
the City Clerk must be followed.
(1980 Code § 35-7)
   B.   No water supply or sewer service of any user shall be disconnected,
discontinued or shut off by the City until at least thirty (30) days have
elapsed since the billing for supply or service and said service remains
partially or wholly unpaid and until the City Collector has first given a ten
(10) day notice, either by mail or by personal service, to the user of the
intent of the City to discontinue said water service or sewer service, or both,
which notice is on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2338, 3-22-2011; amd. 2019 Code)
10-4-9:   REFUSAL OF SERVICE WHEN THERE ARE DELINQUENT CHARGES:
Anyone moving from one premises to another premises in the City, owing
delinquent water and/or sewer charges to the City, shall not be entitled to
receive water or sewer service of the City until all the delinquent charges of
the user are paid in full.
(1980 Code § 35-9)
10-4-10:   LIEN PROVISIONS:
Rates and charges for services furnished pursuant to any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be a lien upon the premises, as provided by statute.
   A.   Whenever a bill for service remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has
been rendered, the City Attorney may file with the Recorder of Deeds of
Iroquois County, Illinois, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description for the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for this amount as well as for
all charges for water and sewer services furnished subsequent to the period
covered by the bill.
   B.   If the user or consumer whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises, and the City Collector has notice of this, then notice shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the City
Collector, whenever such bills or charges remain unpaid for a period of sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered.
   C.   The failure of the City Collector to record such a lien claim or to
mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water or sewer bills as
mentioned in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Upon the filing of the lien, there shall accrue to the City a
delinquency charge in the amount of one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00),
to cover the costs and expenses of the City in preparing and filing the lien,
which said charge, together with the recording fee, shall be added to the
charges due from the user and/or owner for services furnished the premises on
which the lien is recorded, and shall become a part of the amount for which a
lien is claimed.
(Ord. 2350, 8-23-2011)
   E.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges or bills shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by suit filed in the name of the
City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the City, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters, against any property for which any of the charges or bills has
remained unpaid for sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.
(1980 Code § 35-11)
10-4-11:   DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
   A.   Funds To Collector And Treasurer: All revenues and monies derived from
the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by
the Collector separate and apart from all other funds of the City, and all of
said sums, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City
Treasurer within ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 35-12)
   B.   Waterworks And Sewerage Fund: The City Treasurer shall receive all such
revenues from the combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds
and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be
delivered to him and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the
“Waterworks and Sewerage Fund” of the City, and the Treasurer shall administer
the fund in every respect in the manner provided in division 139 of article 11
of the Illinois Municipal Code and all other laws thereunto enabling or
amendatory.
(1980 Code § 35-13)
10-4-12:   ACCOUNTING:
The City Collector shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and current entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
(1980 Code § 35-14)
ARTICLE A: DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
Section
10-4A-1: Basis For Wastewater Service Charges
10-4A-2: Measurement Of Flow
10-4A-3: Rates And Charges Established
10-4A-4: Computation Of Certain Charges
10-4A-5: Dispute Appeals
10-4A-6: Review And Revision Of Wastewater Service Charge
10-4A-7: Notice Of Rates
10-4A-8: Payment Of Bills
10-4A-9:Disposition Of Revenues
10-4A-10: Accounting
10-4A-11: Access To Records
10-4A-12: Penalty
10-4A-1:   BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the City shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement, applicable surcharges and local
capital cost charge composed of a debt service charge and a capital improvement
charge.
   A.   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge is computed by
apportioning the annual debt service on a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons
basis.
   B.   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge is levied on
all users to provide for capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of
the sewage treatment works. The capital improvement is computed by apportioning
the annual amount to be accrued as a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons or
as a fixed charge per month.
   C.   Basic User Charge:
      1.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
domestic concentrations (see also subsections
10-2-1C and
10-3P-1B of this title):
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°) biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) of two hundred one milligrams per liter (201 mg/L)
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred thirty nine
milligrams per liter (239 mg/L).
      2.   It shall consist of operation and maintenance replacement and shall
be computed as follows:
         a.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated.
         b.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
         c.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance, and replacement
(OM&R) costs to each user class by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
         d.   Proportion the estimated OM&R costs to wastewater facility
categories by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
         e.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
         f.   Compute surcharge costs per pound per one thousand (1,000)
gallons in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   D.   Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (201 mg/L) and SS (239 mg/L). The
surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the two hundred one milligrams per
liter (201 mg/L) and two hundred thirty nine milligrams per liter (239 mg/L)
concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Subsection
10-4A-4A of this article specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
(1980 Code page 216 art. I § 1)
10-4A-2:   MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall
be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
   A.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the City for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these
other sources.
   B.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the City if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water
consumption records.
   C.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the City.
(1980 Code page 217 art. I § 2)
10-4A-6   RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Local Capital Cost Charge:
      1.   A debt service charge of sixty five cents ($0.65) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons to each user of the wastewater facility of the City is hereby
established.
      2.   A capital improvement charge will be levied on all users as a charge
of ninety cents ($0.90) per one thousand (1,000) gallons, to provide funds for
extension, improvement of reconstruction of the sewage treatment works and
other sewer improvements.
(1980 Code page 217 art. I § 3)
   B.   Basic User Rate:
      1.   There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and
a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater
facilities of the City of two dollars forty cents ($2.40) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons' usage per month. The basic user rate is calculated upon
charges of debt service of sixty five cents ($0.65) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons, capital improvement charge of ninety cents ($0.90) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons, and eighty five cents ($0.85) for operation, maintenance and
replacement for a total of two dollars forty cents ($2.40) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons.
      2.   a.    All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater facilities
shall pay a minimum flat rate charge of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) per
month. The flat rate charge will allow a maximum of two thousand (2,000)
gallons per month.
         b.   In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by
the City to be in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per month, the City
may require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply
or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
      3.   Metered residential users of the wastewater system shall also be
subject to a flat rate minimum charge in the amount of four dollars eighty
cents ($4.80) per month where the usage does not exceed two thousand (2,000)
gallons per month.
      4.   All nonmetered commercial users of the wastewater facilities shall
pay a minimum flat rate charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month. The flat
rate charge will allow a maximum of four thousand (4,000) gallons per month. In
the event the use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the City to be
in excess of four thousand (4,000) gallons per month, the City may require such
flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or a sewer main
to measure the amount of service supplied.
      5.   Commercial and institutional users of the wastewater system shall
also be subject to a minimum monthly fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) where the
metered usage does not exceed four thousand (4,000) gallons per month.
(1980 Code page 217 art. I § 4)
   C.   Surcharge Rates: The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as
follows:
      1.   Per pound of BOD: Fifteen cents ($0.15).
      2.   Per pound of SS: Fourteen cents ($0.14). (1980 Code page 218 art. I
§ 5)
10-4A-4:   COMPUTATION OF CERTAIN CHARGES:
   A.   Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the City and shall be binding as a basis
for surcharges.
(1980 Code page 218 art. I § 6)
   B.   Residential Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge
for residents shall be computed by the following formula:
   CW = CC + CD + CM + (VU-X)CU + CS
   Where:
    CW   =   Amount of service charge ($) per billing period.
   CD   =   Debt service charge (subsection
10-4A-3A1 of this article).
   CC   =   Capital improvement charge (subsection
10-4A-3A2 of this article).
   CM   =   Minimum charge for operation, maintenance, and replacement.
   VU   =   Wastewater volume for the billing period.
   X   =   Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection
10-4A-3B of this article).
   CU   =   Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement
(subsection 10-4A-3B of this article).
   CS   =   Amount of surcharge (subsections
10-4A-3C and
10-4A-4A).
(1980 Code page 218 art. I § 7)
10-4A-5:   DISPUTE APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charge established for user
charges in sections
10-4A-3 and
10-4A-4 of this article shall be made available to a user within ten (10) days
of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used
or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the City within thirty (30)
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies
(1980 Code page 219 art. I § 11)
10-4A-6:   REVIEW AND REVISION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed not less often
than annually by certified public accountants for the City in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs or a change in operation and
maintenance costs including replacement costs.
(1980 Code page 217 ¶ 2)
10-4A-7:   NOTICE OF RATES:
The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate of that portion of the user
charges which is attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance and replacement.
(1980 Code page 217 ¶ 3)
10-4A-8:   PAYMENT OF BILLS:
The rates or charges shall be payable monthly for residential users and monthly
for industrial and commercial users.
(1980 Code page 219 art. I § 8)
10-4A-9:   DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall
be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All such revenues
and monies shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart from his
private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City, and all
of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City
Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by the Mayor and
City Council. The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the “Sewerage Fund of the City”. The
Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by
statute of the “Revised Cities and Villages Act”, effective January, 1942 (65
ILCS).
(1980 Code page 219 art. III § 1)
10-4A-10:   ACCOUNTING:
   A.   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   B.   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show the total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged.
(1980 Code page 220 art. III § 2)
10-4A-11:   ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the City which are applicable to the City
system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant or any
Federal regulations and conditions of the Federal grant.
(1980 Code page 219 art. I § 9)
10-4A-12:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall
be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(1980 Code page 219 art. I § 12)
TITLE 11: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
11-1-1: Building Official
11-1-2: Building Permits
11-1-3: Building Operations
11-1-4: Soil Fills
11-1-5: Building Appearance
11-1-6: Enforcement
11-1-7: Penalties
11-1-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
Whenever the term “Building Official” is used in this title, it shall relate to
and mean the same person who, under title 12 of this Code, “Zoning”, is
appointed as Building Official.
(1980 Code § 39-7)
11-1-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any
building or structure in the City where the cost of such construction or
alteration exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or where the effect of such
alteration is to enlarge the capacity or affect the bearing walls of any
building or the roof thereof without first having secured a permit therefor.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for such permit shall be made to
the Building Official and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications in
duplicate showing the work to be done. Such plans shall be verified by the
signature of either an owner of the premises, a duly authorized agent of an
owner or the architect or contractor in charge of operations.
   C.   Examination Of Application; Approval Of Plans: The Building Official
shall examine the application, plans and specifications to determine whether
the proposed construction will comply with all ordinance provisions relating
thereto. Upon approval, one set of the plans shall be returned to the
applicant, with a permit, and the other shall be retained by the Building
Official. No permit shall be issued, except after approval of the plans and
payment of the fee herein provided.
   D.   Permit Fees: Fees for permits for building construction shall be as
follows:
 
                                                                                Greater of the fee amount listed on the “City of Watseka Building Permit Fee -
Commercial and Industrial Construction:                                         Non Residential” schedule maintained in the office of the Building Official
                                                                                corresponding to the value of the work to be undertaken or $50.00.
Residential Construction (new or additions):                                    Greater of 0.25 per square foot or $50.00
   Residential utility construction (including, but not limited to, garages,
decks, patios, utility sheds and carports, and other structures not adding      Greater of 0.15 per square foot or $50.00
living space to the residence)
Roofing                                                                         $50.00
 
   There shall be a minimum fee for all permits in the amount of fifteen
dollars ($15.00), and said fee shall be payable at the Office of the City
Collector.
   E.   Expiration And Extension Of Permits: Building permits shall expire on
the day of expiration set forth therein. Thirty (30) day extensions of such
building permits shall be allowed upon written request and payment of the sum
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month for each such thirty (30) day request.
   F.   Variations: It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the approved
plans and specifications deposited with and approved by the Building Official,
unless amended plans and specifications showing such proposed alterations or
variations are first filed with and approved by the Building Official.
(1980 Code §§ 39-1 through 39-5; amd. Ord. 2081, 2-17-2003; Ord. 2307, 10-27-
2009; Ord. 2568, 4-28-2020; Ord. 2634, 4-26-2022)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
12-3-2 of this Code
11-1-3: BUILDING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Streets:
      1.   The use of streets for the storage of materials in the process of
construction or alteration of a building may be granted where the same will not
unduly interfere with traffic and will not reduce the usable width of the
roadway to less than eighteen feet (18').
      2.   No portion of the street, other than that directly abutting on the
premises on which work is being done, shall be used, except with the consent of
the owner or occupant of the premises abutting on such portion.
      3.   Any person seeking to make such use of the street shall file an
application for a permit therefor with the City Clerk, together with a bond
with sureties to be approved by the Clerk, to indemnify the City for any loss
or damage which may be incurred thereby by reason of such use and occupation.
(1980 Code § 39-75)
   B.   Sidewalks: No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building,
construction or alteration without a special permit from the City Clerk; and
whenever the removal of a sidewalk is required in such work, a special permit
from the Clerk shall be obtained.
(1980 Code § 39-77)
   C.   Safeguards: It shall be the duty of the person or corporation doing any
construction, altering or wrecking work in the City to do the same with proper
care for the safety of persons and property. Warnings, barricades and lights
shall be maintained wherever necessary for the protection of pedestrians or
traffic; and temporary roofs over sidewalks shall be constructed wherever there
is danger from falling articles or materials to pedestrians.
(1980 Code § 39-80)
   D.   Night Operations: No construction or altering operations shall be
carried on at nighttime if the same are accompanied by loud noises.
(1980 Code § 39-76)
11-1-4: SOIL FILLS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: A separate fill permit is necessary for each
location where fill is to be deposited, and no fill may be deposited within the
City without a valid permit for the site upon which fill is deposited.
      2.   Application For Permit: Applications for soil fill permits for
material to be deposited within the City limits may be applied for in writing
at the Watseka City Hall upon such forms as the Building Inspector may require
from time to time.
      3.   Term Of Permit: Fill permits shall be valid for a period of one year
after issuance.
      4.   Revocation Of Permit: Revocation of permits may occur at anytime the
Building Inspector finds a violation of the requirements of the fill or the
terms and conditions of the permit.
   B.   Contents And Quality Of Fill: All fill used within the City shall meet
or exceed the minimum requirements for fill content and quality as set forth in
the Federal Emergency Management Agency specifications and Environmental
Protection Agency rules and regulations for fill as set forth in The Flood
Plain Manual and other publications.
   C.   Time Limit For Leveling Fill: All fill transported to sites within the
City must be leveled within sixty (60) days of the fill being deposited upon
the location.
(Ord. 2139, 2-22-2005)
   D.   Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation of this section continues shall
constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
(Ord. 2139, 2-22-2005; amd. 2019 Code)
11-1-5: BUILDING APPEARANCE:
In the B-2 Central Business Zoning District, building appearance for new
construction and/or building renovations/rehabilitations shall conform to the
following requirements:
   A.   Form and Proportion: Massing and configuration (i.e., height, width,
and roofline) shall conform, as near as possible, to that of other buildings on
the same block. When a new building is proposed to be wider than the historic
twenty (20') to thirty (30') feet in width, the facade shall be visually
subdivided into proportional bays, and similar in scale to adjacent buildings.
Horizontal alignments and vertical spacing elements shall be similar to other
buildings on the same block.
   B.   Roof Forms: Rooflines shall be similar to adjacent buildings. Gable
roof shapes are acceptable if parapet walls hide the end wall and water
drainage is contained on the property. When feasible, the original roof shape
of a building shall be maintained or restored.
   C.   Windows: The window openings above the first floor shall appear as
“punched” openings within a solid wall. Proportions shall be similar to the
window openings of other buildings on the same block. New and existing
storefronts shall include the basic features of a historical storefront. A
bulkhead shall be provided separating the upper stories from the first floor.
The first floor shall have an 80%-20% glass to other material ratio. Door
openings directly onto the public sidewalk shall include/maintain a recessed
entry.
   D.   Materials: Building materials for exposed surfaces shall include brick,
stone, split-face concrete block, or an architecturally detailed exterior
insulation finish system (i.e., Dryvit). Permitted detailing materials include
cast and molded metals, wood, fiberglass replications, gypsum detailing,
structural glass when replicating a storefront design, and Dryvit. Wood, vinyl,
aluminum siding, wood asphalt, fiberglass shingles, structural ribbed panels,
corrugated metal panels, plywood sheathing, plastic or fiberglass sheathing,
reflective or moderate to high-grade tinted should be avoided, and shall not
otherwise be permitted for visible surfaces unless otherwise approved by the
Building Official taking into account conformity with other buildings on the
same block.
   E.   Architectural Details: When renovating/rehabilitating buildings, the
removal or alteration of historic architectural features should be avoided.
Recreated features shall relate to the building’s period of construction,
scale, proportions and use of materials. Existing elements not original to the
building that are historically or architecturally insignificant to the building
should be removed and replaced. Historically or architecturally significant
elements or details should remain visible. Existing brick shall be retained
wherever possible. To the extent new brick is required, the new brick shall
match the original brick and mortar for color and texture, and the width of
repointed joints should match the original.
(Ord. 2591, 10-27-2020)
11-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Building Official and any lawfully appointed
deputies to enforce the provisions of this title. The Building Official is
hereby empowered to make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of these provisions, and to make any tests or examinations of
materials or methods to be used, for the purpose of seeing if they comply with
the requirements of this title.
(1980 Code § 39-6)
11-1-7: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this title shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, together
with costs of proceedings for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1980 Code § 39-8; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 2: BUILDING CODE
Section
11-2-1: Code Adopted
11-2-2: Amendments To Code
11-2-1: CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
City Clerk at the Watseka City Hall, 201 Brianna Drive, Watseka, Illinois
60970, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2006
edition, as published by the International Code Council, including all of the
appendices thereto, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and
the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code
on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section
11-2-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2209, 10-16-2006)
11-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
11-2-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: The City of Watseka, Illinois.
Section 1612.3 Insert: The City of Watseka, Illinois.
Section 1612.3 Insert: September 30, 1988.
Section 3410.2 Insert: Ten days after publication of ordinance 2209.
(Ord. 2209, 10-16-2006)
CHAPTER 3: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
11-3-1: Code Adopted
11-3-2: Amendments To Code
11-3-1: CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
City Clerk at the Watseka City Hall, 201 Brianna Drive, Watseka, Illinois
60970, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition
of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code
on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section
11-3-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2208, 10-16-2006)
11-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
11-3-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: The City of Watseka, Illinois.
Section 103.5 Minimum fine: twenty five dollars ($25.00) and maximum fine:
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Section 302.4 Insert: 6 inches.
Section 304.14 Insert: March 1 through October 31 of each year.
Section 602.3 Insert: October 1 through April 30 of the next succeeding year.
Section 602.4 Insert: October 1 through April 30 of the next succeeding year.
(Ord. 2208, 10-16-2006)
CHAPTER 4: USE OF SOLAR ENERGY
Section
11-4-1: Compliance With Federal Regulations
11-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
Any building hereafter constructed or remodeled wherein the use of solar energy
is incorporated in said construction or remodeling shall be built or remodeled
in accordance with the standards as are set forth in “Solar Dwelling Design
Concepts”, published May 1976 by the Office of Policy Development and Research
of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and all
subsequent published amendments thereof.
(1980 Code § 39-125)
CHAPTER 5: FIRE LIMITS
Section
11-5-1: Boundaries
11-5-2: Repairs
11-5-3: Penalties
11-5-1: BOUNDARIES:
That portion of the City within the following described boundaries is hereby
designated and established as the fire limits of the City:
Commencing at the West end of Oak Street, thence East along the center line of
Oak Street to the center line of Fifth Street, thence South along the center
line of Fifth Street to the center line of Cherry Street, thence West along the
center line of Cherry Street to the center line of First Street as originally
platted, (now the L & N Railroad and formerly the Missouri Pacific and Union
Pacific Railroad), thence North along the center line of said First Street to a
place where the center line of Oak Street as extended would be intersected,
thence East to the place of the beginning.
(1980 Code § 39-10)
11-5-2: REPAIRS:
It shall be unlawful to repair any existing frame building within the fire
limits after the same shall be damaged by any cause in an amount exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of its value; provided, that in such event, the building
may be completely rebuilt with fireproof materials.
(1980 Code § 39-12)
11-5-3: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, together with costs of proceedings
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1980 Code § 39-15; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 6: PLUMBING REGULATIONS
Section
11-6-1: Plumbing Inspector
11-6-2: State Plumbing Code
11-6-1: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
The plumbing inspector for the City is a position that is hired out as needed.
The inspector shall be a licensed plumber.
(1980 Code § 41-1; amd. 2019 Code)
11-6-2: STATE PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing in the City must comply with the Illinois Plumbing Code.
CHAPTER 7: ELECTRICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
Section
11-7-1: Definition
11-7-2: Compliance Required; Exceptions
11-7-3: Permit Requirements
11-7-4: Certificate Of Approval
11-7-5: Penalty
11-7-1: DEFINITION:
The term ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT, as used in this chapter, means the definition of
such equipment as set forth in the National Electrical Code, as published by
the National Fire Protection Association, and as from time to time hereafter
amended. It does not include apparatus, conductors, or other equipment
installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their
operation as public utilities.
(Ord. 2320, 6-22-2010)
11-7-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   All electrical wiring, apparatus, equipment, or appliances for
furnishing light, heat, or power shall be in strict conformity with approved
methods and practices for safety to life and property and in accordance with
the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, and as from time to time hereafter amended.
(Ord. 2320, 6-22-2010)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to repair or
install any electrical wiring or electrical equipment within the City, unless
the repairs or installations are made in strict compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. This subsection shall not apply to repairs or installations
made on: 1) radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and
signals; or 2) apparatus conductors or other equipment installed for or by
public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction
of the Illinois Commerce Commission for use in their operation as public
utilities.
(1980 Code § 40-41)
   C.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the installation of
new merchandise or equipment, electrically operated, or to any such equipment
which is used and has been repaired by a duly licensed electrical contractor,
where nothing more is required for the installation of the equipment other than
to plug it into already existing electrical conduits or sockets.
(1980 Code § 40-44)
11-7-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install or alter any
electrical equipment or wiring subject to registration under Title 4, Chapter
13 of this Code without having first secured a permit therefor.
   B.   Application For Permit; Issuance: Applications for permits shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk and shall be referred by him to the
Electrical Inspector. Each application shall contain the name of the owner of
the premises to be served, the name of the contractor doing the work and the
nature of the work to be done. Where the work consists of new or extensive
repairs or alterations, plans and specifications of the work shall accompany
the application. Upon approval of the application by the Electrical Inspector,
the permit shall be issued by the City Clerk.
   C.   Permit Fee: Where any electrical equipment or wiring is installed or
altered in connection with the erection of a new building or in connection with
the alteration or repair of a building, for which a permit and a fee are
required under the Building Code or the zoning ordinance, no additional fee
shall be required for the permit to be issued hereunder. For all other
electrical permits, the fee for the permit shall be two percent (2%) of the
cost of the repairs or installation to be made, but in no event less than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   D.   Service Providers: No electrical service provider shall make an
electrical connection to a property (be it newly constructed or altered) unless
an electrical permit has been issued by the Electrical Inspector for the work
and the electrical service provider's requirements for the supply of electric
service has been satisfied.
(1980 Code §§ 40-42 and 40-43) (Ord. 2526, 11-23-2021)
11-7-4: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
   A.   The Electrical Inspector shall issue a certificate of approval after
each inspection in which the wiring or apparatus is found to be in compliance
with the terms of this chapter and all amendments hereto.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to use or to turn on electrical power into any
wires or apparatus hereafter installed for which a certificate has not been
issued because the permit was not secured for the installation or because the
work was not completed according to the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   No electrical service provider shall make initiate or restore
electrical service to a property (be it newly constructed or altered) unless a
certificate of approval has been issued by the Electrical Inspector. The
electrical service provider shall not consider a connection to be a final
connection until and unless a certificate of approval has been issued.
(1980 Code § 40-45) (Ord. 2526, 11-23-2021)
11-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1980 Code § 40-50; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 8: FENCES
Section
11-8-1: Definitions
11-8-2: Permit Requirements; Exemptions
11-8-3: Variations From Plans
11-8-4: Height Of Fences Generally
11-8-5: Location And Height Of Certain Fences
11-8-6: Penalty
11-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in this chapter shall be defined and have the following meanings:
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot, only
one street line shall be considered as a front; provided, that where the length
of a shorter line is less than eighty percent (80%) of the length of a longer
line, the shorter street shall be considered as the front.
SETBACK LINE: The line established by the minimum yard requirements of the
standard use requirements for the zoning district and use applicable to a
particular lot.
SITE LINE: Where more than one side of a lot faces a street, the setback line
on those parts of the lot facing the street must equal the front yard setback
line for that district.
(1980 Code § 39A-6)
11-8-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or emplace
any fence within the corporate limits of the City without first having secured
a permit therefor.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Application for a fence permit shall be made to the Building
Official and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the work
to be done. Such plans shall be verified by the signature of either an owner of
the premises, a duly authorized agent or contractor in charge of the
operations.
      2.   Applicants for fence permits shall evidence the lot lines next to
the street to the Building Official to determine the appropriate setback. The
Building Official shall also determine if the type of fence and other
information provided by the application is in accordance with the ordinances of
the City prior to the issuance of a permit, but the Building Official, in
issuing the permit, shall not be empowered or responsible for determining lot
lines of private owners with adjoining private lots.
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for fence permits shall be in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00), and payment of the fee shall accompany the application for
the permit.
   D.   Exemptions: Fences less than two feet (2') in height are exempt from
any requirement under this chapter to obtain a fence permit or to pay a fee for
the same but are otherwise subject to all of the other provisions of this
chapter.
(1980 Code §§ 39A-2, 39A-3, and 39A-4; amd. Ord. 2377, 8-28-2012; Ord. 2634, 4-
26-2022)
11-8-3: VARIATIONS FROM PLANS:
It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the approved plans and
specifications filed with and approved by the Building Official unless amended
plans and specifications showing such proposed alterations or variations are
first filed with and approved by the Building Official.
(1980 Code § 39A-5)
11-8-4: HEIGHT OF FENCES GENERALLY:
   A.   No fence exceeding the height of the four and one-half feet (41/2')
shall be permitted in or on any portion of a residential lot having frontage
upon a street.
   B.   No fence within the City limits shall exceed six and one-half feet (61/
2') on any residential lot.
(Ord. 2144, 4-18-2005)
11-8-5: LOCATION AND HEIGHT OF CERTAIN FENCES:
   A.   Stockade Fences: No stockade-type fence shall be permitted in or on the
front portion of a lot nearer to the street than a line to be determined by the
greatest distance of the following:
      1.   The setback line for that district and use; or
      2.   The front portion of any structure upon the lot.
   B.   Corner Lot Fences:
      1.   For corner lots, no stockade-type fence, nor any other type fence
exceeding four and one-half feet (41/2') in height, shall be constructed,
erected or emplaced closer to the street than the setback line or the actual
building, whichever is greater. Where no building exists on the lot, no such
fence shall be constructed, erected or emplaced nearer to the street than the
applicable setback line for the most restrictive use of the applicable
district.
(Ord. 2144, 4-18-2005)
      2.   Fences on all corner lots shall be restricted to four and one-half
feet (41/2') in height on all exterior lot lines of said lots, being lot lines
that front on streets, and fences on corner lots shall have a ten foot (10')
setback line on all such lot lines that front on streets. No such fences shall
be erected upon easements and/or rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2266, 6-10-2008)
   C.   Prohibited On Easements And Rights-Of-Way: Fences on all lots shall not
be erected upon easements and/or rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2377, 8-28-2012)
11-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation
occurs or continues.
(1980 Code § 39A-8)
CHAPTER 9: PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
Section
11-9-1: Definition
11-9-2: Compliance With Provisions
11-9-3: Permit Requirements
11-9-4: Location
11-9-5: Method Of Disinfection
11-9-6: Fencing And Gates
11-9-7: Electrical Requirements
11-9-8: Nuisance Conditions Prohibited
11-9-9: Maintenance Required; Inspections
11-9-10: Penalty
11-9-1: DEFINITION:
A SWIMMING POOL, within the meaning of this section, shall be any depression in
the ground, either temporary or permanent, or a container of water, either
temporary or permanent, and either above or below the ground, in which water of
more than twenty four inches (24") in depth is contained and which is used
primarily for the purpose of bathing and swimming.
(1980 Code § 39-201)
11-9-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or enlarge any
privately owned or operated swimming pool, not enclosed in a permanent building
in the City, except in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
(1980 Code § 39-200)
11-9-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, enlarge, or alter
any private swimming pool unless a building permit and performance bond have
first been obtained from the Building Official. The permit fee shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). Application shall be on forms provided by the Building
Official and shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing the
following:
   A.   Pool dimensions and volume of water in gallons.
   B.   Location and type of waste disposal system.
   C.   Location of pool on lot, distance from lot lines, and distance from
structure.
   D.   Fencing and landscape plan, or a combination thereof.
(1980 Code § 39-202; amd. Ord. 2634, 4-26-2022)
11-9-4: LOCATION:
No pool shall be located erected, constructed or maintained closer to any side
or rear lot line than allowed by the zoning ordinance for permitted accessory
building uses.
(1980 Code § 39-203)
11-9-5: METHOD OF DISINFECTION:
Gaseous chlorination system shall not be made use of as a disinfection method
for pool waters. The Building Official shall recommend a proper disinfectant.
(1980 Code § 39-203)
11-9-6: FENCING AND GATES:
   A.   Pools within the scope of this chapter or not enclosed within a
permanent building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient
strength to prevent access to the pool and shall be not less than four feet
(4') in height, so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger
than four inches (4") in one dimension. Gates or doors shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self- latching device for keeping the gate or door securely
closed at all times when not in actual use.
   B.   Aboveground pools with self-provided fencing to prevent unguarded entry
will be allowed without separate additional fencing, provided the self-provided
fencing is of the minimum height and design as heretofore specified.
Aboveground pools with a height of more than four (4) feet shall be permanent
without fencing provided that the means of access to such pool may be secured
by lifting or removing stairs or ladders or means of entry are equipped with
self-closing and self-latching devices.
   C.   Location or fencing required shall be subject to all other applicable
ordinances.
   D.   The wall of the house or building faced to a pool may be incorporated
as a portion of the fence.
(1980 Code § 39-204) (Ord. 1859, 3-24-1997)
11-9-7: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance With State And City Laws: All electrical installations
provided, installed, and used in conjunction with a private swimming pool shall
be in conformance with State laws and City ordinances regulating electric
installations (See chapter 7 of this title).
   B.   Overhead Lighting: If overhead floodlights or other artificial lights
are used to illuminate the pool at night, such lights shall be shielded to
direct light only on the pool.
(1980 Code § 39-205)
11-9-8: NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED:
No pool shall be so operated or maintained as to create a nuisance, a hazard,
an eyesore, or otherwise to result in a substantial adverse effect on
neighboring properties, or to be in any other way detrimental to public health,
safety, and welfare.
(1980 Code § 39-206)
11-9-9: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED; INSPECTIONS:
A swimming pool or swimming pools shall be maintained in a sanitary manner. The
Building Official or Code Enforcement Official may inspect or cause to be
inspected each private swimming pool maintained in the City.
(1980 Code § 39-207)
11-9-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(1980 Code § 39-208)
CHAPTER 10: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
11-10-1: Permit Requirements
11-10-2: Bond Requirements
11-10-3: Procedures For Moving Buildings
11-10-4: Penalty
11-10-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall move any building
on, through or over any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the
City without having obtained a permit therefor from the City.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the proposed route and number
of days it is intended that the building should occupy any portion of any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.
(1980 Code § 23-145)
   C.   Approval Of Route; Permit Fee: Upon the approval of the intended route
by the Public Works Committee, the applicant and permittee shall pay to the
City Clerk a fee which fee shall entitle the applicant and permittee to use the
public streets, alleys and ways of the City on the route approved by the Public
Works Committee for a period of one day for the purpose of moving the building
for which the permit is granted hereunder. If it shall require the permittee
more than one day in which to move said building, he shall pay to the City
Clerk for each day or fraction thereof over and above the first day used to
move said building.
(1980 Code § 23-146)
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon the compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the payment of the fees herein provided, the City Clerk shall sign
and issue a permit to the applicant for the moving of the building on the
intended route.
(1980 Code § 23-147)
11-10-2: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every person, firm or corporation applying for a permit under this chapter
shall submit with his application a cash bond or a bond with a lawful corporate
surety or a personal bond signed by two (2) or more responsible freeholders of
the City, conditioned on his compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter, and agreeing to pay and hold the City harmless from any claim which
may be made against it by reason of the occupation of any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place by the building or structure moved, and agreeing to
reimburse and pay the City for all damages which may be caused to its streets,
alleys or other public ways by virtue of the moving of the building or
structure in question. The amount of the bond shall be at least twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and it shall be approved by the City Clerk.
(1980 Code § 23-148)
11-10-3: PROCEDURES FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Lights And Warning Devices: The person, firm or corporation moving any
building or structure through the streets or other public ways of the City
shall keep warning signs and lanterns or lights during all hours on the
building or structure so as to guard against any person or vehicle colliding
therewith. The permittee shall also set out such flares and erect such
barricades and take any and all other steps which shall be necessary to warn
the public and protect it from colliding with the building or structure.
(1980 Code § 23-149)
   B.   Utility Wires Or Cables: Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere
with the wires or cables of a public utility in moving a building, the terms of
any existing special or franchise ordinance governing this subject matter shall
apply.
(1980 Code § 23-150)
   C.   Trimming Trees: The permittee shall trim, at his own expense, all trees
required to be trimmed for the purpose of moving the building or structure, but
no trees shall be trimmed by the permittee until the Public Works Committee has
approved the proposed trimming to be done thereby.
(1980 Code § 23-151)
11-10-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(1980 Code § 23-152)
CHAPTER 11: DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
Section
11-11-1: Permit Required; Qualifications; Restrictions
11-11-2: Permit Fee
11-11-3: Application For Permit
11-11-4: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
11-11-5: Permit Nontransferable
11-11-6: Permit Expiration
11-11-7: Asbestos Remediation
11-11-8: Insurance Requirements
11-11-9: Project Commencement; Site Preparation and Security
11-11-10: Dust Control
11-11-11: Traffic Control
11-11-12: Location and Protection of Utilities
11-11-13: Authorized Fill
11-11-14: Unsuitable Materials; Contamination
11-11-15: Site Maintenance
11-11-16: Foundation Walls and Slabs
11-11-17: Grading and Seeding
11-11-18: Acts Prohibited
11-11-19: Penalty
11-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; QUALIFICATIONS; RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to for any person or entity to engage in demolition
activities with respect to any building or structure without a demolition
permit. Only bona-fide and licensed wrecking or excavating companies shall be
eligible for a demolition permit to engage in demolition activities affecting
non-residential buildings or structures or any buildings or structures located
outside of a residential zoning district.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-2: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for a demolition permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be
payable at the time of application and shall be non-refundable.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
An application for a demolition permit, signed and verified by the owner (the
"permittee") of the property on which the building or structures to be
demolished are located, or the owner's agent, shall be filed with the Building
Official and shall include the following information:
   A.   The street address of the building or structure to be demolished.
   B.   A plan for demolition and a schedule of time to complete the demolition
activities.
   C.   The name and address of the contractor to perform the demolition work,
including a copy of the contractor's license, as applicable.
   D.   Evidence the permittee has satisfied the insurance requirements of this
chapter.
   E.   The name and address of the landfill at that the permittee will use to
dispose of Unsuitable Materials, as defined herein.
   F.   If the building or structure is infested with rodents or insects, the
applicant shall supply documentation that such infestation has been eliminated.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The Building Official shall review the demolition permit application and shall
issue a demolition permit within five (5) days after receipt provided all
information and documentation required to be included has been supplied, the
information evidences that the demolition project will be completed in
compliance with this chapter in all aspects, and the application fee has been
paid. Any denial of a demolition permit shall be issued in writing with the
basis for such denial stated. Any denial of a demolition permit is appealable
to the City Council provided the permittee files his appeal, which shall
include a copy of the Building Officials written denial, within thirty (30)
days following the dated date of the denial letter.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-5: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
Once issued, a demolition permit is not transferable to any other person or
property.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-6: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
A demolition permit will be valid for sixty (60) days but shall be subject to
thirty (30) day extensions for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-7: ASBESTOS REMEDIATION:
The permittee shall comply with applicable laws (including Iroquois County),
and the regulations and rules of the IEPA and IDPH governing the inspection,
remediation, and disposal of asbestos encountered during demolition activities.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-8: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The permittee shall obtain and shall at all times maintain insurance in a form
approved by the City evidencing that permittee has a policy of comprehensive
general liability insurance naming "City of Watseka, its officers, employees
and each of their respective successors and assigns as their interests may
appear," the owners of any utilities traversing the property, and adjoining
property owners as additional insured parties, insuring permittee's demolition
activities upon, in or about the property against claims or bodily injury or
death or property damage or loss with a combined single limit of not less than
Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000). The policy shall stipulate that the
insurance afforded to the additional insureds shall apply as primary insurance
and that those commercial general liability insurance policies carried by the
additional insureds shall be non-contributory with respect to any losses or
claims. Such insurance policy shall be with a company licensed in the State of
Illinois, and such policy shall provide that it is not subject to cancellation
or reduction in coverage except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice to
the additional insureds. The permittee shall submit certificates evidencing the
existence and amount of the insurance policy when submitting its application.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-9: PROJECT COMMENCEMENT; SITE PREPARATION AND SECURITY:
   A.   Subject to the below requirements for site preparation and security,
demolition activities may commence upon the issuance of a demolition permit and
shall continue in a diligent manner without interruption or delay through
completion.
   B.   No demolition activities shall be commenced until the permittee
furnishes and erects a six (6') foot chain link security fence around the
perimeter of the project site. Such fence shall be maintained by the permittee
on the project site until completion.
   C.   No demolition activities shall be commenced until the permittee
provides proper and adequate shoring to protect and brace pavements, sidewalks,
adjacent buildings, fences and other structures not subject to demolition, so
as to prevent any settlement, collapse or other damage to these structures.
Such shoring shall remain in place until existing elements to remain can
properly be supported by fill or other acceptable measures.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-10: DUST CONTROL:
The permittee shall control the dust and air-borne dirt generated by the
demolition activities. The implementation of dust control procedures shall be
required if wind and dry soil conditions reduce visibility on adjacent property
or the right-of-way. Concerns for health and safety to the public using
adjacent facilities will be grounds for the implementation of a dust control
plan. The permittee and the Building Official shall review the nature and
extent of dust generating activities and cooperate to develop specific types of
control techniques appropriated for the situation. Sample techniques that may
warrant consideration include such measures as:
   A.   Minimization of the track out of soil to nearby public areas; and
   B.   Use of "wet saws" when cutting materials.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-11: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
To the extent required by the Building Official, the permittee shall provide
traffic control in accordance with applicable sections of the Illinois
Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction and applicable guidelines contained in the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. The permittee shall
obtain, erect, maintain, and remove all signs, barricades, flagmen and other
traffic control devices as may be necessary for the purpose of warning or
guiding traffic. Placement and maintenance of all traffic control devices shall
be in accordance with the applicable parts of Article 107.14 of the Standard
Specifications and the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways. The permittee shall be solely responsible for ensuring
that all traffic control devices are installed and maintained in accordance
with applicable state standards.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-12: LOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
The permittee shall inspect each location, identify the existence and location
of all utilities, contact the owners thereof for notification of vertical/
horizontal separations, comply with all other safety requirements required by
the owners of such utilities, and observe such requirements as necessary at all
times. The permittee shall notify J.U.L.I.E. (811) at least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to any excavation to verify locations of all utilities. Existing
public utilities, such as water mains, sewers, gas lines, streetlights,
telephone lines, electric power lines, cable television, etc., shall be
protected against damage by the permittee. The permittee shall disconnect and
cap the water service connection at the curb stop or meter pit. The permittee
shall disconnect, bring above-grade and cap the sanitary service connection at
the property line. The water and sewer service connections shall be inspected
by the Public Works Director prior to backfilling. The permittee must maintain
all utility services which may traverse the project site serving adjacent
properties, and any such damage to said utilities shall be repaired at once at
the permittee's expense, so that no adjacent property is without such services.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-13: AUTHORIZED FILL:
Concrete foundation walls and slabs, and bricks, shall be broken into pieces no
larger than three (3') square feet and left in place for use as fill. All other
fill shall consist of compacted aggregate material. The top twelve (12") inches
of each demolition site shall be filled with topsoil and graded to provide
positive drainage. Only clean demolished brick and concrete material shall be
used as fill. All material used as fill shall be accounted for by the permittee
in applicable quantities.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-14: UNSUITABLE MATERIALS; CONTAMINATION:
   A.   All materials not used or suitable for fill (the "Unsuitable
Materials") shall be hauled away, as it accumulates, by the permittee, and
disposed of at facilities qualified to accept the same, depending on the
nature, under applicable law. Unsuitable Materials shall be transported and
disposed of at facilities that can legally accept new construction, excavation,
and demolition materials for the purpose of re-use, recycling, composting or
disposal. Only Building Official-approved facilities shall be used by the
permittee to dispose of Unsuitable Materials. The permittee shall supply to the
Building Official load tickets and landfill receipts from qualified facilities
evidencing proper disposal of Unsuitable Materials. The disposition of all
Unsuitable Materials shall be accounted for by the permittee in applicable
quantities.
   B.   If encountered, the removal and proper disposal of hazardous
substances, hazardous materials and contaminated soil, water, and or
underground storage tanks (UST) shall be performed meeting all requirements of
the IEPA and the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The City shall be
immediately notified if such conditions are encountered.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-15: SITE MAINTENANCE:
The permittee shall maintain the project site in a clean condition, and free of
accumulation of debris. Unsuitable Materials shall not be stored at the project
site at in excess of two (2) working days.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
 11-11-16: FOUNDATION WALLS AND SLABS:
All foundation walls and slabs of building or structures demolished shall be
demolished and removed from the project site unless used as fill. No filling
activities shall be commenced until foundation walls and slabs are inspected by
the City to ensure broken for proper drainage.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-17: GRADING AND SEEDING:
The project site shall be graded to its pre-work elevation and seeded no later
than ten (10) days following the completion of demolition and fill activities.
The permittee shall seed and straw the project site, or have a hydro-seed
product installed, before final inspection. Only dormant seeding shall be
permitted through the months of October and March.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-18: ACTS PROHIBITED:
A permittee shall not:
   A.   Conduct demolition activities before sunrise or after sunset;
   B.   Use explosives as a means to demolish buildings or structures;
   C.   Burn, or cause to be burned, at any time, any materials;
   D.   Initiate demolition work prior to pumping out and disposing of water
that may have accumulated in the building or structure; or
   E.   Illegally dispose of or dump materials.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
11-11-19: PENALTY:
Any person or entity violating any of the provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2657, 8-23-2022)
CHAPTER 12: NUMBERING LOTS AND STRUCTURES
Section
11-12-1: Numbering Plan
11-12-2: Duty To Number
11-12-3: Assignment Of Numbers
11-12-4: Street Number Chart
11-12-1: NUMBERING PLAN:
All lots, buildings and structures in the City shall be numbered in accordance
with the following plan:
The base line for streets running north and south shall be Walnut Street, and
numbers lying north and south thereof shall be designated as North, or South,
as the case may be, provided that, where Walnut Street meets or intersects with
Fleming Street, the base line for streets running north and south shall be
Fleming Street from that point on west and Walnut Street from that point on
east shall be used as the base line. The base line for streets running East and
West shall be Third Street, and all numbers lying East or West of this line
shall be designated East or West, as the case may be. Numbering shall begin
with the base lines with the number one hundred (100), shall be consecutive,
and one unit may be allowed for each twenty five feet (25') of frontage. The
numbering on each block shall begin with one hundred (100) or a multiple
thereof. Odd numbers shall be on the south and west sides of the streets. Even
numbers shall be on the north and east sides of the streets.
(1980 Code § 39-141)
11-12-2: DUTY TO NUMBER:
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every building in the City to
have placed thereon, in a place readily visible from the street, the street
number of the building. The figures of each street number shall be at least
three inches (3") in height. Any person, firm or corporation, having a duty to
number a building in accordance with this chapter and having failed to do so
after having received a notice to do so from the Building Official for each day
on which the failure to number the building continues.
(1980 Code § 39-142)
11-12-3: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to assign or have assigned to
each and every building, store or residence its proper number. The Building
Official may also renumber or change any existing numbers, upon notice to the
owner or occupant of the building, so as to make the numbers conform to this
chapter.
(1980 Code § 39-143)
11-12-4: STREET NUMBER CHART:
The Building Official shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of
every lot, building and structure in the City, which chart shall be open to
inspection by anyone interested.
(1980 Code § 39-144)
TITLE 12: ZONING
CHAPTER 1: TITLE; INTERPRETATION; APPLICATION; COMPLIANCE
Section
12-1-1: Short Title
12-1-2: Home Rule Powers
12-1-3: Intent And Purpose
12-1-4: Application And Interpretation; Conflicts
12-1-5: Compliance With Provisions
12-1-6: Procedural Rules
12-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the WATSEKA ZONING
ORDINANCE.
(1980 Code § 36-2)
12-1-2: HOME RULE POWERS:
This title is adopted pursuant to the home rule powers now possessed by the
City.
(1980 Code § 36-4)
12-1-3: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the objectives, intent and purposes enumerated and
authorized in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.
(1980 Code § 36-3)
12-1-4: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: This title shall apply to all territory
located within the corporate limits of the City.
(1980 Code § 36-18)
   B.   More Restrictive Provisions Apply: Whenever regulations or restrictions
imposed by this title are either more or less restrictive than regulations or
restrictions imposed by any governmental authority through legislation, rule or
regulation, the regulations, rules or restrictions which are more restrictive
or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   Conflicting Provisions:
      1.   Regardless of any other provisions of this title, no land shall be
used and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any State or
Federal pollution control or environmental protection law or regulation, or in
violation of any resolution, ordinance or law relating to flood control.
(1980 Code § 36-27)
      2.   No building or use of land shall conflict with or violate the yard,
area and parking requirements of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-19)
   D.   Invalidity: Should any section, provision, part or clause of this title
be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of this title as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(1980 Code § 36-213) (Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-1-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used
for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building
or land is located, unless, pursuant to the provisions of this title relating
to special uses or planned unit developments, a modified use is authorized.
(1980 Code § 36-19)
   B.   No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for
a certificate of occupancy shall be approved by the Building Official, and no
permit or license shall be issued by any other City department, which would
authorize the use or change in use of any land or building contrary to the
provisions of this title, or the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement, or
occupancy of any building designed or intended to be used for a purpose
contrary to the provisions of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-20)
   C.   No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used
for any purpose other than that which is permitted in the district in which
such building or land is located; and no building or use of land shall conflict
with or violate the yard, area and parking requirements of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-23)
12-1-6: PROCEDURAL RULES:
As to matters of notice, procedure and hearing not provided in this title, the
provisions of division 13 of article 11 of chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes relating thereto shall apply.
(1980 Code § 36-5)
CHAPTER 2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section
12-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
12-2-2: Priority Of Sources
12-2-3: Definitions
12-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
When used in this title, words used in the present tense shall include the
future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular; the word “building” shall include the word “structure”; and the word
“shall” is mandatory and not directory.
(1980 Code § 36-12)
12-2-2: PRIORITY OF SOURCES:
When the meanings of words and terms used in this title are not clear, or
subject to doubt, the definitions shall be taken from the following, in order
of preference:
   A.   IBC (International Building Code).
   B.   Federal Housing Administration’s “Definitions”.
   C.   Webster’s International Dictionary (Unabridged).
(1980 Code § 36-11)
12-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this title, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Any building that is: (a) is subordinate in extent and
purpose to the principal building; (b) is customarily found as an incident to
such principal building; (c) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of those occupying, working at, or being served by the principal
building; (d) is located on the same lot as the principal building; and (e) is
under the same ownership and control as the principal building.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at an adult-use dispensing
organization or use at an adult-use processing organization, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed adult-use cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to adult-use purchasers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as
amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS ORGANIZATION: An adult-use cannabis cultivation center,
adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing organization,
adult-use cannabis infuser organization, adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization or adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing
organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization or adult-use cannabis
transporting organization.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product
formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTATION ORGANIZATION: An organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport
cannabis on behalf of an adult-use cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ALLEY: A secondary thoroughfare, less than thirty feet (30') in width,
dedicated for the public use of vehicles and pedestrians affording access to
abutting property.
APARTMENT: One or more rooms comprising a dwelling unit or serving as the home
or residence of an individual, or a family or a household.
AREA OF BUILDING: The horizontal projected floor area inside of exterior
enclosure walls or between exterior walls and fire walls.
BASEMENT: A story of a building having more than one-half (½) its height below
the level of the average height of the finished grade at the middle of the
front of the building. Synonymous with "cellar".
BUILDING: A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls, built,
erected and framed of component structural parts, designed for the housing,
shelter, enclosure and support of individuals, animals or property.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of this title, or his duly authorized
representative.
CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: Any adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization or medical cannabis dispensing organization.
CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION: Any facility operated by an adult-use
cannabis cultivation center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use
cannabis processing organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization,
adult-use cannabis transporting organization, medical cannabis cultivation
center, medical cannabis craft grower, medical cannabis processing
organization, medical cannabis infuser organization or medical cannabis
transporting organization.
CANNABIS ORGANIZATION: Any adult-use cannabis organization or medical cannabis
organization.
DISTRICT: A territory delineated on the Zoning Map for which the regulations
and restrictions of this title governing the use of land and buildings, the
height of buildings, the bulk of buildings, the floor area, the open space, the
size and location of yards, and the off-street parking facilities are uniform.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
FAMILY: A person living alone, or two (2) or more persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not more than ten (10) persons
unrelated to each other by blood, marriage, or legal adoption.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed for the storage of an
automobile or automobiles belonging to the occupants of a specified dwelling or
apartment. This term shall also include "carport".
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance from the grade to the top of the
highest roof beams of a flat roof, or to the main level of the highest gable or
slope of a hip roof. When a building faces on more than one street, the height
shall be measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street
front.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation or profession customarily carried on by
an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly incidental to the use
of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. The home occupation shall be
carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building accessory
thereto, and only by members of the family occupying the premises and one
person outside the family. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior
storage of materials, no other exterior indication of the home occupation or
variation from the residential character of the principal building, and no
offensive odors, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall be
produced. Grocery stores, tearooms, restaurants, dress shops, millinery shops,
tourist homes, animal hospitals and kennels, among others, shall not be deemed
to be home occupations.
INTERIOR LOT LINE: Any lot line other than one adjoining a street or public
space.
LINE OF BUILDING (For Measuring Yards): A line parallel to the nearest lot line
drawn through the point of the exterior side of the base of a building or group
of buildings nearest to such lot line, exclusive of such features or
obstructions specified as being permitted to extend into a yard.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot, only
one street line shall be considered as a front; provided, that where the length
of a shorter line is less than eighty percent (80%) of the length of the longer
line, the shorter street line shall be considered as the front.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of an
irregular, triangular or gore- shaped lot, it shall mean a line within the lot,
ten feet (10') long, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from a street shall be called a “side street line”. A
side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots shall be called an
“interior side lot line”.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed medical cannabis dispensing
organizations, per the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as it
may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to registered qualifying patients, per the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
MEDICAL CANNABIS ORGANIZATION: A medical cannabis cultivation center, medical
cannabis processing organization, medical cannabis infuser organization,
medical cannabis dispensing organization or medical cannabis transporting
organization.
MEDICAL CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION: A medical cannabis cultivation
center, medical cannabis processing organization, medical cannabis infuser
organization or medical cannabis transporting organization.
MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product
formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
MEDICAL CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION: An organization or business that is
licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on
behalf of a medical cannabis business establishment, per the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
MULTI-FAMILY APARTMENT HOUSE: A building containing more than two (2) dwelling
units.
OPEN SPACE: A usable yard, court, or space between buildings, which is open to
the sky.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building on a lot intended to be utilized for the
principal use and to which any other building or structure on such lot must be
accessory.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing one dwelling unit. Whenever the
term “single- family dwelling”, “two-family dwelling”, or “multi-family
dwelling” are used in this title, all mobile homes, as described in chapter 7
of this title, are excluded from and are herein defined as not being a single-
family dwelling, two-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling.
SITE LINE: Where more than one side of a lot faces on a street, the setback
line on those parts of the lot facing on a street must equal the front yard
setback line for that district.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing two (2) dwelling units.
(1980 Code § 36-12) (Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019; amd. Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
12-3-1: Building Official
12-3-2: Building Permit
12-3-3: Certificate Of Compliance And Occupancy
12-3-4: Public Ways And Driveway Improvements
12-3-5: Fees And Costs
12-3-6: Violation; Penalty
12-3-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Appointment And Term: There is hereby created the Office of City
Building Official. Said official shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council, and shall hold office for the term of four (4)
years and until his successor is appointed at the next term of the Mayor.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The Building Official is designated as the official to be
responsible for enforcing the this title and shall have the power and shall
exercise the function prescribed by terms of all ordinances now in force and
hereafter passed or amended.
(1980 Code § 36-89)
      2.   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to see that the
construction and repairs of all buildings in the City conform to and comply
with the rules and regulations established by this title and to enforce the
provisions of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-90)
   C.   Appeals Of Decisions: Appeal from the decision of the Building Official
may be made to the Board of Appeals, as provided by law (see section
12-3A-10 of this chapter).
(1980 Code § 36-91)
Cross-reference:
   See also title 1, chapter 10, article C of this Code
12-3-2: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit And Compliance Required: No use shall be established, and no
building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered or expanded,
without a permit having first been issued by the Building Official, and no
permit shall be issued unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this
title or amendments hereto duly enacted.
(1980 Code § 36-92)
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a
plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, its location on the lot
or lots, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of these regulations.
      2.   The applicant for a permit shall satisfy the Building Official that
his property corners are properly staked and that the building or structure
shall be located in strict accordance with the provisions of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-95)
      3.   No permit for excavation for or erection of any building, or part of
a building, or for repairs to or alteration of a building, or for the moving of
any building from one lot to another shall be issued until a statement of its
intended use has been filed by the applicant.
(1980 Code § 36-94)
   C.   Term Of Permit; Invalidation: All permits issued under this title or
prior zoning ordinances shall be valid only for one year from date of issuance,
unless the applicant has commenced construction pursuant to the permit. All
permits under which construction has not been begun within one year after
issuance thereof are hereby invalidated.
(1980 Code § 36-97)
   D.   Record Of Permits: A record of all permits and applications shall be
kept on file in the Office of the Building Official, and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the building affected.
(1980 Code § 36-94)
   E.   Revocation Of Permit: The Building Official may revoke a permit or
approval issued, where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation
as to a material fact set out in the application or plans on which the permit
or approval was based. The revocation shall be made in writing, and may be
either served personally upon the applicant or mailed to applicant by United
States mail at applicant’s address shown in the application.
(1980 Code § 36-93)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
11-1-2 of this Code
12-3-3: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE AND OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Certificate Required: No building or structure hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied and used until a certificate of
compliance and occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. The
certificate of compliance and occupancy shall be issued only after the Building
Official makes a finding that the building is in conformance with the
provisions of this title, and other health and building laws, and construction
is proceeding in accordance with the building permit.
   B.   Application For Certificate: A certificate of compliance shall be
applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be
issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of the building
shall have been satisfactorily completed.
   C.   Record Of Certificates: A record of all certificates shall be kept on
file in the Office of the Building Official, and copies shall be furnished, on
request, to persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected.
(1980 Code § 36-98)
12-3-4: PUBLIC WAYS AND DRIVEWAY IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Display:
      1.   No work shall be performed by any nonauthorized agent or independent
contractor of the City, upon pavement, streets, curbs, curb cuts, sidewalks,
alleys, public ways, private driveways or other private ways, unless and until
the Building Official has issued a permit for the work to be done.
      2.   No work on public or private ways may be commenced without the
issuance of a permit which shall be displayed in the vicinity of the public or
private way construction project.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for any person not an authorized
agent or independent contractor of the City to construct or lay pavement,
curbs, curb cuts, sidewalks, alleys, public ways, or private driveways (both
commercial and residential) must be made to the Building Official. The
application shall be in such form as determined by the Building Official from
time to time.
   C.   Commercial Plans And Specifications: For any and all public and private
way improvements intended to be primarily used for commercial purposes,
complete written plans and specifications shall be provided to the Building
Official along with a certification from a licensed professional engineer that
indicates the proposed plan is appropriate for the contemplated use.
   D.   Fees: The Building Official may charge such uniform application fees as
he or she determines appropriate for public and private way improvement(s).
(Ord. 2086, 5-19-2003)
Cross-reference:
   See also sections
9-1-2,
9-2-2  and
9-3-1  of this Code
12-3-5: FEES AND COSTS:
   A.   Fees pertaining to petitions for zoning amendments, use permits,
certificates of compliance, variations, and appeals to the Board of Appeals
shall be established by the City Council.
(1980 Code § 36-96)
   B.   All publication and hearing costs in all proceedings for amendments to
this title, for special uses, and for variances shall be paid by the applicant.
In addition thereto, before any proceedings may be had by any applicant for an
amendment to this title or for the issuance of a permit for a special use, or
for a variance, the applicant shall deposit with and pay to the City Collector
a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Any amendment, permit for special
use, or variance granted where the applicant has failed to pay the fee shall be
invalid.
(1980 Code § 36-128)
12-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Violation: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this title for any
person, firm or corporation to erect or alter any building or to make use of
any premises subject to the regulations herein set forth contrary to any of the
provisions of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-208)
   B.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of
the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day a violation exists or continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1980 Code § 36-209; amd. 2019 Code) (Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
ARTICLE A: BOARD OF APPEALS
Section
12-3A-1: Board Created; Appointment; Residency
12-3A-2: Terms Of Office
12-3A-3: Removals And Vacancies
12-3A-4: Duties
12-3A-5: Compensation
12-3A-6: Organization
12-3A-7: Meetings And Hearings Open To Public
12-3A-8: Jurisdiction And Restrictions
12-3A-9: Notice Of Hearings
12-3A-10: Appeals
12-3A-11: Variations
12-3A-12: Rules And Regulations
12-3A-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; RESIDENCY:
There shall be a Board of Appeals on zoning matters, consisting of seven (7)
members to be appointed by the Mayor, with City Council approval. The word
"Board", when used in this article, shall mean the Board of Appeals. The
members shall be citizens of the City of Watseka or residents of territory
contiguous to the City and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond
the corporate limits, as is provided by statute.
(Ord. 2376, 8-28-2012)
12-3A-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The members of the Board shall serve for a term of five (5) years. Said terms
shall be staggered so that the term of only one member expires each year.
(Ord. 2214, 11-27-2006; amd. Ord. 2376, 8-28-2012)
12-3A-3: REMOVALS AND VACANCIES:
The Mayor shall have the power to remove any member of the Board from office
for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled
for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant.
(1980 Code § 36-107)
12-3A-4: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Board to hear and decide any appeal of any
decision, order or interpretation by the Building Official, and it shall have
the power to reverse any decision of the Building Official on a concurring vote
of four (4) members.
(1980 Code § 36-106)
12-3A-5: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Amount And Determination: Each member of the Board shall be compensated
for each meeting he or she shall attend at the rate of fifty five dollars
($55.00) per meeting, said compensation to be paid by the City. For the purpose
of determining the compensation, all matters scheduled for discussion and
consideration by each Board member on a particular date shall be considered as
having been held and determined in one meeting.
(Ord. 2214, 11-27-2006)
   B.   Reimbursement For Expenses: Expenses incurred by the Board are to be
itemized and shall be paid by the City.
(1980 Code § 36-109)
12-3A-6: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers:
      1.   Chair: The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall
designate one of the members of the Board as the Chair. The Chair shall hold
that office until his successor is appointed or until the expiration of his
term. The Chair, or in his absence, the Acting Chair, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
      2.   Secretary: The Board shall select one of the Board members as
Secretary who shall keep the minutes of the meetings of the Board and keep its
records and files.
      3.   Other Officers: The Board may select or appoint such other officers
as is necessary.
(1980 Code § 36-108)
   B.   Meetings:
      1.   Notice Of Meetings: There shall be at least fifteen (15) days’, but
not more than thirty (30) days', notice of the time and place of Board meetings
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, containing a
statement of the particular purpose of the meeting and a brief description of
the location of the property or properties under consideration at the meeting.
The notice shall be given by the owner of the real estate under consideration.
(1980 Code § 36-110)
      2.   Requests For Meetings: Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chair or at the request of three (3) members of the Board.
      3.   Minutes:
         a.   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon every question decided thereby, or if any member is absent
or fails to vote, indicating such fact.
         b.   A statement of the facts found by the Board shall be included in
the minutes of each case heard or considered thereby.
         c.   The reason for each decision and for the recommendation or denial
of a variance as herein provided shall also appear in the minutes.
         d.   In every instance, a statement of the facts upon which decisions
or recommendations are based shall appear in the minutes.
         e.   The minutes of the Board shall be open to public examination.
   C.   Rules Of Procedure: The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure, a
copy of which, and all amendments thereto, shall be filed in the Office of the
City Clerk.
(1980 Code § 36-109)
12-3A-7: MEETINGS AND HEARINGS OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All meetings of the Board and all hearings shall be open to the public.
(1980 Code § 36-109)
12-3A-8: JURISDICTION AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The Board shall hear and decide appeals from, and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Official.
   B.   The Board shall also hear all applications for variations and shall
submit its recommendations, based upon a finding of fact, for enactment of an
ordinance, if one is required. The City Council shall not have the power to
grant a variation until a public hearing has been held by the Board, pursuant
to notice, and after receiving the Board's report with a finding of fact.
C. The Board shall have no authority to authorize any change in the use of any
parcel or property or structure in matters of appeal. The concurring vote of
four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Building Official or to decide in
favor of the applicant any matter in which the Board is requested to recommend
a variance.
(1980 Code § 36-112)
12-3A-9: NOTICE OF HEARINGS:
Decisions and recommendations of the Board shall be reached only after a public
hearing and after notice has been given by registered or certified mail to the
appellant or to the applicant and after a sign has been posted on the property.
Said notice shall be mailed and sign posted at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of the hearing.
(1980 Code § 36-111)
12-3A-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Right To Appeal; Notice: An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be taken
by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
City. The appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the action
complained of by filing with the Building Official and with the Board, a notice
of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Building Official shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(1980 Code § 36-113)
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: The appeal shall stay all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Official certifies
to the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record on application, with notice to the Building Official,
and all due causes shown.
   C.   Hearing: The Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of appeals and shall give notice thereof to the persons appealing and
to the Building Official. It shall hear and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. At the hearing, parties of interest may appear in person or by
agent or attorney.
   D.   Decision: The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made in the premises, and to that end, shall have all the powers of
the Building Official.
(1980 Code § 36-114)
   E.   Judicial Review: No decision of the Board upon any appeal thereto shall
be subject to review, reversal, or modification by the Corporate Authorities of
the City, but shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of
the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.)
(1980 Code § 36-118)
   F.   Costs Of Appeal: All costs of an appeal shall be borne and advanced in
the first instance by the person appealing. Upon filing said appeal, the
appellants shall deposit with the City Collector such sums as the Chair of the
Board shall certify to be necessary for publication expenses, expenses of the
record and the taking of testimony and any other expenses that may be incurred
on account of the appeal. The proceedings before the Board shall be stayed
until said sums are deposited.
(1980 Code § 36-119)
12-3A-11: VARIATIONS:
Where, in a specific case, an application for a variation is made in writing to
the Board, explaining that because of certain exceptional conditions peculiar
to applicant's property or its environment, strict application of the
regulations of this title would result in practical difficulties and particular
hardship upon the owner, the Board shall consider the case at public hearing,
fifteen (15) days’ notice of which shall have been given, and shall determine
and record all the facts which tend to sustain or fail to sustain the granting
of a variation from the requirements of this title. If the Board determines, by
a concurring vote of not less than four (4) members, that the proposed
variation or some modification of it will not: a) impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property; b) increase the congestion in public
streets unreasonably; c) increase the hazard of fire; d) endanger the public
safety; e) diminish or impair the values of property within the surrounding
areas; or f) in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort,
morals and welfare of the people, it shall adopt a report embodying such
findings, and may recommend to the City Council that an ordinance be adopted
authorizing the variance. No variance shall be granted for any lot which has
been platted subsequent to the effective date hereof.
(1980 Code § 36-116)
12-3A-12: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Board may, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations as may be
deemed necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this title. Such rules
and regulations shall take effect ten (10) days after their publication in a
newspaper with a circulation in the City.
(1980 Code § 36-115)
ARTICLE B: STANDARD USE PROCEDURE
Section
12-3B-1: Application For Building And Zoning Permit
12-3B-2: Review Of Application
12-3B-3: Bond Requirements
12-3B-4: Expiration Of Permit
12-3B-5: Inspections
12-3B-6: Issuance Of Certificate Of Compliance And Occupancy
12-3B-1: APPLICATION FOR BUILDING AND ZONING PERMIT:
The owner or interested party shall fill out the application forms for a
building permit as is provided by the City. The applicant shall also pay a fee
as shall be required by the City on all construction costing one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or more.
(1980 Code § 36-71)
12-3B-2: REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
The Building Official shall review the application, and if it is in order and
conforms to this title and other ordinances, issue a building and zoning permit
to the applicant. Additional information may be requested.
(1980 Code § 36-71)
12-3B-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall provide to the City a good and
sufficient bond, with adequate surety or sureties and in an amount of dollars
which is equal to the cost of the project, whichever amount is the greater,
conditioned that the building, structure, use or change shall conform to the
written plans and specifications filed with the Building Official, and
consenting that, in the event that the building, structure, change or use does
not conform substantially to the written plans and specifications, the City, in
addition to foreclosing on the bond, may have an injunction issued in a court
of competent jurisdiction requiring the conformance by the applicant to the
approved plans and specifications or the removal of the building, structure,
use or change.
(1980 Code § 36-71)
12-3B-4: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
The permit shall become void if construction does not begin within one year.
(1980 Code § 36-71)
12-3B-5: INSPECTIONS:
The Building Official shall inspect the project at the site to determine
compliance with this title, Building Codes and other laws. Inspections shall be
made: a) before footings are placed; b) before the first floor is poured (if
concrete); c) before the interior walls are covered; and d) when the building
is completed.
(1980 Code § 36-71)
12-3B-6: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE AND OCCUPANCY:
The Building Official will issue a certificate of compliance and occupancy when
the project complies with the approved plans and specifications, this title,
Building Codes and other laws, and will then release the bond.
(1980 Code § 36-71)
ARTICLE C: SPECIAL USE PROCEDURE
Section
12-3C-1: Procedure Created
12-3C-2: Compliance With Provisions
12-3C-3: Application For Special Use
12-3C-4: Hearing; Findings And Recommendations
12-3C-5: Action By City Council
12-3C-6: Information Required; Procedure
12-3C-7: Planned Unit Developments
12-3C-8: Factors And Mitigation
12-3C-1: PROCEDURE CREATED:
Recognizing that there are legitimate uses for which no provision has been made
in some or all of the districts herein created, a procedure is hereby created
by which a special use may be requested in any of said districts and
consideration of the request be given by the Corporate Authorities of the City.
(1980 Code § 36-78)
12-3C-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Special uses may be granted and allowed in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
(1980 Code § 36-77)
12-3C-3: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE:
Any owner of any tract or lot in the City wishing to make a use thereof not
permitted under this title may, in writing, make application to the City
Council for the granting of a special use for said tract or lot. Upon the
application being made, the application shall be referred to the Zoning
Commission for further action pursuant to this title.
(1980 Code § 36-79)
12-3C-4: HEARING; FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
The Zoning Commission shall thereafter conduct a public hearing thereon,
following the same procedures as to notice and hearing as must be followed in
an amendment of this title (see article D of this chapter). At the conclusion
of the hearing, the commission shall, in writing, report its findings and
recommendations to the City Council.
(1980 Code § 36-80)
12-3C-5: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
Upon receipt of the report of the Zoning Commission, the City Council shall
have power, by ordinance, either to grant or deny the application for a special
use or to refer the application back to the Zoning Commission for further
consideration and report. No special use shall be granted if it is not
compatible with the uses which, by this title, are permitted in the district
for which the special use is requested to be allowed or granted, and unless it
promotes the public welfare and is a reasonable exercise of the police power of
the City.
(1980 Code § 36-81)
12-3C-6: INFORMATION REQUIRED; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Information Required: Before the hearing, the owner shall provide the
Zoning Commission at least the following detailed information and any other
information deemed necessary by the commission. All information submitted shall
include:
      1.   The name and address of all owners of the site, the planners,
architects, engineers, surveyors or other consultants.
      2.   A general area plan drawing reflecting the intended use and future
street locations for adjacent areas when the proposed planned unit development
is intended to represent a single phase of a longer range development.
      3.   Present and proposed zoning.
      4.   The existing conditions on the site including contour lines (5 foot
intervals), watercourses and existing drainage facilities, wooded areas and
isolated trees of six inches (6") or more in diameter, existing streets,
sidewalks or other improvements, and existing buildings and structures showing
those which will be removed and which will be retained.
      5.   A site plan or plans of the proposed development giving the exact
location of the following to scale:
         a.   All buildings, one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'0") or
greater, and common open space and its use.
         b.   Sidewalks with dimensions (width and thickness).
         c.   Screening, fencing or buffering of the development perimeters.
         d.   Areas that are to be public.
         e.   Such other information that the Plan Commission may require
including utilities.
      6.   An accurate legal description and property survey of the entire
property.
      7.   Architectural building elevations, each one sixteenth inch equals
one foot (1/16" = 1'0") or greater, pavement types, culverts, common open
space, recreation facilities, sidewalks, illumination, and landscaping.
      8.   Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of
land and recording the documents.
      9.   Tabulations on the use of the area including land area, number of
buildings, number of dwelling units per acre (if applicable), total common open
space, percentage of building coverage of the total site and total number of
parking spaces.
      10.   All curb cuts, driving lanes, and transportation points.
      11.   Other plans or specifications that may be required for final
approval of drainage, street design or other facilities by the City engineer or
Plan Commission and plans necessary for approval by the Building Official.
      12.   A development schedule indicating: a) the approximate date when
construction of the project will begin; b) when each stage will begin; c) the
approximate dates when each stage will be completed; and d) the area and
location of common open space that will be provided at each stage; e) if the
applicant intends to sell or lease all or a portion of the development after
the project is approved, a statement shall be presented to the commission. If
applicable, the conditions of sale and maintenance of such developed properties
shall be stipulated. Any covenants, deed restrictions or other similar
agreements between the applicant and future owners shall be presented.
   B.   Public Notice: Public notice shall be given by the owner (newspaper and
sign) not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days, all the
same as the requirements of section
12-3D-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Public Hearing: Public hearing before the commission shall be required
before a decision shall be made.
   D.   Recommendation: The commission shall recommend approval or denial to
the City Council.
   E.   City Council Action: The City Council shall vote for approval or
denial.
   F.   Bond Required: The owner shall provide to the City a good and
sufficient bond, in an amount and conditioned as is provided in section
12-3B-3 of this chapter.
   G.   Issuance Of Permit: After approval by the City Council, the Building
Official shall issue a zoning special use permit to the applicant.
   H.   Time For Construction; Extension: If no construction has begun or no
approved use is established in the special use development within one year from
the approval of the final development plan by the City Council, the City
Council may extend for one additional year the period for the beginning of
construction, the establishment of an approved use, or completion of a phase of
development as indicated in the development schedule. If a final development
plan lapses under the provisions of this subsection, the Building Official
shall notify the applicant at the address given on the plan submitted of the
revocation of the approval of the special use development.
   I.   Inspections: The Building Official shall inspect the project at the
site to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications, this
title, Building Codes and other laws. Inspections shall be made: 1) before
footings are placed; 2) before the first floor is poured (if concrete); 3)
before the interior walls are covered; and 4) when the building is completed.
   J.   Issuance Of Certificate Of Compliance And Occupancy: The Building
Official will issue a certificate of compliance and occupancy when the project
complies with the approved plans and specifications, this title, Building Codes
and other laws.
(1980 Code § 36-82)
12-3C-7: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Planned unit developments may be permitted in accordance with the procedures
herein set forth.
(1980 Code § 36-83)
12-3C-8: FACTORS AND MITIGATION:
   A.   No special use permit shall be granted pursuant unless the applicant
shall establish that:   
      1.   Code And Plan Purposes: The proposed use and development will be in
harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this title was enacted
and for which the regulations of the district in question were established.
      2.   No Undue Adverse Impact: The proposed use and development will not
have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the
character of the area, or the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      3.   No Interference With Surrounding Development. The proposed use and
development will be constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to dominate
the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and development of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
      4.   Adequate Public Facilities: The proposed use and development will be
served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as streets,
public utilities, drainage structures, police and fire protection, refuse
disposal, parks, libraries, and schools, or the applicant will provide
adequately for such services.
      5.   No Traffic Congestion: The proposed use and development will not
cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through
streets.
      6.   No-Destruction Of Significant Features: The proposed use and
development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of any natural,
scenic, or historic feature of significant importance.
      7.   Compliance With Standards: The proposed use and development complies
with all standards imposed on that use and any district where it is a permitted
use.
   B.   In determining whether the applicant’s evidence establishes that the
foregoing standards have been met, the Zoning Commission shall consider:
      1.   Public Benefit: Whether and to what extent, the proposed use and
development at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable to
provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of the public
convenience or that will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood
or community.
      2.   Alternative Locations: Whether and to what extent, such public goals
can be met by the location of the proposed use and development at some other
site or in some other area that may be more appropriate than the proposed site.
      3.   Mitigation Of Adverse Impacts: Whether and to what extent, all steps
possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed use
and development on the immediate vicinity through building design, site design,
landscaping, and screening.
   C.   The Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose
such conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character,
location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes
and objectives of this title upon the premises benefited by a special use
permit as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse
effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject
property or upon public facilities and services; provided, however, that such
conditions shall not be used as a device to grant a permit for a special use
that is intended to be temporary in nature. Such conditions shall be expressly
set forth in the ordinance granting the special use. Violation of any such
condition or limitation shall be a violation of this title and shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
   D.   Whenever any special use permit granted pursuant to this section is
made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the applicant, the
applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the
Building Official so stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the Building Official, to
recover the City’s actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such
conditions and limitations have been met.
   E.   The grant of a special use permit shall not authorize the establishment
or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize
the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits or
approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the City.
   F.   Subject to an extension of time granted by the Building Official, no
special use permit shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless
a building permit is issued and construction has actually begun within that
period, and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a
Certificate of Occupancy is issued and a use commenced within that period.
   G.   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular
use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically expire and
cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be
discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months or more.
   H.   Except when otherwise provided in the ordinance granting a special use
permit, a special use permit shall be deemed to relate to, and be for the
benefit of, the use and property in question rather than the owner or operator
of such use or property.
   I.   A special use permit may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant
to the procedures and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this
section for its original approval.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
ARTICLE D: AMENDMENTS
Section
12-3D-1: Amendment By Ordinance; Initiation; Compliance Required
12-3D-2: Purpose And Procedure Generally
12-3D-3: Detailed Procedure
12-3D-1: AMENDMENT BY ORDINANCE; INITIATION; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
The regulations imposed and the zoning districts created under this title may
be amended by ordinance, initiated either on the motion of the City Council or
by a petition for amendment addressed to the City Council, but such ordinance
or amendment may not be adopted until there has been compliance with all the
provisions hereof relating to amendments of zoning ordinances. And no such
ordinance of amendment may be adopted until after a public hearing upon the
proposed amendment has been held by the Zoning Commission, pursuant to public
notice given of the hearing.
(1980 Code § 36-125)
12-3D-2: PURPOSE AND PROCEDURE GENERALLY:
The purpose and order of procedures on amendments shall be as follows:
   A.   To allow for a change in the zoning districts or regulations, if
warranted, for the general public’s health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   The persons requesting the change shall, in writing, ask for a hearing
before the Zoning Commission.
   C.   The Zoning Commission shall recommend approval or denial to the City
Council.
   D.   The City Council shall approve or deny a change in this title.
(1980 Code § 36-126)
12-3D-3: DETAILED PROCEDURE:
   A.   Amendment By Ordinance; Hearing Required: The regulations imposed and
the districts created by this title may be amended by ordinance, but no such
amendments shall be made without a public hearing before the Zoning Commission.
   B.   Notice And Hearing:
      1.   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at
least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days,
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by
posting a sign provided by the City on the property continuously at least
fifteen (15) days before the hearing.
      2.   The published notice shall give the time and place of the hearing
and contain a brief description of the proposed amendment and the street
address, if available, or some readily identifiable description of the location
of the property sought to be rezoned, if the proceedings are for the rezoning
of a specific property.
      3.   Any notice required by this subsection need not include a metes and
bounds legal description of the area classified for special use; provided, that
the notice includes: a) the common street address or addresses; and b) the
property index number (PIN) or numbers of all parcels of real property
contained in the area for special use.
      4.   The posted sign shall be placed and erected on the property where
directed by the Building Official.
   C.   Protests: If, prior to the hearing, written objections protesting the
change of the regulations or districts are filed with the City Clerk by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of: 1) the frontage proposed to be
altered; or 2) the frontage immediately joining or across an alley therefrom;
or 3) the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, then
the amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all the members of the City Council.
(1980 Code § 36-127)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
12-4-1: Contiguous Lots; One Building Per Lot
12-4-2: Access To Public Way
12-4-3: Traffic Visibility At Intersections
12-4-4: Use Of Alleys In Determining Yards
12-4-5: Permitted Obstructions In Or Over Yards
12-4-6: Cannabis Organizations
12-4-7: Accessory Buildings
12-4-1: CONTIGUOUS LOTS; ONE BUILDING PER LOT:
   A.   When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area
and dimensions to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use
district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one
ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use if, together, they
have minimum lot area.
   B.   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide
dwelling units shall be located on a zoning lot as herein defined, and in no
case shall there be more than one such building on one zoning lot.
(1980 Code § 36-21)
12-4-2: ACCESS TO PUBLIC WAY:
No building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which
does not abut upon a public street or permanent easement of access to a public
street of at least twenty five feet (25') in width, unless an easement of
lesser width was of record prior to the effective date hereof.
(1980 Code § 36-24)
12-4-3: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS:
No wall, fence or shrubbery shall be erected, maintained or planted on any lot
which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with traffic visibility on a curve
or at any street intersection or at the exit from any private drive or alley.
(1980 Code § 36-25)
12-4-4: USE OF ALLEYS IN DETERMINING YARDS:
In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard, where such
yard opens onto an alley, one-half (½) of the alley width shall be assumed to
be a portion of the yard.
(1980 Code § 36-26)
12-4-5: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN OR OVER YARDS:
The following shall be considered as permitted obstructions or uses when
located within or over required yards:
   A.   Terraces and patios.
   B.   Awnings and canopies.
   C.   Chimneys, not exceeding two percent (2%) of the width of the yard.
   D.   Steps not over four feet (4') in height.
   E.   Arbors and trellises.
   F.   Fences or walls not over six and one-half feet (61/2') in height (see
also sections
11-8-4 and
11-8-5 of this Code).
   G.   Breezeways and open porches.
   H.   Roof overhangs, not to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the required
side yard.
(1980 Code § 36-31)
12-4-6: CANNABIS ORGANIZATIONS:
   A.   All cannabis organizations are prohibited, and no person shall locate,
operate, own, suffer, or allow to be operated a cannabis organization within
the following zoning districts:
      1.   R-1 Single-Family District;
      2.   R-2 Single-Family District;
      3.   R-3 Duplex or Two-Family District;
      4.   R-4 Multi-Family District;
      5.   RMH Mobile Home Park; and
      6.   P Public Use District.
   B.   Cannabis dispensing organizations shall be permitted as a special use
in the B-1 Neighborhood Business District and the B-2 Central Business
District, provided the facilities otherwise comply with the provisions of
chapter 15 of this title.
   C.   Adult-use cannabis craft growers, adult-use cannabis cultivation
centers, adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations, medical cannabis
cultivation centers, and medical cannabis dispensing organizations shall be
permitted as a special use in the M-1 Manufacturing District and the M-
2 Manufacturing District, provided the facilities otherwise comply with the
provisions of chapter 15 of this title.
   D.   Cannabis organizations shall be permitted as a special use in the M-
2 Manufacturing District, provided the facilities otherwise comply with the
provisions of chapter 15 of this title.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to locate or operate a cannabis organization
except when on/adjacent to Jefferson Street or Walnut Avenue, also known as
Main Street.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to locate or operate a cannabis organization
within one mile of another cannabis organization.
   G.   It shall be unlawful to engage in any activity authorized to be
conducted by or in a cannabis industrial organization by or in a cannabis
dispensing organization.
   H.   No other cannabis organization, of any type, shall be allowed, and no
person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, or allow to be operated a cannabis
organization within any zoning district unless specifically authorized in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
   I.   The operation of any cannabis organization in violation of the
provisions of this title is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated
by all available remedies afforded under the law.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-4-7: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Not more than one (1) accessory building shall be permitted on a lot;
provided, however, on a residentially zoned lot having only a detached garage
(no garage attached to the principal building) there shall be permitted two
accessory buildings inclusive of the detached garage.
   B.   (b)   No part of an accessory building shall be located: (i) in front
of the principal building; (ii) within two (2') feet of the rear lot line;
(iii) within two (2') feet of an interior side yard lot line; or (iv) where any
principal building would be prohibited within an exterior side yard lot line
(i.e., side yard abutting a street on a corner lot).
   C.   No accessory building shall be erected, maintained, or allowed on a lot
without or in the absence of a principal building thereon; provided, however,
an accessory building may be allowed to temporarily remain on a lot after the
demolition of the principal building under the following circumstances: (i) the
owner of the lot owns an adjacent lot, he/she intends to consolidate the lots
by plat of subdivision and such consolidation would not cause a violation of
subsection (a) hereof, and said consolidation is completed within six (6)
months after the demolition; or (ii) if the owner of the lot submits a
statement to the Building Official, as a part of the demolition permit process,
of his/her intent to construct a principal building on that lot within one (1)
year of the demolition, and such construction is commenced and diligently
prosecuted during that time-period, and completed not more than eighteen (18)
months after the demolition. In the absence of such intent to consolidate or
construct, any accessory building shall be demolished as a part of the
demolition of the principal building. Upon a failure to consolidate, or
commence, diligently prosecute, or complete the of a new principal building in
accordance with the above, the accessory building shall be demolished within
sixty (60) days after written notice is received from the Building Official.
   D.   Detached garages shall not exceed the following maximum dimensions: an
exterior height of fifteen (15') feet or the height of the principal building,
whichever is less; and a total area not to exceed eight hundred eighty (880')
square feet.
   E.   Other accessory buildings, including storage sheds, shall not exceed
the following maximum dimensions: an exterior height of twelve (12') feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less; and a total area not
to exceed one hundred forty-four (144') square feet.
   F.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the total lot coverage
for principal and accessory buildings shall exceed the percentage necessary to
meet ths minimum open space requirements for a lot in the particular zoning
district.
(Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
ARTICLE A: CARGO CONTAINERS
Section
12-4A-1: Definitions
12-4A-2: Prohibited And Permitted Locations
12-4A-3: Standards And Regulations
12-4A-4: Exemptions
12-4A-5: Removal By City
12-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CARGO CONTAINER: An article of transport equipment which falls into any of the
following categories:
   A.   Designed or constructed for or used to facilitate the packing,
shipping, movement, or transportation of freight, articles, goods or
commodities by one or more modes of transport; and/or
   B.   Designed to be or capable of being: 1) mounted or moved on a rail car;
or 2) mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by a tractor trailer; or 3)
loaded onto a ship; and/or
   C.   A prefabricated metal structure designed for use as an individual
shipping container in accordance with international standards or a metal
structure designed and built for use as an enclosed truck-trailer in accordance
with U.S. Department of Transportation standards.
PERMANENT: A period of time limit that exceeds thirty (30) days on-site without
being utilized for transportation purposes.
STACK/STACKING: A method of storing cargo containers or a chassis in a vertical
manner where the floor of the container or bed of the chassis remains parallel
to the ground.
TEMPORARY: A period of time that does not exceed thirty (30) days on-site while
being used for storage purposes.
(Ord. 2355, 9-27-2011)
12-4A-2: PROHIBITED AND PERMITTED LOCATIONS:
   A.   Except as provided herein, cargo containers may not be placed, stored
or used on property zoned for residential, business, or manufacturing uses.
   B.   1. Cargo containers may be placed, stored or used for temporary storage
on property zoned for residential, business, or manufacturing uses, provided
the business has obtained a temporary storage permit from the Building Official
and Code Enforcement.
      2.   Cargo containers may not be placed, stored or used on a permanent
basis on any property zoned for residential, business, or manufacturing uses.
(Ord. 2355, 9-27-2011)
12-4A-3: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Cargo containers shall not be stacked on one another.
   B.   Cargo containers shall not be used for living quarters and shall not be
provided with refrigeration, heating, electricity, or plumbing.
   C.   Cargo containers used for temporary storage must be placed to the rear
of the property and may not be placed within any designated landscape or flood
retention or detention areas.
   D.   No cargo containers may be placed, stored or used on property or any
area that is within the floodplain or floodway.
(Ord. 2355, 9-27-2011)
12-4A-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Contractors may use cargo containers in any zoning district for the
storage of equipment and materials during the period of construction at the
construction site subject to the following:
      1.   The construction must be properly permitted by the City.
      2.   The container shall be removed from the property no later than seven
(7) calendar days after the final inspection and approval of the construction
by the City.
      3.   If construction ceases for a period of thirty (30) days or is
abandoned, the cargo container shall be removed not later than seven (7) days
after notice to remove issued by the City.
   B.   Containers used during moving may be placed on residential zoned
property for a maximum of fourteen (14) days.
   C.   Containers may be used for public safety and related purposes by the
City. (Ord. 2355, 9-27-2011)
12-4A-5: REMOVAL BY CITY:
   A.   Authority To Remove: Any cargo container(s) placed, stored or used in
violation of this article may be removed by the City if the property owner on
which the cargo container(s) is located fails to remove the cargo container(s)
within fourteen (14) calendar days of notice by the City of a violation and
order to remove.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: A notice of violation and order to remove shall be
deemed received by the property owner if the notice and order are mailed to the
address of the owner as listed in the records of the County Assessor, and a
copy of the notice and order are posted on the main entrance door or gate of
the property.
   C.   Costs A Lien: The City's cost to remove and dispose of the cargo
container shall be a lien against the property.
(Ord. 2355, 9-27-2011)
CHAPTER 5: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Section
12-5-1: Districts Established
12-5-2: Zoning Map; Zoning Of Annexed Land
12-5-3: Determination Of District Boundaries
12-5-4: Vacating Public Ways
12-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
All lands subject to the provisions of this title are hereby divided and
classified into the following districts, namely:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Duplex District
R-4 Multi-Family Residential District
RMH Mobile Home Park District
P   Public Use District
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 Central Business District
M-1 Manufacturing District
M-2 Manufacturing District
 
(1980 Code § 36-50)
12-5-2: ZONING MAP; ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
The boundaries of the districts as they now exist are hereby established as
shown on the Zoning Map which is hereby made a part of this title. Any land,
the classification of which may not be shown on the map, is hereby classified
in the R-1 Residential District, and when land is annexed into the City, it is
classified in the R-1 Residential District until differently classified by
amendments to this title.
(1980 Code § 36-50; amd. 2019 Code)
12-5-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown
on the Zoning Map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys, or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as following the
centerline thereof.
   B.    Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   C.   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the effective date
hereof is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district; provided, the less
restricted portion is at least eighty percent (80%) of the total lot area.
(1980 Code § 36-51)
12-5-4: VACATING PUBLIC WAYS:
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated, the zoning district
adjoining each side of the street, alley or public way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such a vacation, and all area included in the
vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of
the extended districts.
(1980 Code § 36-52)
CHAPTER 6: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
12-6-1: Average Depth Of Front Yards
12-6-1: AVERAGE DEPTH OF FRONT YARDS:
Whenever the established average front yards in any R District occasioned by
dwellings previously built is less than the required front yards herein
established, all new construction shall conform to the required front yards
herein established. Whenever the established average front yards in any R
District occasioned by dwellings previously built is more than the required
front yards herein established, all new construction shall conform to the
established average front yards; provided, that any owner of lands affected by
this rule, who wishes to place new construction thereon, may avail himself of
the special use procedures herein established for the purpose of obtaining a
modification of said rule as to his property. (1980 Code § 36-32)
ARTICLE A: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
12-6A-1: Permitted Uses
12-6A-2: Limitations On Certain Uses
12-6A-3: Special Uses
12-6A-4: Standard Use Requirements
12-6A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, in
the R-1 District except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings.
Grain farm.
Home garden.
Home occupations.
Park.
Playground.
Single-family dwellings.
(1980 Code § 36-134)
12-6A-2: LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN USES:
   A.   Accessory buildings and uses, if detached, shall be located no closer
than two feet (2') to any rear yard or interior side yard but not in the front
sixty feet (60') of the lot.
   B.   Home occupations shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit. Only one sign, not greater than one
square foot, shall be permitted. No display of goods or services shall be
visible from the outside.
(1980 Code § 36-135) (Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
12-6A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of chapter
3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements hereof are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-136)
12-6A-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be eight thousand five hundred
(8,500) square feet.
   B.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be
seventy five feet (75').
   C.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements shall be:
      1.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Each side yard: At least ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot.
      3.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
      4.   Where a lot is at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, the
building shall also be set back to allow for a site line.
   D.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
   E.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area allowable per dwelling is one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
   F.   Open Space: The minimum open space is seventy percent (70%) of the lot.
Open spaces do include required drive and parking space.
   G.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of open area
shall require one deciduous tree; provided, that not more than five (5) trees
shall be required on any one lot. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch (1")
in diameter.
(1980 Code § 36-137)
ARTICLE B: R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
12-6B-1: Permitted Uses
12-6B-2: Limitations On Certain Uses
12-6B-3: Special Uses
12-6B-4: Standard Use Requirements; Exemptions
12-6B-1: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, in
the R-2 District except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings.
Grain farm.
Home garden.
Home occupations.
Park.
Playground.
Single-family dwellings.
(1980 Code § 36-142)
12-6B-2: LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN USES:
   A.   Accessory buildings and uses, if detached, shall be located no closer
than two feet (2') to any rear yard or interior side yard but not in the front
sixty feet (60') of the lot.
   B.   Home occupations shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit. Only one sign, not greater than two one
square foot, shall be permitted. No display of goods or services shall be
visible from the outside.
(1980 Code § 36-143) (Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
12-6B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of chapter
3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements hereof are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-144)
12-6B-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Standard Use Requirements:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand five hundred
(6,500) square feet.
      2.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be
fifty feet (50').
      3.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements shall be:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Each side yard: At least ten percent (10%) of the width of the
lot.
         c.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
         d.   Where a lot is at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
the building shall also be set back to allow for a site line.
      4.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
      5.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area allowable per dwelling is nine
hundred (900) square feet.
      6.   Open Space: The minimum open space is fifty percent (50%) of the
lot. Open spaces do include required drive and parking space.
      7.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of open area
shall require one deciduous tree; provided, that not more than five (5) trees
shall be required on any one lot. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch in
(1") diameter.
(1980 Code § 36-145)
   B.   Exemptions: Where the parcel in question is a fifty foot (50') corner
lot platted prior to 1961, the Building Official may waive the setback for a
site line on one of the two (2) adjoining streets but shall require sufficient
setback to allow for vehicles approaching the intersection of the two (2)
streets to have a reasonably clear view of oncoming traffic into such
intersection.
(Ord. 1451, 12-17-1984)
ARTICLE C: R-3 DUPLEX DISTRICT
Section
12-6C-1: Permitted Uses
12-6C-2: Limitations On Certain Uses
12-6C-3: Special Uses
12-6C-4: Standard Use Requirements; Exemptions
12-6C-1: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, in
the R-3 District except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings.
Duplex.
Grain farm.
Home garden.
Home occupations.
Park.
Playground.
Single-family dwellings.
Two-family dwelling.
(1980 Code § 36-151)
12-6C-2: LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN USES:
   A.   Accessory buildings and uses, if detached, shall be located no closer
than two feet (2') to any rear yard or interior side yard but not in the front
sixty feet (60') of the lot.
   B.   Home occupations shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit. Only one sign, not greater than one
square foot, shall be permitted. No display of goods or services shall be
visible from the outside.
(1980 Code § 36-152) (Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
12-6C-3: SPECIAL USES:
A special use may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements hereof are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-153)
12-6C-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Standard Use Requirements:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square
feet.
      2.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be
fifty feet (50').
      3.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements shall be:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Each side yard: Six feet (6').
         c.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
         d.   Where a lot is at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
the building shall also be set back to allow for a site line.
         e.   Where a duplex resident is so subdivided that each of the two (2)
units in such duplex is in a separate lot or parcel, no side yard shall be
required on the side of the duplex living unit connected with the other side.
      4.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
      5.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area allowable per dwelling is seven
hundred (700) square feet.
      6.   Open Space: The minimum open space is thirty percent (30%) of the
lot. Open space does include required drive and parking space.
      7.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of open area
shall require one deciduous tree; provided, that not more than five (5) trees
shall be required on any one lot. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch (1")
in diameter.
(1980 Code § 36-154)
   B.   Exemptions: Where the parcel in question is a fifty foot (50') corner
lot platted prior to 1961, the Building Official may waive the setback for a
site line on one of the two (2) adjoining streets but shall require sufficient
setback to allow for vehicles approaching the intersection of the two (2)
streets to have a reasonably clear view of oncoming traffic into such
intersection.
(Ord. 1451, 12-17-1984)
ARTICLE D: R-4 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section
12-6D-1: Permitted Uses
12-6D-2: Limitations On Certain Uses
12-6D-3: Special Uses
12-6D-4: Standard Use Requirements; Exemptions
12-6D-1: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, in
the R-4 District except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings.
Condominium.
Duplex.
Laundry houses.
Multi-family dwelling.
Park.
(1980 Code § 36-160)
12-6D-2: LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN USES:
   A.   Accessory buildings and uses, if detached, shall be located no closer
than two feet (2') to any rear yard or interior side yard but not in the front
sixty feet (60') of the lot.
   B.   Home occupations shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit. Only one sign, not greater than one
square foot, shall be permitted. No display of goods or services shall be
visible from the outside.
(1980 Code § 36-161) (Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
12-6D-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of chapter
3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements hereof are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-162)
12-6D-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Standard Use Requirements:
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square
feet.
      2.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be
fifty feet (50').
      3.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements shall be:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty feet (20').
         b.   Side yard: Ten feet (10').
         c.   Rear yard: Ten feet (10').
         d.   Where a lot is at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
the building shall also be set back to allow for a site line.
      4.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
      5.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area allowable per dwelling shall be
none.
      6.   Open Space: The minimum open space is thirty percent (30%) of the
lot. Open space does include required drive and parking space.
      7.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area
shall require one deciduous tree; provided, that not more than five (5) trees
shall be required on any one lot. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch (1")
in diameter.
(1980 Code § 36-163)
   B.   Exemptions: Where the parcel in question is a fifty foot (50') corner
lot platted prior to 1961, the Building Official may waive the setback for a
site line on one of the two (2) adjoining streets but shall require sufficient
setback to allow for vehicles approaching the intersection of the two (2)
streets to have a reasonably clear view of oncoming traffic into such
intersection.
(Ord. 1451, 12-17-1984)
CHAPTER 7: RMH MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
Section
12-7-1: Definitions
12-7-2: Permitted Uses
12-7-3: Special Uses
12-7-4: Requirements
12-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MOBILE HOME: A moveable or portable unit, designed and constructed to be towed
or driven on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, and designed to be
connected to utilities for occupancy and to provide complete independent living
facilities including provisions for cooking, sleeping, and sanitation. The term
includes units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed or telescoped
when being towed and then be expanded to provide additional cubic capacity, and
units composed of two (2) or more separately towable components designed to be
joined into one integral unit capable of being again separated in components
for repeated towing. Removal of wheels, towing devices, or any other
alterations does not qualify a mobile home as a conventional single-family
dwelling unless such alterations enable the unit to meet the Federal Housing
Authority’s “Minimum Property Standards for One and Two Living Units”, latest
edition. The definition of a "mobile home" shall include any of the five (5)
uses permitted in section
12-7-2 of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A contiguous parcel of land planned and improved for the
placement of two (2) or more mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK SERVICE BUILDING: A permanent structure housing laundry,
recreation, office, sanitation or other community facilities as required in
mobile home parks for the use by mobile home park occupants.
MOBILE HOME SITE: A clearly designated parcel of land intended for the
placement of an individual mobile home and for the exclusive use of its
occupants.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of an individual mobile home site which has been
constructed for the placement of a mobile home.
(1980 Code § 36-170)
12-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or land shall be used, and
no building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered in
the Mobile Home Park District, otherwise known as the RMH District, except for
one or more of the following uses:
Commercial type of motor home.
House trailers.
Mobile home park service buildings.
Mobile homes.
Recreational vehicles.
(1980 Code § 36-169)
12-7-3: SPECIAL USES:
A special use may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements hereof are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-171)
12-7-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site Size; Access: The site shall be at least two thousand one hundred
(2,100) square feet in area, and each lot must face or abut upon a private or
public driveway or roadway of not less than sixteen feet (16') in width, which
driveway or roadway shall have unobstructed access to a public street or alley.
   B.   Open Space: There shall be an open space of at least ten feet (10')
adjacent to the sides of every mobile home and at least five feet (5') adjacent
to the ends of every mobile home.
   C.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area shall
require one tree. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch (1") in diameter.
   D.   Required Parking: There shall be one parking space per dwelling unit
minimum (see chapter 12 of this title for off-street parking regulations).
   E.   Floor Area And Age: No “mobile home”, as herein defined, shall be
permitted in this District, unless the floor area thereof is four hundred fifty
(450) square feet or more and unless said mobile home is not over five (5)
years old when first placed in use in the District; provided, that the special
use procedures may be used to secure a modification of said requirements.
   F.   Other Requirements: Except as otherwise herein provided, all mobile
homes hereinafter brought into the City or placed in use in the City shall meet
and comply with the Minimum Standards for Mobile Homes, as may be from time to
time promulgated and published by The American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) of 1430 Broadway, New York, New York 10017.
(1980 Code § 36-172)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
11-13-4 of this Code
CHAPTER 8: P PUBLIC USE DISTRICT
Section
12-8-1: Permitted Uses
12-8-2: Excluded Uses
12-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected, converted,
enlarged or structurally altered, in the P District, except for one or more of
the following uses:
Any public use by any governmental body.
Courthouse.
Parks.
Public jail.
Recreational uses.
Schools.
Sewage disposal plant.
Swimming pools.
(1980 Code § 36-175)
12-8-2: EXCLUDED USES:
Any use not herein specifically provided is hereby excluded in this District.
(1980 Code § 36-176)
CHAPTER 9: BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
12-9-1: Uses Excluded In All Business Districts
12-9-1: USES EXCLUDED IN ALL BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
The following uses are specifically excluded from Business Districts:
Any use which creates detrimental noise, odor, fumes, dust, waste, or vibration
causing unlawful annoyance or damage, which creates abnormal traffic
congestion, or which is dangerous because of high combustible materials used or
manufactured; and any of the following uses:
Animal feedlots.
Bottling works.
Bulk storage of petroleum products.
Coal yards.
Contractor plant or storage yard.
Equipment storage yards.
Hatcheries.
Junkyards.
Livestock sales yards.
Manufacturing and industrial uses, except those incidental to an accepted use.
Milk receiving and/or processing.
Mobile homes.
Motor vehicle wrecking yards.
Poultry dressing.
Trucking depots.
(1980 Code §§ 36-180, 36-187)
ARTICLE A: B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section
12-9A-1: Permitted Uses
12-9A-2: Limitations On Certain Uses
12-9A-3: Special Uses
12-9A-4: Standard Use Requirements
12-9A-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the B-1 District or Neighborhood Business
District:
Any retail or commercial business use not excluded in section
12-9-1 of this chapter; and all residential uses, except those of mobile homes
or trailers.
(1980 Code § 36-179)
12-9A-2: LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN USES:
Residential uses shall be subject to the following conditions and standards:
   A.   Single-family homes shall be subject to the standard use requirements
for R-2 Districts as provided by section
12-6B-4 of this title.
   B.   Duplex residential homes shall be subject to the standard use
requirements for R-3 Districts as provided by section
12-6C-4 of this title.
   C.   Multi-family residential homes shall be subject to the standard use
requirements for R-4 Districts as provided by section
12-6D-4 of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-181) (Ord. 2573, 5-26-2020)
12-9A-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of chapter
3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements hereof are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-182)
12-9A-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS:
The following standard use requirements must be observed for B-1 Districts:
   A.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square
feet. Any lot exclusively used for the operation of a cell tower shall be
excluded from the six thousand (6,000) square foot minimum lot size
requirement.
(1980 Code § 36-183; amd. Ord. 2258, 3-11-2008)
   B.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be fifty
feet (50').
   C.   Front Yard: The building front shall be set back to allow for the
existing site line or where no site line may be established, a distance of
twenty five feet (25'). This will be the minimum requirements.
   D.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
   E.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area allowable per dwelling shall be
none.
   F.   Open Space: The minimum open space is twenty percent (20%) of the lot.
Open space does include required drive and parking areas.
   G.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area shall
require one deciduous tree; provided, that not more than five (5) trees shall
be required on any one lot. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch (1") in
diameter.
(1980 Code § 36-183)
ARTICLE B: B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section
12-9B-1: Permitted Uses
12-9B-2: Limitations On Certain Permitted Uses
12-9B-3: Special Uses
12-9B-4: Standard Use Requirements
12-9B-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the B-2 or Central Business District:
Public library and any retail, commercial or professional business use not
excluded in section
12-9-1 of this chapter; and all residential uses, except those of mobile homes
or trailers.
(1980 Code § 36-186)
12-9B-2: LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN PERMITTED USES:
Residential uses above the first floor of businesses may be permitted if
parking is provided as per residential requirements.
(1980 Code § 36-188)
12-9B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of chapter
3, article C of this title; provided, that the minimum standard use
requirements in this article are observed.
(1980 Code § 36-189)
12-9B-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS:
The following standard use requirements must be observed for B-2 Districts:
   A.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be none.
   B.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be none.
   C.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements shall be none.
   D.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
   E.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area shall be none.
   F.   Open Space: The minimum open space shall be fifty (50) square feet.
   G.   Parking: No parking is required, except for residential uses.
(1980 Code § 36-190)
CHAPTER 10: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A: M-1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Section
12-10A-1: Permitted Uses
12-10A-2: Excluded Uses
12-10A-3: Special Uses
12-10A-4: Standard Use Requirements
12-10A-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Manufacturing District:
All uses permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts.
All uses permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Business Districts.
All uses excluded in the B-1 and B-2 Business Districts, except those uses
permitted in Mobile Home Districts.
Industrial and manufacturing uses, not hereinafter prohibited.
Residential uses above the first floor of businesses.
(1980 Code §§ 36-194 and 36-196)
12-10A-2: EXCLUDED USES:
The following uses are excluded in the M-1 Manufacturing Districts:
All mobile homes and any uses which are dangerous because of high combustible
or inflammable material used or manufactured or which, due to the emission or
accumulation within the corporate limits of fumes, dust, offensive refuses,
smoke or gas, injure or impair, to a marked degree, the public health or
safety.
(1980 Code § 36-195)
12-10A-3: SPECIAL USES:
A special use may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 3, article C of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-197)
12-10A-4: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS:
The standard use requirements for the M-1 District are as follows:
   A.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand five hundred
(6,500) square feet.
   B.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be sixty
five feet (65').
   C.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:
      1.   Side Yards: Each side yard shall be six feet (6').
      2.   Rear Yard: The rear yard shall be ten feet (10'), excluding any
public alley or way.
   D.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators,
assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials, the
height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
   E.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area shall be none.
   F.   Open Space: The minimum open space shall be fifty percent (50%) of the
lot. Open space does include required drive and parking areas and side and rear
yards.
   G.   Required Trees: Each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area shall
require one deciduous tree; provided, that not more than five (5) trees shall
be required on any one lot. Each tree shall be a minimum of one inch (1") in
diameter.
(1980 Code § 36-198)
ARTICLE B: M-2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Section
12-10B-1: Permitted And Prohibited Uses
12-10B-2: Special Uses
12-10B-3: Standard Use Requirements
12-10B-1: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Unless otherwise provided in this title, no building or
land shall be used, and no building shall be erected, converted, enlarged or
structurally altered in the M-2 District except manufacturing uses:
   B.   Prohibited Uses: No residential or retail business use shall be
allowed.
(1980 Code § 36-202)
12-10B-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be granted herein in accordance with the provisions of chapter
3, article C of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-203)
12-10B-3: STANDARD USE REQUIREMENTS:
Standard use requirements for the M-2 District are as follows:
   A.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be six thousand five hundred
(6,500) square feet.
   B.   Average Width Of Lot: The minimum average width of a lot shall be sixty
five feet (65').
   C.   Yards: The minimum yard requirements are the same as in the M-
1 District.
   D.   Building Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty
five feet (35'), except in the cases of radio or TV towers, stacks, elevators
or assemblages, or other structures wholly constructed of fireproof materials,
the height thereof shall not exceed sixty feet (60').
   E.   Floor Area: The minimum floor area shall be none.
   F.   Open Space: The minimum open space shall be twenty percent (20%) of the
lot. Open space does include required drive and parking areas and side and rear
yards.
(1980 Code § 36-204)
CHAPTER 11: OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND MOBILE HOME DISTRICTS
Section
12-11-1: Floor Area For Sleeping Rooms
12-11-2: Prohibited Areas For Sleeping Purposes
12-11-3: Temporary/Transient Residents
12-11-1: FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES:
In all structures in all residential districts and mobile home districts, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least
seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet
of floor area for each occupant thereof.
(Ord. 2080, 2-17-2003)
12-11-2: PROHIBITED AREAS FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES:
In all structures in all residential districts and mobile home districts,
kitchens, attics, dining rooms, unfinished basements, garages, bathrooms and
interior public areas shall not be used or occupied for sleeping purposes.
(Ord. 2080, 2-17-2003)
12-11-3: TEMPORARY/TRANSIENT RESIDENTS:
In all structures in all residential districts and mobile home districts, no
more than five (5) lodgers or boarders for no more than ninety (90) days in any
one 180-day period in addition to the occupying family may occupy a space
designed for a single family. This section shall not prohibit the establishment
of residential care facilities when licensed by the State of Illinois and
allowed by ordinance.
(Ord. 2080, 2-17-2003)
CHAPTER 12: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Section
12-12-1: Plans And Specifications
12-12-2: Design Of Parking Area
12-12-3: Parking Space Requirements
12-12-4: Number Of Parking Spaces
12-12-5: Maintenance Of Facilities
12-12-1: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented
satisfactory evidence to the Building Official that the off-street parking
facilities required by the provisions of this chapter will be provided and
maintained. Such evidence shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
detailed plans and specifications of the proposed off-street parking
facilities.
(1980 Code § 36-64)
12-12-2: DESIGN OF PARKING AREA:
   A.   Surfacing:
      1.   All open off-street parking areas, roads, and drives, except those
located on the same lot of a single-family residential structure and used as
such, shall be improved as follows: (i) a concrete surface course having a
depth of not less than six inches (6") over a compacted gravel base course
having a depth of not less than four inches (4"); (ii) an asphalt surface
course having a depth of not less than three and one-half inches (3.5") over a
compacted gravel base course having a depth of not less than eight inches (8");
a tar and chip surface course over a compacted gravel base course having a
depth of not less than twelve inches (12"); or, other comparable hard surface
all-weather dustless material having such depth as may be approved by the city
engineer. The requirements of this section shall be met for the entire off-
street parking area for all new construction projects or construction projects
constituting a “substantial improvement,” whether or not located on the same
lot as the principal structure or use, as well as the creation of or expansion
of any off-street parking areas.
      2.   All driveways and parking areas located on the same lot of a single-
family residential structure and used as such shall be improved with compacted
gravel, or equivalent material with the approval of the city engineer, having a
depth of not less than six (6"); provided, however, that portion of any
driveway or parking area in the parkway (i.e., located between the street and
the property line) shall be improved as follows: (i) a concrete surface course
having a depth of not less than six inches (6") over a compacted gravel base
course having a depth of not less than four inches (4"); or (ii) an asphalt
surface course having a depth of not less than three and one-half inches (3.5")
over a compacted gravel base course having a depth of not less than eight
inches (8"). The requirements of this section shall be met for the entire
driveway and/or parking area for all new construction projects or construction
projects constituting a “substantial improvement,” as well as the creation of
or expansion of any driveway or parking area.
(Ord. 2306, 10-27-2009)
   B.   Access: Access to parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as will least
interfere with the movement of traffic. Driveways shall be constructed in
accordance with Section
9-3-1 of this Code.
   C.   Screening And Landscaping (see also subsection
13-3-5H9e of this Code): All open off-street parking areas and access driveways
that are four (4) spaces or more, even if for residential use, and those spaces
and access driveways that serve uses other than residential, shall be
effectively screened along the entire boundary by a wall or solid fence or a
densely planted compact hedge along any side which adjoins, or is directly
across a street or alley from, a property in a residential district. The public
right-of-way between the curb and the property line shall not be screened.
   D.   Penalty: Any person found in violation of any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that said violation continues
shall be considered to be a separate offense.
(1980 Code §§ 36-61 and 36-62; amd. Ord. 2258, 3-11-2008; Ord. 2306, 10-27-
2009; Ord. 2562, 2-25-2020; Ord. 2693, 11-28-2023)
12-12-3: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   One hundred eighty (180) square feet of lot or floor area which has a
means of ingress or egress from an alley or street shall be deemed parking
space for one vehicle.
   B.   The space shall not occupy any part of any required front yard, but
where open, may be included as part of a required open space for side or rear
yard.
   C.   On corner or through lots, parking space may not be included as part of
required yards lying adjacent to either street.
   D.   Lights used to illuminate parking lots shall be so arranged as to
reflect lighting away from the adjoining premises.
(1980 Code § 36-63)
12-12-4: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   For all new construction to be used for residential purposes in any
district, there shall be provided at least one off-street parking space for
each dwelling unit.
(1980 Code § 36-58)
   B.   All Other Uses Except The Central Business District:
      1.   Provide one off-street parking space for each three hundred (300)
square feet of building area in the B-1 District (retail) and one space for
each five hundred (500) square feet of building area in the M Districts.
      2.   Off-street parking requirements may be met on a separate lot, if
within two hundred feet (200') of the lot in question and under the same
ownership.
      3.   To encourage continued business growth in the Central Business
District, no off-street parking shall be required, except for residential uses.
      4.   If the owner objects to the requirements of one space for each three
hundred (300) or five hundred (500) square feet in subsection A of this
section, as the case may be, the owner may file an application for a variance
in accordance with section
12-3A-11 of this title.
(1980 Code § 36-59)
12-12-5: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Off-street parking spaces required by this chapter shall be maintained in good
condition, so long as the structure or use for which they are provided exists.
(1980 Code § 36-65)
CHAPTER 13: SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, CANOPIES AND AWNINGS
Section
12-13-1: Short Title
12-13-2: Purpose
12-13-3: Definitions
12-13-4: Permit Requirements
12-13-5: Special Provisions
12-13-6: Construction And Maintenance Standards
12-13-7: Residential Zoning Districts
12-13-8: Non-Residential Zoning Districts
12-13-9: Holiday Exceptions
12-13-10: Prohibited Signs
12-13-11: Nonconforming Signs
12-13-12: Nuisance And Abandoned Signs
12-13-13: Penalty
12-13-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Watseka Sign Ordinance."
(1980 Code § 39-146) (Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the use of signs in the City of
Watseka under circumstances that are safe, aesthetically pleasing, compatible
with their surroundings, and legible in the circumstances in which they are
intended to be seen. This chapter recognizes the need for a well-maintained and
attractive physical appearance of the community, the need to preserve the non-
commercial character of residential neighborhoods, and an allowance for signage
that will be conducive to competitive commerce where applicable. Further, this
chapter is adopted for the purpose of reducing sign or advertising distractions
that may increase traffic accidents by distracting driver attention from the
roadway. o provision of this chapter is intended regulate signs on the basis of
content. Finally, no provision of this chapter is intended to favor or permit
commercial speech at the expense of non-commercial speech.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Photographs of signs are
meant for demonstrative purposes only, and are not intended to exclude
deviations in style.
A-FRAME SIGN. A sidewalk sign typically constructed of wood, metal, or plastic,
which is hinged or attached at the top and wide at the bottom to form a shape
similar to the letter “A."
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2906.jpg]
 
ABANDONED SIGN. A sign or support structure:
   A.   That is located upon a lot on which the principal building is vacant
and not actively listed for sale or lease for a period of ninety (90)
consecutive days or longer at any given time; or
   B.   That is located upon a lot on which the principal building is vacant
and said sign or support structure violates this Watseka Sign Ordinance or is
not being maintained in accordance with the provision of this Code fourteen
(14) days following a notice from the City of such violation or maintenance
issue irrespective of whether said building is actively listed for sale or
lease.
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE. A flag, propeller, spinner, streamer, beacon, search
light, inflatable sign, or similar device that is designed or used for the
purpose of attracting attention.
AWNING. A roof-like structure usually covered in a fabric that projects from a
wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a door or window from the
elements.
AWNING SIGN. A sign painted on, printed on, or otherwise permanently attached
to the surface of an awning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2908.jpg]
 
BANNER SIGN. A sign constructed of light-weight flexible material with no
enclosing framework, and typically tethered or attached to a structure or poles
by wires or rope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2910.jpg]
 
BEACON. A stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination,
single or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert
attention.
BENCH/SHELTER SIGN. A sign affixed to a bench or shelter located in the public
right-ofway.
CABINET SIGN. A sign of any type that has one or more plastic, acrylic, or
similar material faces (i.e., panels) enclosed by frame (i.e., cabinet).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2912.jpg]
 
CANOPY SIGN. A sign painted or permanently attached to a canopy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2914.jpg]
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign with changeable copy that is manually changed,
such as a bulletin board or marquee sign, or that is changed by incorporating
video display, flip-disks, incandescent lamps, fluorescent lamps, fiber optics,
light-emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays, plasma displays, field emission
displays, or any other mechanical or light-emitting matrix to convey an
animated or changing copy or image.
CODE. The Watseka City Code.
COMMISSIONER. The Building Official of the City of Watseka.
COPY. The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or changeable
letters, numbers, or symbols.
ELECTRICAL RACEWAY. A utilitarian metal channel for the electrical components
of an illuminated sign and not designed as an architectural feature.
ERECT or CONSTRUCT. To affix, attach, build, construct, erect, hang, paint,
place, or suspend.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated from an exterior light source
such as a flood lamp.
FEATHER FLAG. A vertical sign, usually cons1stmg of fabric, which contains a
harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground for support.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2916.jpg]
 
FLASHING SIGN. Any sign that contains an intermittent or flashing light source,
or which produces the illusion of intermittent or flashing light.
FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is completely or principally supported by one
or more poles, posts or other support anchored to the ground, and which is
separate from and not attached to a building or other structure.
GROUND LEVEL. The average natural grade of a property.
GROUND SIGN. A sign which is permanently secured to the ground and supported by
one or more uprights, poles, braces, or other structural components.
HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from ground level to the highest point
of a sign structure.
HOME OCCUPATION. A licensed occupation or profession taking place at a
residence by a member of the residence.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign with an artificial light source intended for the
purpose of decorating, outlining, accentuating, or brightening the sign area.
INFLATABLE SIGN. A three-dimensional object filled or activated by moving or
non-moving air or other gas, and which is located, attached, or tethered to the
ground or a structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2918.jpg]
 
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated from an interior light source.
LUMINOUS TUBE SIGN. A sign that consists of or is illuminated by exposed
electrically charged gas-filled tubing, or by fiber optics.
MARQUEE. A roof-like structure that projects over an entrance to a building,
but not supported by the ground.
MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to a marquee.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2922.jpg]
 
MONUMENT SIGN. A free-standing sign supported by a solid architectural element
at its base.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2926.jpg]
 
OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any permanent sign or sign structure that:
   A.   Is not owned solely in the name of the fee simple owner of the lot;
   B.   Is located on a lot having no principal building or structure
authorized for human occupancy either residentially or commercially unless the
lot on which the sign is erected is under common ownership with an immediately
adjoining lot satisfying the principal building or structure characteristic;
   C.   Is erected or maintained by any person that is party to any written or
oral lease, easement, license or other arrangement with the fee simple owner of
said lot (or any other person authorized by or through the fee simple owner of
the lot) and who otherwise lacks an ownership or possessory interest in the
principal building or structure satisfying the requirements of subsection B.,
or a non-common unit thereof; or
   D.   Upon which any space is provided, through sale, lease or otherwise, to
a third-party end-user in a time intervals of less than one (1) year.
ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that is not an off-premises sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2924.jpg]
 
PAINTED WALL SIGN. A sign that is applied with paint or similar subsimagetance
directly on to the surface of a wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2928.jpg]
 
PEDESTRIAN WALL SIGN. Any sign permanently attached or affixed to a building
that is intended to be seen by pedestrians only.
PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign permanently attached or affixed to the ground, a
building, or other structure.
POLE SIGN. A free standing sign supported by a pole or poles and designed to
permit pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereunder.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2930.jpg]
 
PORTABLE MESSAGE BOARD. A portable sign of which the characters are capable of
being changed manually, digitally, or by other means.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2932.jpg]
 
POST SIGN. A free-standing sign mounted on one or more support posts, as
differentiated from a pole sign based on the supports serving as an essential
design/decorative element of the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2924.jpg]
 
PROJECTING SIGN. A sign that is attached to and projects from the wall of a
building a distance greater than the depth of the sign structure. Projecting
signs typically take the form of a blade sign or hanging sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2936.jpg]
 
PROJECTOR SIGN. A sign that is projected onto the surface of a building using
an intense source of illumination.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2938.jpg]
 
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, parkway, sidewalk, or other property
dedicated for public use.
PYLON SIGN. A free-standing sign that is supported by two (2) or more uprights,
poles, or braces in or upon the ground that are not a part of a building or
enclosed within the exterior walls of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2940.jpg]
 
ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained on the roof or parapet
of any building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2942.jpg]
 
SIDEWALK SIGN. Any portable free-standing sign supported by braces or legs, but
not a portable message board, which is easily moved without mechanical means.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2944.jpg]
 
SIGHT TRIANGLE.
   A.   On a corner lot, the area marked by a point at which the two (2) street
curb lines intersect, measuring back twenty feet (20') on each street line, and
drawing a line across the two (2) back points to fo1m a triangulated area; and
   B.   On any lot, including corner lots, the area marked by a point of
intersection of a driveway and street, measuring back ten feet (10') on each
plane, and drawing a line across the two (2) back points to form a triangulated
area.
SIGN. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure, including its component
pa1ts, that draws attention to an object, product, place, activity, opinion,
idea, person, establishment, institution, organization, or place of business,
or that identifies or promotes the interest of any person and that is intended
to be viewed from any public street, road, highway, right-of-way or parking
space.
SIGN AREA. The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure which
encloses the sign face.
SIGN FACE. The area of a sign on which the copy is placed or contained.
SIGN STRUCTURE. The sign face, support structure, and framework.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure or material that supports or is capable of
supporting or keeping a sign in a stationary position, including foundation.
TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that is not permanently affixed to the ground, building,
or other structure. Typically, such signs include, but are not limited to, yard
signs, sidewalk signs, window signs, and banner signs.
WALL SIGN. A sign attached to or erected against a wall of a building with the
exposed face of the sign being parallel to the plane of the wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2946.jpg]
WINDOW SIGN. A sign or graphic that is installed inside, painted upon, or
placed against a widow for purposes of viewing from the outside of the
premises.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2948.jpg]
 
YARD SIGN. A sign, placard, or banner affixed to the ground by an H-frame,
stake, post, or other means.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/416952fc97d310bbff37c47f7fde2a93de5827bd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2950.jpg]
 
(1980 Code § 39-147) (Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
repair a permanent sign, a sign that will have electrical service, or any type
of sign in non-residential zoning district other than a yard sign, without
having obtained a permit therefor.
   B.   Application. Persons seeking a sign permit shall file an application
with the Commissioner, which shall consist of the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, which shall be
confirmed through the applicant’s driver’s license or state identification
card, articles of incorporation, or other legally recognized form of
identification;
      2.   Proof of ownership or possessory interest in the land (or written
authority from such persons) on which the sign is to be erected;
      3.   The address and legal description of the property on which the sign
is to be erected;
      4.   Identification of the type of sign to be erected;
      5.   Names and addresses of any contractors employed by the applicant to
erect the sign;
      6.   Building plans signed and sealed by a licensed design professional
(i.e., architect or engineer) setting forth the specifications for the
construction of the sign (including size, wind pressure and dead load
specifications) and containing such information sufficient for the Commissioner
to verify compliance with the standards of this chapter;
      7.   Site plans signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor showing the
location of the sign in relation to buildings, structures, property lines,
streets, parking lots, set-backs, and other signs, and otherwise including
information sufficient for the Commissioner to verify compliance with the
standards of this chapter;
      8.   Detailed, scaled drawings of the building elevation where a wall
sign will be placed;
      9.   Completed electrical contractor’s certification (for signs having
electricity);
      10.   Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal,
state or local law, the applicant is required to have in order to erect a sign;
      11.   Proof that the sign does not constitute an off-premises sign; and
      12.   For any sign that will extend over a public right-of-way, a
liability insurance policy covering all damage or injury that might be caused
by each of said signs, or certificate of insurance therefor, issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois and
satisfactory to the City, with limits of liability of not less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage and five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injuries. The City, its officers, agents and
employees shall be named as additional parties insured. Such liability
insurance policy shall be maintained in force throughout the life of the
permit, and if at any time it shall not be in full force, the permit shall be
revoked by the City.
   C.   Permit Fees. The fee for any sign permit based on value of the work as
set forth in the “City of Watseka Building Permit Fee – Non Residential”
schedule maintained in the office of the Commissioner.
   D.   Review. The Commissioner shall complete an application review within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. An applicant may obtain his/her
permit from the Building Department once advised that a decision to grant the
permit has been issued. A record of all permits issued and denied pursuant to
this chapter shall be maintained by the Commissioner. Any permit not
specifically approved or denied within thirty (30) days of the application’s
submission shall be deemed denied as failing to comply with the provisions of
this chapter unless both parties agree to an extension in writing. All
extensions shall be signed by the Commissioner and the applicant and shall
specify the date upon which the extension is to terminate. If the Commissioner
has not granted or denied an application upon the expiration of the time period
so specified, the applicant may either consider such failure as a denial of the
permit or agree to a further extension of time. If an application is
incomplete, the Commissioner shall allow the applicant an opportunity to
provide the information necessary for his/her review.
   E.   Permit Denial. A sign permit shall only be denied if the application or
sign, as proposed, fails to comply with the standards set forth in this
chapter. The Commissioner shall not use the content of a sign as a basis for
his/her decision to deny a permit. In the case of a denial, the Commissioner
shall advise the applicant why the sign cannot be constructed as proposed. The
notification shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. Mail at the address
contained on the application. The notification shall be postmarked no later
than three (3) business days subsequent to the expiration of the review period.
The basis for any denial shall be noted on the application.
   F.   Appeals. An applicant denied a permit under this chapter may appeal the
Commissioner’s decision to the City Council for the City of Watseka. Said
appeal shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and stamped no later than
thirty (30) days after the date indicated on the Commissioner’s denial letter
or the final date upon which the Commissioner’s review has expired if no letter
is received. Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Clerk shall immediately send
notice to the City Council of the appeal. Within fourteen (14) days subsequent
to the receipt of an appeal, the City Clerk shall send notice to the applicant
setting forth the date, time and location of the appeal hearing. The appeal
shall be held within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the applicant’s
appeal. The review of the appeal by the City Council shall be limited to
whether the proposed sign conforms to the Watseka City Code. The City Council
may only reverse the decision of the Commissioner upon a majority vote of the
elected officials then holding office. Upon a reversal, the Commissioner shall
be obligated to issue a permit to the applicant within seven (7) days. An
applicant may appeal the decision to deny a permit made by the City Council
through the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.
   G.   Permit Expiration. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance. Permits may be extended in thirty (30)-day increments by
the Commissioner upon a showing that the permittee has diligently pursued
construction while the permit was valid, and upon the payment of a fee in an
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per thirty (30)-day extension. If work
authorized under a sign permit has not commenced within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the date of issuance of that permit, the sign permit shall become
void.
   H.   Permit Revocation. The Commissioner is authorized to revoke any sign
permit upon a permit holder’s failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
(1980 Code §§ 39-150 through 39-153; amd. Ord. 2567, 4-28-2021; Ord. 2715, 8-
27-2024)
12-13-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Inapplicability. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to govern
or limit the erection of the following types of signs:
      1.   Traffic control devices, including parking signs, on private
property provided the same conform to the most recent version of the National
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as
supplemented by IDOT;
      2.   Interior signs that are not visible from the exterior of a building;
      3.   Architectural features, or symbols or murals embedded in
architectural elements of a building;
      4.   Manufacturer marks;
      5.   Signs required to be posted in accordance with applicable laws;
      6.   Signs erected by the State of Illinois, County of Iroquois, or the
City of Watseka; and
      7.   Signs erected by a public utility company.
   B.   On-Premises Signs. Only on-premises signs are authorized to be erected
by this chapter.
   C.   Measurements. The sign area shall be computed by measuring the frame,
cabinet, fixture, or design including all ornamentation, super graphics, or
other decoration used to attract attention that can be enclosed in no more than
four (4) lines drawn at right angles. In the case of “skeleton” or “cut-out”
letters, or for signs placed on a wall without any borders, the sign area shall
be the sum of the area of all letters, words, logos, or symbols within a single
continuous perimeter with no more than four (4) lines drawn at right angles.
Only one face of a double-faced sign shall be counted in computing the
permitted area of a sign. Double-faced (back-to-back) signs shall be regarded
as a single sign when the sign is mounted on a single structure, and the
distance between each sign face does not exceed two feet (2’) at any one point.
If the sign is multi-faced, then each face shall be counted in computing the
permitted area of a sign. Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly
incidental to the sign shall not be computed as sign area.
   D.   Illumination. Sign illumination shall not interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjacent properties, create a public nuisance, or create public
safety hazards. Exterior light sources shall be shielded from view and directed
to illuminate only the sign face. Any illumination of a sign shall be constant
and not flashing. Internal illumination is permitted only if the sign
background is opaque and the only portion of the sign that appears as
illuminated is the cabinet, actual lettering, trademark, or logo. Electrical
raceways shall not extend beyond the outside edges of the sign copy and shall
be painted to match the color of the background on which they are placed. The
light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness or
directed in a manner that will create a negative impact on properties in direct
line of sight to the sign. Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in
a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.
Reflective-type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed fifteen (15) watts
shall not be used on the exterior surface of signs so that the face of the bulb
or lamp is exposed to a public right-of-way or adjacent property. Lights
sources shall utilize energy-efficient features to the greatest extent
possible.
   E.   Changeable Copy Signs. Only free-standing permanent signs may
incorporate changeable copy features. The maximum sign area devoted to a
changeable copy shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the actual total sign
area. Changeable copy signs shall not flash, blink, depict movement, or change
more frequently than once every sixty (60) seconds.
   F.   Luminous Tube Signs. Luminous tube signs are only permitted as window
signs outside of residential zoning districts, provided:
      1.   Such signs are UL listed with a maximum thirty (30) milliamps per
circuit and be designed to accommodate a dimmer in order to reduce the
brightness of the sign;
      2.   The manufacturer shall be registered with Underwriters Laboratories;
      3.   Tubing shall not exceed one-half inch (0.50”) in diameter;
      4.   Luminous tube lighting adjacent to residential uses shall not exceed
one-half foot (0.5’) candle measured at the property line;
      5.   Luminous tubes shall not be combined with any reflective materials
(e.g., mirrors, polished metal, highly glazed tiles, or other similar
materials); and
      6.   Luminous tube lighting that surrounds a window is not allowed.
   G.   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required around the base of any free-
standing permanent sign. The landscaped area shall be no smaller than the
square footage of the sign area of the sign.
   H.   Secondary Signs (non-residential zoning districts only). For each
building occupied by a single business, each façade with street frontage, and
each façade adjacent to an off-street parking area where customer access is
available (i.e., “qualifying façade”), wall, awning, canopy, and projecting
signs (in any combination) shall be permitted up to a maximum sign area of one
and one-half square feet (1.5 sq. ft.) for each linear foot of qualifying
façade, but shall not exceed a two hundred square feet (200 sq. ft.). Secondary
signs on non-qualifying façades are permitted provided the maximum sign are
shall not exceed one-half of the maximum sign area for qualifying façades.
Buildings occupied by multiple businesses shall be subject to the same
standards except that secondary signs shall only be permitted for those
businesses that conduct business on the ground floor of the building, and any
such sign erected by a qualifying business shall be located within the middle
fifty percent (50%) of its tenant frontage measured from lease line to lease
line.
   I.   Annual Inspections. The Commissioner, or his/her designee, shall
inspect annually, or at such other times deemed necessary, each sign regulated
under this chapter to ascertain whether the same is structurally safe or in
need of repair.
   J.   Permit Tags. All permanent signs shall have placed in a conspicuous
place a permit tag, in letters not less than one-half inch (0.50”) in height,
the month and year the sign was erected, the name and address of the permittee,
the permit number, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in
connection therewith.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-6: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Generally. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the details of an approved application and
supporting materials, as applicable, and in accordance with the building and
electrical codes adopted by the City of Watseka at the time of submission of
any application.
   B.   Wind Pressure. All permanent signs shall be constructed and designed to
withstand a wind pressure of at least forty pounds (40 lbs.) per square foot of
the net surface area and to receive dead loads as required by the building
code.
   C.   Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good repair, in a clean
and functional condition, and shall be free of chipping or peeling paint,
cracks, holes, breaks, rust or oxidation, and under no circumstances shall a
sign structure be maintained in a manner in which internal mechanisms or parts
that would typically be covered by a sign copy be and remain visible. Any parts
or features of sign that are illuminated, internally or externally, or
otherwise having electrical components shall be maintained so that all portions
of the sign and its parts and components fully function at all times.
   D.   Vacancies. No changeable copy sign shall advertise a business or tenant
that no longer occupies a principal building on which the sign is located after
ninety (90) days subsequent to the date the business or tenant ceases
operations or occupancy of the building or building space. All such changeable
copy signs shall be replaced with blank copies.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-7: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Residential Use. Signs shall be permitted on lots zoned residential and
used for residential purposes, as follows:
      1.   Permanent Signs:
         a.   Post and Monument Signs. One post or monument sign shall be
permitted in a common area at the primary access point of a lot containing a
multi-family building of three (3) or more dwelling units, a subdivision, or a
residential planned unit development. The dimensions for a monument or post
sign shall be as follows:
            (1)   The maximum sign area shall be twenty-four square feet (24
sq. ft.);
            (2)   Maximum height shall be eight feet (8’);
            (3)   The maximum average height shall be six feet (6’); and
            (4)   The maximum width of the shall not exceed one and one-half
times the average height.
   Post or monument signs shall be located within a twenty-five feet (25’) of a
paved entrance/exit to the lot, subdivision, or planned unit development, as
the case may be. Only externally illuminated signs are permitted. Cabinet signs
are prohibited.
         b.   Pedestrian Wall Signs. Multi-family buildings of three (3) or
more dwelling units having a common entrance are permitted to have one (1)
pedestrian sign having a maximum sign area of eight square feet (8 sq. ft.).
Pedestrian wall signs shall be permanently attached to the building, and
located no further than five feet (5’) from the common entrance. Pedestrian
signs may not project more than six inches (6”) from the wall on which they are
affixed. The maximum height for a pedestrian wall sign shall be one foot (1’)
below the top of the door frame of the common entrance adjacent to its
location.
         c.   Incidental Signs. Single-family residences being the location of
a licensed home occupation are permitted to have one sign mounted flush against
the wall of the residence within three feet (3’) of the residence’s address,
the sign area of which shall not exceed two square feet (2 sq. ft.). Incidental
signs shall not be illuminated. Cabinet signs are prohibited.
      2.   Temporary Signs:
         a.   Yard Signs. Not more than one (1) yard sign shall be permitted on
a lot, except that a total of two (2) yard signs shall be permitted on any lot
when the lot is being actively marketed for sale or lease, when the principal
structure thereon is being constructed or reconstructed pursuant to a validly
issued permit, or when garage sale activities are on-going on the lot. The
maximum sign area of a yard sign shall not exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.).
No yard sign shall exceed five feet (5’) in height. Yard signs shall not be
illuminated.
         b.   Banner Signs. One (1) banner sign shall be permitted on a lot for
a cumulative continuing period of time not to exceed five (5) days per calendar
year. Banner signs shall be free-standing or attached to a building or fence on
the lot. The maximum sign area for a banner sign shall not exceed twelve square
feet (12 sq. ft.). No banner sign shall exceed ten feet (10’) in height. Banner
signs shall not be erected over pedestrian or vehicular points of travel.
Banner signs shall not be illuminated.
         c.   Window Signs. Not more than two (2) window signs shall be
permitted in or upon windows fronting a public right-of-way. No window sign
shall exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of a single window pane and the total
sign area of all window signs shall not exceed more than ten percent (10%) of
the total window surface area of authorized window space. Window signs shall
not be illuminated.
   B.   Non-Residential Uses. Signs shall be permitted on lots zoned
residential, but legally used for non-residential purposes, as follows:
      1.   Permanent Signs:
         a.   Post and Monument Signs. One (1) post or monument sign shall be
permitted per lot. No post or monument signs shall be permitted on a lot having
a wall sign. The dimensions for a monument or post sign shall be as follows:
            (1)   The maximum sign area shall be twenty-four square feet (24
sq. ft.);
            (2)   Maximum height of shall be eight feet (8’);
            (3)   The maximum average height shall be six feet (6’); and
            (4)   The maximum width shall not exceed one and a half (1.5) times
the average height.
   Only externally illuminated signs are permitted. Cabinet signs are
prohibited.
         b.   Wall Signs. One (1) wall sign shall be permitted per lot on a
building, except that on a corner lot two (2) wall signs will be permitted on a
building provided they face different streets. No wall signs shall be permitted
on a lot having a post or monument sign. The maximum sign area for a wall sign
shall not exceed twenty-four square feet (24 sq. ft.). Wall signs shall be
attached parallel to the building’s exterior wall, and must not interrupt the
architectural details of the building. Wall signs shall be located only on a
building frontage and shall not extend above an eave or parapet, or above or
below a fascia on which they are located. Signs located on adjacent walls shall
be separated by a minimum of thirty feet (30’). Signs shall be placed flat
against the wall and shall not project from the wall more than required for
normal construction purposes and in no case more than twelve inches (12”).
Internally illuminated wall signs are prohibited. Cabinet signs are prohibited.
         c.   Small Signs. Two (2) small signs shall be permitted per paved
entrance/exit drive of a lot. The maximum surface area for a small sign shall
not exceed two square feet (2 sq. ft.). The maximum height of a small sign
shall be three feet (3’). Small signs shall only be permitted within five feet
(5’) of a paved entrance/exit drive.
      2.   Temporary Signs:
         a.   Yard Signs. One yard sign shall be permitted for on every lot,
and one additional yard sign shall be permitted for every one quarter (1/4)
acre of space greater than one-half (1/2) an acre. Notwithstanding the above,
one (1) additional temporary signs shall be permitted on any lot when the lot
is being actively marketed for sale, when a building or unit thereof is
actively marketed for lease, or when the principal structure thereon is being
constructed or reconstructed pursuant to a validly issued permit. The maximum
sign area of a yard sign shall not exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.), with a
total maximum cumulative sign area of all yard signs not to exceed twenty-four
square feet (24 sq. ft.). The maximum height of a yard sign shall be five feet
(5’). Yard signs shall not be illuminated.
         b.   Sidewalk Signs. Two (2) sidewalk signs, each having a sign area
not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.) and a height not to exceed four feet
(4’), shall be permitted on a lot during normal business hours for a cumulative
period of time not to exceed twenty (20) days per calendar year. Portable signs
shall not be illuminated.
         c.   Window Signs. Window signs shall be permitted in or upon the
first floor windows of the principal building of a lot fronting a public right-
of-way. Window signs shall occupy a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of a single
window pane and the total sign area of all window signs shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the total surface area of authorized window space.
         d.   Banner Signs. One (1) banner sign shall be permitted on a lot for
a cumulative continuous period of time not to exceed ten (10) days per calendar
year. Banner signs shall be free-standing or attached to a building on the lot.
The sign area for banner signs shall not exceed twelve square feet (12 sq.
ft.). The maximum height for a banner sign shall be ten feet (10’). Banner
signs shall not be erected over pedestrian or vehicular points of travel, and
shall not be illuminated.
   C.   Flags. Two flags and one flag pole shall be permitted per residentially
zoned lot. Each flag shall be a maximum of fifteen square feet (15 sq. ft.) in
area. A flag pole shall not exceed the lower of twenty-five feet (25’) in
height or the highest point of the principal building. Flag poles may be
permanently anchored to the ground or a building. Flag poles anchored to the
ground shall be centered within a landscaped planter having a radius not
smaller than the length of the flag at full extension. Flag poles anchored to a
building shall not project over a point of pedestrian or vehicular travel.
Illumination of flags is permitted.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-8:    NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Primary Signs. Not more than one pole, pylon, monument, or post sign
shall be permitted on a lot, and it shall be located no less than fifteen feet
(15’) from a building located thereon, and at least fifty feet (50’) from
another primary freestanding sign, as follows:
      1.   Pole Signs. Pole signs erected on lots abutting arterial streets
(i.e., Walnut, Lafayette, and Jefferson) shall have a maximum surface area of
one hundred fifty square feet (150 sq. ft.), and shall not exceed a height of
thirty-five feet (35’). Pole signs erected on lots in all other areas shall
have a maximum sign area of thirty-two square feet (32 sq. ft.), and shall not
exceed a height of thirty-five feet (35’). All pole signs shall have a minimum
of fifteen feet (15’) of clearance from grade to the bottom of the sign.
      2.   Pylon Signs. Pylon signs shall be permitted on lots having at least
fifty feet (50’) of frontage on an arterial street. In addition, pylon signs
are only allowed when the principal building is set back from the street
frontage property line a minimum of fifty feet (50’). The maximum sign area for
a pylon sign shall be one hundred fifty square feet (150 sq. ft.). Proportional
dimensions for a pylon sign shall be as follows:
         (a)   Maximum height is thirty feet (30’);
         (b)   Maximum width is thirty percent (30%) of height;
         (c)   Maximum leg height is thirty-three percent (33%) of height;
         (d)   Maximum leg width is twenty-five percent (25%) of width; and
         (e)   The maximum width of the opening between legs is fifty percent
(50%) of width.
   Changeable copy sign elements may be incorporated into a pylon sign provided
they do not exceed forty percent (40%) of the actual total sign area.
      3.   Monument or Post Signs. Monument or post signs shall have a maximum
sign area of forty square feet (40 sq. ft.). The proportional dimensions for a
monument or post sign shall be as follows:
         (a)   Maximum height of sign structure is eight feet (8’);
         (b)   Maximum average height of sign structure is six feet (6’); and
         (c)   Maximum width of the sign structure is one and half (1.5) times
the average height.
   B.   Secondary Signs. In addition to primary signs, the following secondary
signs shall be permitted, provided that the combined surface areas of all
secondary signs on a lot shall not exceed fifty square feet (50 sq. ft.):
      1.   Wall Signs. Wall signs shall be attached parallel to the building’s
exterior wall, and must not interrupt the architectural details of the
building. Wall signs shall be located only on a building’s frontage and shall
not extend above an eave or parapet, or above or below a fascia on which they
are located. Signs located on adjacent walls shall be separated by a minimum of
thirty feet (30’). Electrical raceways shall be integrated with the overall
design of the sign to the greatest degree. Signs shall be placed flat against
the wall and shall not project from the wall more than required for normal
construction purposes and in no case more than twelve inches (12”).
      2.   Awnings Signs. Awnings shall be limited to two colors, and shall be
installed so that the clearance from grade to the bottom of the awning is not
less than eight feet six inches (8’6”). Awnings shall be allowed for first-
story occupancies only. Lettering, logos, symbols, and graphics are allowed on
up to fifty percent (50%) of the area of the shed and valance portion of the
awning. In the case of a barrel shaped awning, the sign area shall not occupy
more than sixty percent (60%) of the bottom twelve inches (12”) of the awning.
Awning signs shall be applied flat against the awning surface. No temporary
signs are permitted to be attached to awnings. Awnings shall not be lighted
from under the awning (back-lit awning) so that the awning appears to be
internally illuminated.
      3.   Canopy Signs. Canopy signs shall only be permitted at automobile
service stations and financial institutions. Canopies shall be limited to two
colors, and shall be installed so that the clearance from grade to the bottom
of the canopy is not less than fifteen (15’) feet. Canopy signs shall not
extend beyond the gable or fascia board of the canopy. There shall be no more
than one canopy sign per street frontage. The total area of the canopy occupied
by a sign shall not exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.) per street frontage. No
temporary signs shall be attached to a canopy.
      4.   Projecting Signs. One projecting sign for each tenant establishment
per qualifying façade shall be permitted. Projecting signs shall have a maximum
sign area of eight square feet (8 sq. ft.). Projecting signs shall have a
minimum clearance of eight feet six inches (8’6”) measured from the bottom of
the sign to the sidewalk above which the sign extends. No sign shall project or
be constructed within the airspace above a public right-of-way excepting a
sidewalk, and only then when affixed to the front façade of a building located
not more than feet (2’) from the front lot line. Projecting signs shall not
extend more than six feet (6’) from a vertical plane of the façade and must be
at least six inches (6”) from the façade, provided that no projecting sign
shall extend further than a point that is two feet (2’) from the far edge of
the sidewalk.
   C.   Other Signs. In addition to primary and secondary signs, the following
other signs shall be permitted:
      1.   Small Signs. Not more than two (2) small signs shall be permitted
per paved entrance/exit drive, and not more than one small sign shall be
permitted per drive-thru service lane. Small signs shall not exceed three feet
(3’) in height, and they shall have a maximum sign area of four square feet (4
sq. ft.). Small signs shall be located within five feet (5’) of a paved drive.
      2.   Fuel Island Signs. Not more than one (1) sign having a sign area not
to exceed four square feet (4 sq. ft.) shall be permitted on or in front of
each fuel service island located on a lot.
      3.   Drive-Thru Boards. Not more than one (1) drive-thru board having a
maximum height of eight feet (8’), and having a maximum sign area of forty-
eight square feet (48 sq. ft.), may be located to the rear of a building having
a business that offers drive-thru service. The drive-thru board shall be
located within five feet (5’) of an active drive-thru service lane. A drive-
thru board may be illuminated and may allow for live audible communications
between persons.
      4.   Pedestrian Signs. One (1) pedestrian sign shall be permitted for
each building having a common entrance for multiple commercial tenancies.
Pedestrian signs shall have a maximum sign area of eight square feet (8 sq.
ft.), shall be permanently attached to the building, and located within five
feet (5’) of the common entrance. Pedestrian signs shall not project more than
six inches (6”) from the wall on which they are affixed. The maximum height for
a pedestrian wall sign shall be one foot (1’) below the top of the door frame
of the common entrance adjacent to its location.
      5.   Temporary Signs. In addition to such other signs as may be
permitted, the following temporary signs shall be permitted:
         (a)   Yard Signs. One (1) freestanding yard sign shall be permitted
for each street frontage per lot. One additional yard sign shall be permitted
for each street frontage per lot when the lot or building, or portion thereof,
located thereon is actively marketed for sale or lease.
         (b)   Sidewalk Signs. Not more than two (2) freestanding sidewalk
signs shall be permitted on a lot during normal business hours for a cumulative
period of time not to exceed twenty (20) days per calendar year.
         (c)   Window Signs. Window signs shall be permitted for first-story
occupancies only. Window signs shall occupy a maximum of seventy-five percent
(75%) of a single window pane and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
window surface area per storefront elevation measured from lease line to lease
line. Window signs shall be painted on, mounted against, or applied to the
window surface.
         (d)   One (1) banner sign shall be permitted on a lot at a time, and
only for a cumulative continuing period of time not to exceed fourteen (14)
days per calendar year, and only in such calendar year in which a new business
is opened on said lot. Banner signs shall be free-standing or attached to a
building. The maximum sign area for a banner sign shall not exceed twelve
square feet (12 sq. ft.). No banner sign shall exceed ten feet (10’) in height.
Banner signs shall not be erected over pedestrian or vehicular points of
travel. Banner signs shall not be illuminated.
   D.   Flags. One flag shall be permitted on a lot for every fifty feet (50’)
of street frontage up to a maximum of three (3) flags and three (3) flag poles.
No flag shall exceed forty square feet (40 sq. ft.) in area. A flag pole shall
not exceed the lower of fifty feet (50’) in height or the highest point of the
principal building’s roof. Flag poles may be permanently anchored to the ground
or a building. Flag poles anchored to the ground shall be centered within a
landscaped planter having a radius not smaller than the length of the flag at
full extension. Flag poles anchored to a building shall not project over a
point of vehicular travel, and if located above a point of pedestrian travel,
shall have a clearance (including the flag itself) of at least eight feet six
inches (8’6”) below the same.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-9: HOLIDAY EXCEPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other limitation herein to the contrary, the following
temporary signs shall be permitted on any property during the periods specified
below:
   A.   During the forty (40)-day period from December 1 to January 10, three
(3) temporary signs having a maximum sign area of eight square feet (8 sq. ft.)
each, and a maximum cumulative sign area of twenty-four square feet (24 sq.
ft.), may be erected on a lot. Lights may be used to decorate the property even
if the lights may be arranged to form a sign;
   B.   During the ten (10)-day period from June 27 to July 6, one (1)
temporary sign not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.) may be erected on a
lot; and,
   C.   During any five (5)-day period excluding those referenced above that
includes a holiday recognized by the United States of America or the State of
Illinois, one (1) temporary sign not to exceed six square feet (6 sq. ft.) may
be erected on a lot.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-10: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
No person shall erect or maintain any of the following signs, all of which
shall be strictly prohibited:
   A.   Signs in or over the public right-of-way;
   B.   Unless otherwise permitted to extend over a sidewalk as provided in
this chapter, signs that project beyond the property line on which the sign is
constructed;
   C.   Permanent signs within a setback or within the boundaries of any storm,
sanitary, water, or public utility easement;
   D.   Signs within a natural waterway;
   E.   Illuminated banner signs, or banner signs attached to fences outside of
a residential zoning district;
   F.   Feather flags;
   G.   Roof signs;
   H.   Animated signs, attention-getting devices, and inflatable signs.
   I.   Portable message boards;
   J.   Projector signs;
   K.   Signs attached to fences, except on public property devoted to
recreational uses;
   L.   Painted wall signs;
   M.   Marquee signs;
   N.   Changeable copy signs, except as a component of another type of sign
and authorized herein;
   O.   Signs (permanent or temporary) attached to trees, lights, utility
poles, another sign’s posts, standpipes, gutter drains or fire escapes;
   P.   Signs that block or impede the ingress or egress of any door, window,
or fire escape, or which otherwise impair access to the roof of a building;
   Q.   Signs which due to their location, construction, or illumination create
a visual or physical hazard for vehicles, pedestrians or children;
   R.   Permanent off-premises signs; provided, however, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to prohibit a non-commercial sign where a commercial
sign would otherwise be permitted;
   S.   Signs that violate the provisions of the Illinois Highway Advertising
Control Act of 1971, as amended;
   T.   Signs on a vehicle if the vehicle is not used for daily operations or
during the regular course of business, or is not licensed, insured, or
operational;
   U.   Abandoned signs;
   V.   Signs, which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring, or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed to be
traffic-control devices, or the light of an emergency or other governmental
vehicle;
   W.   Free-standing signs within five feet (5’) of a property line or within
a sight triangle;
   X.   Signs which emit audible sound other than drive-thru boards;
   Y.   Signs composed with spray paint;
   Z.   Signs that have exposed wood in its untreated state, or that use
materials that are not otherwise waterproof; and
   AA.   Any other sign not specifically authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-11: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any sign that existed lawfully on the effective date of this Watseka Sign
Ordinance that remains or becomes nonconforming by reason of adoption of these
regulations, or because subsequent amendments to these regulations, are
considered nonconforming signs and their continuance is allowed in accordance
with the following provisions:
   A.   Ordinary repairs and maintenance, including the removing and replacing
of the outer panels is permitted, provided that the panels are replaced with
identical panels and no structural alterations or other work that extends the
useful life of the sign is permitted;
   B.   Single panels on multi-panel signs for multi-tenant shopping centers
may be changed to reflect tenant changes;
   C.   No repair or alteration that increases the size of the sign is
permitted;
   D.   No nonconforming sign may be removed in whole or in part to any other
location on the same or any other lot unless every portion of the sign is made
to conform to the provisions of this chapter;
   E.   If a nonconforming sign becomes abandoned, it must be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-12: NUISANCE AND ABANDONED SIGNS:
   A.   Nuisance. Any sign placed in the public right-of-way in violation of
this chapter shall be considered a nuisance and subject to abatement by the
City. Any person responsible for the illegally placing a sign in the public
right-of-way shall be responsible for the City’s costs to remove or abate the
nuisance in addition to any penalties that may be imposed.
   B.   Abandoned Signs. Abandoned signs shall be removed within ninety (90)
days of being declared as such by the Commissioner. Any abandoned sign not
removed in the time-period referenced shall be considered a nuisance and
subject to abatement by the City. The owner of the property upon which the
abandoned sign is located shall be responsible to for the City’s costs to
remove or abate the nuisance in addition to any penalties that may be imposed.
(Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
12-13-13: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each violation, or day said violation is
permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
(1980 Code § 39-176; amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 2715, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 14: NONCONFORMITIES
Section
12-14-1: Buildings Under Construction
12-14-2: Discontinuance Of Use
12-14-3: Continuance Of Use
12-14-4: Change Of Use
12-14-5: Existing Buildings
12-14-6: Rights-Of-Way And Easements As Conforming Uses
12-14-7: Procedure For Nonconformity
12-14-8: Existing Lots Not Meeting Area And Dimension Requirements
12-14-1: BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date hereof or of amendments hereto may be completed in accordance
with the approved plans; provided construction is started within six (6)
months. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established
building.
(1980 Code § 36-39)
12-14-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
   A.   Bare Lots: The lawful use of land containing no buildings which does
not conform to the provisions of this title shall be discontinued within five
(5) years from the effective date hereof.
(1980 Code § 36-41)
   B.   Mobile Homes, Manufactured Homes And Trailers: Upon the sale,
assignment, or transfer of a mobile home, manufactured home, or trailer in all
districts in which mobile homes, manufactured homes, or trailers are not
permitted, such mobile home, manufactured home, or trailer shall be removed
therefrom within thirty (30) days after it has been sold, assigned, or
transferred.
(Ord. 2472, 4-25-2017)
12-14-3: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
Any lawfully established use of a building or land at the effective date hereof
or of amendments hereto that does not conform to the use regulations for the
district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming
use, and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
(1980 Code § 36-38)
12-14-4: CHANGE OF USE:
   A.   A nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof, may be
changed to a use of the same or of a more restricted (residential considered
more restricted than manufacturing for example) character, but may not
thereafter be changed to any less restricted use.
   B.   Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming
use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this title shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use.
(1980 Code § 36-40)
12-14-5: EXISTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Continuance Of Use: The lawful use of a building existing at the
effective date hereof may be continued, subject to the provisions of this
section.
   B.   Change Of Use:
      1.   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a
building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more
restricted classification and shall also apply to nonconforming uses in
districts hereafter changed.
      2.   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a
more restricted use or to a conforming use, such shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.
   C.   Damaged Buildings: No building which has been damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its value, shall be restored except in conformity with the
regulations of this title.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Use: In the event that a nonconforming use of any
building or premises is discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a
period of two (2) years, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
(1980 Code § 36-42)
12-14-6: RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS AS CONFORMING USES:
The use of rights-of-way and easements for highways, streets, alleys, walks,
railroads, electric power lines, telephone lines, water mains, sanitary sewers
and storm drains, whether belonging to a governmental body or a public utility,
shall be considered to be conforming uses in each district.
(1980 Code § 36-44)
12-14-7: PROCEDURE FOR NONCONFORMITY:
If, on any inspection, the conditions of a building or premises or its use or
occupancy are found not to conform to the requirements of this title, or the
conditions of any existing permit therefor, the Building Official shall at once
issue written notice to the owner, specifying the manner in which the building
or premises or its use or occupancy fails to conform, and the owner shall at
once take steps to make it so conform, as directed by the Building Official;
and if it is necessary, for the proper protection of the occupants, he shall
order the use of premises vacated until its condition is made satisfactory in
conformity with the requirements of this title, at which time, a permit shall
be issued as herein provided.
(1980 Code § 36-117)
12-14-8: EXISTING LOTS NOT MEETING AREA AND DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS:
Any single lot or parcel of land held in one ownership, which was of record at
the effective date hereof, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot
width and area may be utilized for a permitted use; provided, that yards,
courts or usable open space is not less than seventy percent (70%) of the
minimum required dimensions or areas.
(1980 Code § 36-22)
CHAPTER 15: CANNABIS ORGANIZATIONS
Section
12-15-1: Purpose And Applicability
12-15-2: Process
12-15-3: Cannabis Organization Components
12-15-4: Cannabis Dispensing Organization
12-15-5: Cannabis Industrial Organization
12-15-6: Additional Requirements
12-15-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations regarding
the operation of cannabis organizations within the corporate limits of the
City. Such organizations shall comply with all regulations provided in the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act and the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, as may be applicable, as may be amended from time to time (the
“Acts”), regulations enacted pursuant to authority granted through the Acts,
and the regulations provided herein. In the event that the Acts are amended,
the more restrictive of the State or City regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-15-2: PROCESS:
Cannabis organizations shall only be permitted as special uses in such zoning
districts as set forth in this chapter and processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. No cannabis organization shall be opened or
operated unless specifically authorized under and pursuant to the Acts and this
chapter.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-15-3: CANNABIS ORGANIZATION COMPONENTS:
In determining compliance with this chapter, the following components of the
cannabis organization shall be evaluated based on the entirety of the
circumstances affecting the particular property in the context of the existing
and intended future use of other properties in the vicinity:
   A.   Impact of the proposed cannabis organization on existing or planned
uses located within the vicinity of the subject property;
   B.   Proposed structure in which the cannabis organization will be located,
including co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage,
security installations/security plan, and Building Code compliance;
   C.   Hours of operation of the cannabis organization and anticipated number
of customers/employees;
   D.   Anticipated parking demand based and available private parking supply,
including any unique demand for handicapped parking;
   E.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways;
   F.   Site design, including access points, internal site circulation, and
commercial vehicle loading, unloading and parking;
   G.   Proposed signage plan;
   H.   Proximity to a public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home, residential care home, a
public park, or any property lawfully used in a residential manner or any
residential zoning district;
   I.   Compliance with all other requirements of this chapter specific to the
type of cannabis organization; and
   J.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
this chapter.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-15-4: CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which a cannabis dispensing organization may be
located, the proposed organization must comply with the following:
   A.   A cannabis dispensing organization may not be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private
nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day
care home, residential care home, or public park.
   B.   A cannabis dispensing organization may not be located in a house,
apartment, condominium, or a building devoted in whole or in part to a
residential use.
   C.   A cannabis dispensing organization may not have drive-thru service.
   D.   The on-site consumption of cannabis or cannabis-infused products shall
be prohibited on the premises of a cannabis dispensing organization.
   E.   At least eight percent (80%) of the floor area of any tenant space
occupied by a cannabis dispensing facility shall be devoted to the activities
of the cannabis dispensing organization.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-15-5: CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS:
In those zoning districts in which a cannabis industrial organizations may be
located, the proposed organization must comply with the following:
   A.   A cannabis industrial organization (the enclosed, locked facility where
medical cannabis will be grown, harvested, infused, manufactured, packaged or
otherwise prepared for distribution) may not be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home,
or residential care home.
   B.   A cannabis industrial organization may not be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of an area zoned residential.
   C.   No retail sale or distribution of cannabis or cannabis infused products
shall be permitted on the premises of a cannabis industrial organization.   
   D.   The on-site consumption of cannabis or cannabis-infused products shall
be prohibited on the premises of a cannabis industrial organization.   
   E.   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by a cannabis industrial organization shall be devoted to the
activities of the organization.    
   F.   Any cannabis transporting organization shall be the sole use of the
tenant space of the building in which it is located.    
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
12-15-6: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
An applicant shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras,
lighting, or other improvements, as needed or at the request of the City, to
ensure the safety of employees and customers of the cannabis facility. Said
improvements may be required by the City in excess of those security measures
required by the Act.
(Ord. 2553, 11-26-2019)
CHAPTER 16: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
12-16-1: Purpose
12-16-2: Definitions
12-16-3: Private Solar Energy Facilities
12-16-4: Commercial Solar Energy Facility Siting Applications
12-16-5: Design And Operational Standards For Commercial Solar Energy
Facilities
12-16-6: Inspections
12-16-7: Commercial Solar Energy Facility Decommissioning
12-16-8: Indemnification
12-16-9: Change In Ownership Or Operation
12-16-10: Violations
12-16-11: Penalties And Administration
12-16-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the siting, installation,
maintenance, operation, and decommissioning of solar energy facilities within
the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 2662, 10-25-2022; amd. Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed herein.
APPLICANT. Any person submitting a special use or building permit application
for the siting and installation of any SEF, as applicable.
BUILDING MOUNTED. Affixed to a principal or accessory structure.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The building official of the City.
CITY. The City of Watseka, Iroquois County, Illinois.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY (CSEF).
   A.   Any device or assembly of devices that:
      1.   Is ground installed; and
      2.   Uses solar energy from the sun for generating utility scaled
electricity for the primary purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not
primarily for consumption on the property on which the device or devices are
located.
   B.   A CSEF shall include all supporting facilities.
FACILITY OWNER.
   A.   A person with a direct ownership interest in a CSEF regardless of
whether the person is involved in acquiring the necessary rights, permits, and
approvals or otherwise planning for the construction and operation of the
facility; and
   B.   At the time the facility is being developed, a person who is acting as
a developer of the facility by acquiring the necessary rights, permits, and
approvals or by planning for the construction and operation of the facility,
regardless of whether the person will own or operate the facility.
GROUND MOUNTED. Being affixed to the ground, or attached to an antenna, light
pole, or utility facility, but not a building.
NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is not a participating property.
NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on nonparticipating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a special use permit to site and develop a CSEF is filed.
OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that is
existing and occupied on the date that an application for a special use permit
to site and develop a CSEF is filed with the City:
   A.   A school;
   B.   Place of worship;
   C.   Day care facility;
   D.   Public library; or
   E.   Community center.
OPERATOR. The person responsible for the day-to-day operations and maintenance
of the CSEF, including any third-party subcontractors.
PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. The real property that is the subject of a written
agreement between a CSEF owner and the owner of the real property that provides
the facility owner with an easement, option, lease or license to use the real
property for the purpose of siting and developing a CSEF. Participating
property also includes real property that is owned by a CSEF owner for the
purpose of siting and developing a CSEF.
PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on participating property
and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for a special
use permit to site and develop a CSEF is filed.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other
legal entity.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. For each property, the structure that one or more persons
occupy the majority of time on that property for either business or personal
reasons. A principal structure excludes accessory structures.
PRIVATE SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY (PSEF). A solar electric system that is owned by
a property owner or a tenant of the property to provide solar electricity for
the property or its users, net metering, or for other commercial or non-
commercial purposes, but excluding the conversion of solar energy into
electricity for introduction to the grid for distribution and consumption
through an interconnect agreement. A PSEF shall include all supporting
facilities.
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY (SEF). Any Commercial Solar Energy Facility or Private
Solar Energy Facility.
SUPPORTING FACILITIES. All accessory and subordinate equipment and
infrastructure of a SEF including, but not limited to, transmission lines,
substations, access roads, storage containers, and equipment associated with
the generation and storage of electricity.
(Ord. 2662, 10-25-2022; amd. Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-3: PRIVATE SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES:
The following requirements shall govern the siting, installation, maintenance,
operation, and decommissioning of any PSEF:
   A.   A PSEF shall be owned, operated, and/or maintained individually or
collectively by the record owner the underlying property on which the PSEF is
sited and/or a tenant of or business operating within a principal or accessory
structure located on the underlying property or adjoining property under common
ownership.
   B.   A PSEF shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Provided, however, a
ground mounted PSEF shall be prohibited in all residential zoning districts and
on any lot, or combination of adjoining lots under common ownership, of less
than twenty (20) acres in total in any other type of zoning district.
   C.   The setback for building mounted PSEF shall be the same as buildings in
the applicable zoning district. The setback for a ground mounted PSEF shall be
measured from the nearest edge of any component of the PSEF, as follows:
      1.   One hundred fifty feet (150') from any occupied community building
and residence on adjoining real property not owned by the owner of real
property on which the PSEF is located.
      2.   Zero feet (0') from the property line of real property under common
ownership with the real property on which the PSEF is located.
      3.   Fifty feet (50') from the nearest edge of a public road right-of-
way.
      4.   Fifty feet (50') from the property line of real property adjoining
the real property on which the PSEF is located but not owned by the owner of
real property on which the PSEF is located.
   D.   In residential zoning districts, a building mounted PSEF shall not
extend above the peak roof height of the building to which they are affixed,
except that on a flat roof the height of a building mounted PSEF shall be
permitted to extend not more than six feet (6') above the roof line, or above
maximum permitted height in the zoning district, whichever is less. In all
other zoning districts, the maximum permitted height of a PSEF is as follows:
      1.   A building mounted PSEF shall not extend more than ten feet (10')
above the roof line and no more than ten feet (10') above the maximum permitted
height in the applicable zoning district.
      2.   A ground mounted PSEF shall not exceed twenty (20') feet in height,
excluding electric transmission lines and utility poles.
   E.   An applicant shall file a building permit application with the Building
Official for the siting and construction of a PSEF. The applicant shall submit
three (3) complete copies of the building permit application along with the
required building permit fee in the form of a certified check and all
supporting documentation. The building permit fee shall be an amount equating
to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per megawatt of total nameplate capacity
of the PSEF. For a building mounted PSEF, the building permit application shall
contain or be accompanied by the infom1ation required in Section
12-16-4 D, I. - L., as applicable, and construction plans showing all
structural and electrical connections to the building. For a ground mounted
PSEF, the building permit application shall contain or be accompanied by the
information required in Section
12-16-4 D. - K., M., and O., as applicable.
   F.   A building mounted PSEF shall be installed by a State of Illinois
licensed electrician, and the safety of the design and installation shall be
certified by a State of Illinois licensed engineer. All wiring associated with
a PSEF shall be underground or contained within a raceway that complements the
building materials of the structure on which they are located. The
installation, design, and maintenance of a building mounted PSEF shall comply
with the technical codes adopted by the City and any standards that may be
applicable thereto as imposed by a state or federal agency of competent
jurisdiction. A building mounted PSEF shall be decommissioned in the event they
are not used for twelve (12) consecutive months. Decommissioning shall be
completed within six (6) months and shall require the PSEF to be deconstructed
and removed from the property such that there is no evidence that a PSEF
existed on the property or building. Decommissioning will not be required in
the event a PSEF cannot be used for twelve (12) consecutive months for reasons
outside of the control of the owner/tenant and he/they are using commercially
reasonable means to place the PSEF back in use and service as expeditiously as
is reasonably possible. There shall be an inspection for compliance with the
above requirements by an inspector hired by the City and reimbursed by the
property owner or tenant.
   G.   Unless in conflict with a provision of this section, a ground mounted
PSEF shall be installed, designed, maintained and decommissioned in the same
manner as a CSEF and the provisions Sections
12-16-5 through 12-16-9 shall apply to a ground-mounted PSEF; provided,
however, a ground mounted PSEF shall not require a special use permit or meet
the conditions thereof, but the applicant shall submit the information required
by this section as a part of the building permit process.
   H.   Battery storage systems for any PSEF shall comply with NFPA 855.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-4: COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY SITING APPLICATION:
   A.   A special use pem1it shall be required for the siting and operation of
any CSEF. Provided, however, CSEFs shall be prohibited in all residential
zoning districts and on any lot, or combination of adjoining lots under common
ownership, of less than forty (40) acres in total in any other type of zoning
district.
   B.   An applicant shall file a special use application with the Building
Official for the siting and development of any CSEF. The applicant shall submit
seven (7) complete copies of the special use application along with the
required fee in the form of a certified check. An application shall be deemed
complete when the applicable fee is submitted and all supporting documents are
included.
   C.   Prior to processing any special use application for a CSEF, the
applicant shall submit a certified check to the City in an amount equal to five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per megawatt (MW) of proposed nameplate capacity,
up to a maximum fee of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
These funds shall be placed in an FDIC insured money-market account and used to
pay the City's costs and expenses to process the special use permit
application. The applicant shall supplement the special use application fee in
the event the City's actual expenses exceed the amount of the initial
application fee. All fees not used shall be returned to the applicant or
credited to the decommissioning escrow.
   D.   The special use permit application shall contain or be accompanied by
the following information, which shall be updated by the applicant no later
than ten (10) days following a change:
      1.   The name(s), address(es), phone number(s) and electronic contact
information of the applicant(s), facility owner and operator, and all property
owner(s). The applicant shall be required to include copies of all easements
identifying ownership or interest in the properties.
      2.   A CSEF summary, including a description of the project, its
approximate name plate generating capacity, the potential equipment
manufacturer(s), type(s) of CSEF(s), number of CSEF(s), and name plate
generating capacity of each CSEF, and the location of the project.
      3.   Sufficient documentation to verify that the applicant and facility
owner financial capability to complete and decommission the CSEF project as
proposed.
   E.   The applicant shall provide the City with a site plan showing the
following existing conditions:
      1.   Existing property lines and property lines extending one hundred
feet (100') from the exterior boundaries, including the names of adjacent
property owners and current use of those properties.
      2.   Exiting public and private roads, showing widths of the roads and
any associated easements.
      3.   Location and size of any abandoned wells, sewage treatments systems.
      4.   Existing buildings and any impervious surfaces.
      5.   A contour map showing topography at two-foot (2') intervals. A
contour map of surrounding properties may also be required.
      6.   Existing vegetation (list type and percent of coverage: i.e.
cropland/plowed fields, grassland, wooded areas etc.).
      7.   Waterways, watercourses, lakes and public water wetlands.
      8.   Any delineated wetland boundaries.
      9.   A copy of the current FEMA FIRM map that shows the subject property.
And, the one hundred (100)-year flood elevation and any regulated flood
protection elevation, if available.
      10.   Flood way, flood fringe and/or general flood plain district
boundary, if applicable and not provided on the copy of the current FEMA FIRM
map.
      11.   Mapped soils according to the Iroquois County Soil Survey.
      12.   Surface water drainage patterns.
   F.   The applicant shall provide the City with a site plan showing the
following proposed conditions:
      1.   Property lines, setback lines, and layout of all structures within
the geographical boundaries of any applicable setback.
      2.   Location and spacing of solar panels.
      3.   Location of access roads, access points, and turnout locations.
      4.   Planned location of underground or overhead electric lines
connecting the solar farm to a building, substation or other electric load.
      5.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
      6.   Third-party transmission lines.
      7.   Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed
solar energy conversion system and its relationship to structure on adjacent
land.
      8.   A landscape plan.
   G.   The applicant shall include a weed control plan for property inside and
outside fenced area for entire property to be approved by the Building
Official. The property must be maintained to prevent fire hazards and be in
compliance with all local, state and federal environmental regulations. No soil
sterilant shall be permitted to be used on the property for weed control.
   H.   The applicant shall submit a preliminary map and plan showing the roads
and rights-of-ways that will be utilized for both the construction and the
operation of the CSEF. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the
applicant shall submit an executed agreement between the CSEF owner or operator
and any local jurisdictional road authority with infrastructure affected by the
CSEF. This agreement shall include at a minimum:
      1.   A final map identifying the routes that will be used.
      2.   A plan for maintaining and/or repairing the affected roads.
      3.   Other inclusions as specified by the City, City Engineer or any
affected jurisdictional road authority.
   I.   The applicant shall submit the manufacturer's specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
panels, mounting systems and foundations for poles or racks.
      1.   The applicant shall submit an itemized cost estimate of the entire
construction costs of the project.
   H.   The applicant shall provide a description of the method of connecting
the array to a building or substation.
      1.   The applicant shall provide a written demonstration that the
applicant is in the queue to acquire an interconnect agreement. Prior to pre-
operation of the project, a copy of an interconnect agreement with the
appropriate electric utility, or a written explanation outlining why an
interconnection agreement is not necessary shall be provided.
   M.   The applicant shall include a decommissioning plan to ensure that the
solar facility shall be properly decommissioned. The decommissioning plan shall
include provisions for removal of all structures (including equipment, solar
panels, fencing, and access roads), foundations and cabling to a depth of
seventy-two inches (72") and a plan for the restoration of soil and vegetation
to the same condition that existed before the construction of such
improvements. Removal of solar panels must be in accordance with state and
federal EPA guidelines and the panels must not be left in any condition where
hazardous materials may leak into the environment. The City reserves the right
to require additional information of components to the plan as the City deems
necessary to ensure that an adequate proposal is in place to decommission the
facility in its entirety and those adequate funds are available.
   N.   Following special use application approval, the applicant is eligible
to apply for a building permit. The building permit fee shall be an amount
equating to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per megawatt of total nameplate
capacity. The applicant shall pay the fee in the form of a certified check
payable to the City.
   O.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit and as part of the building
permit application submittal, a map showing the location of any and all
subsurface drain tiles shall be provided to the Building Official and the
appropriate drainage district, if any.
   P.   An applicant shall notify the Building Official of any changes to the
information provided on the special use application or building permit
application that occur while the application is pending. Failure to notify the
Building Official shall constitute grounds for the immediate rejection of the
application and denial of the permit.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-5: DESIGN AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY
FACILITIES:
   A.   A licensed Illinois professional engineer shall certify that the
foundation and design of the CSEF is within accepted professional standards,
given local soil and climate conditions.
   B.   A CSEF shall be designed, installed and conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute
(“ANSI").
   C.   A CSEF and the property on which it is located shall be maintained in
compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal technical codes and
regulatory standards, as amended.
   D.   A CSEF shall conform to the performance standards applicable in the
zoning district in which they are located.
   E.   Power and communication lines running between banks of solar panels and
to electric substations or interconnections with buildings within the perimeter
of the solar energy development shall be buried according to the National
Electric Code (NEC) in effect at the time of application. All power and
communication lines outside the fenced perimeter of the solar energy
development shall be buried no less than six feet (6'). During the installation
and before wires and lines are covered there will be an inspection for
compliance by the City. Exemptions or variances may be granted by the City
Council in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other elements of
natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines. All power and
communication lines shall be geo-located. J.U.L.I.E. shall be contacted before
commencing digging excavations. All electrical components of the CSEF shall
conform to the applicable local, state, and national codes, and relevant
national and international standards.
   F.   All drainage tiles shall be repaired or restored to same or better
condition as to when the project began. There will be an inspection for
compliance by an independent inspector chosen and hired by the City and
invoiced and by the City to the facility owner or operator. Local drainage
districts shall be contacted prior to beginning development to locate drainage
district tiles.
   G.   Equipment and structures shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height
when ground mounted. Excluded from this height requirement, however, are
electric transmission lines and utility poles.
   H.   An appropriate warning sign shall be provided at the entrance to the
facility and along the perimeter to the solar farm project. The sign at the
entrance to the facility shall include the facilities 911 address and a twenty-
four (24)-hour emergency contact number. A 911-compliant visible warning sign
concerning voltage must be placed at all CSEF(s), including the base of all
pad-mounted transformers, and supporting facilities.
      Warning signs identifying underground wire locations shall be placed at
all road crossings, creek, waterway, and ditch crossings, and at the base of
CSEF(s) and supporting facilities. All underground wire locations shall be GPS
mapped and given to the Building Official.
   I.   The regulations regarding the siting of a CSEF, with setback distances
measured from the nearest edge of any component of the facility, are as
follows:
      1.   One hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest point on the outside
wall of the structure, measured from the nearest edge of any component of the
facility from occupied community building and dwellings on nonparticipating
properties.
      2.   Zero feet (0') from boundary lines of participating property.
      3.   Fifty feet (50') from the nearest edge of a public road rights-of-
way.
      4.   Fifty feet (50') to the nearest point on the property line of a
nonparticipating property.
   J.   The equipment and structures of the CSEF shall be fully enclosed and
secured by a chain-link or equivalent fence with a minimum height of eight feet
(8') and not more than twenty feet (20') in height. Knox boxes and keys shall
be provided at locked entrances for emergency personnel access. The entirety of
the CSEF shall be enclosed with a living buffer of evergreen trees that must be
planted and maintained prior to construction and will meet or exceed the height
of the solar panels and all facilities equipment, including fencing.
Additionally, the applicant/owner must comply with any screening requirements
requested by the Building Official and consistent with state law and the
provisions hereof. An alternative buffer may also be considered. Earth be1ms or
other topographical features and existing wooded areas may be accepted in lieu
or in combination of the above requirements if they conceal the use from public
view and are maintained. The landscape plan shall also incorporate native
grasses, flowers and plants which will provide wildlife and pollinator habitat,
soil erosion protection and/or aid in strengthening the soil structure. This
shall not be part of the evergreen screen but shall be for all other areas of
the solar farm that will not interfere with the solar arrays.
   K.   If lighting is provided at the site, lighting shall be shielded and
downcast such that the light does not spill onto the adjacent parcel or
residence.
   L.   Noise levels measured at the property line shall not exceed fifty (50)
decibels when located adjacent to an existing residence or residential
district.
   M.   Individual arrays/solar panels shall be designed and located in order
to prevent glare toward any inhabited buildings on adjacent properties as well
as adjacent street rights-of-way.
   N.   CSEF projects shall conform with site runoff storage requirements,
unless the solar panels are "disconnected." Solar panels will be considered
"disconnected" and therefore pervious, if the following criteria are met:
      1.   Pavement, gravel, bare ground, or impervious surfaces are prohibited
below panels or in spacer sections between rows of panels unless specifically
approved by the Village Engineer. All such areas shall be seeded with native
grass or other acceptable alternative. Landscaping shall be well-maintained and
annually seeded, as appropriate, to prevent soil compaction or bare ground
conditions. The growth of vegetation within the perimeter of CSEF assemblage
shall not exceed ten (1 0") inches in height. Tire rutting from maintenance or
other vehicles in spacer sections shall be monitored annually and regraded and
seeded, as appropriate, to mitigate soil erosion and storm water run-off
      2.   The total proposed impervious area on the surface of the ground must
be less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
      3.   The open space between panels must be equal to or greater than the
width of the row of panels. The runoff must sheet flow onto and across the
vegetated area to maintain the disconnection. Sheet flow is optimal on sites
with gradual slopes less than five percent (<5%). Level spreaders, terraces, or
berms may be used to maintain sheet flow conditions if the average slope is
steeper than five percent (5%) and less than ten percent (<10%). Installations
on slopes greater than ten percent (>10%) will require a detailed engineering
study to demonstrate the safe and non-erosive conveyance of runoff to the
property line or downstream storm water management practice.
   O.   The applicant, facility owner or operator shall submit to the local
fire department(s) with jurisdiction over the site, a copy of the existing and
proposed site plans. Upon request by the local fire department, the facility
owner or operator shall cooperate with the local fire department to develop the
fire department's emergency response plan. In addition, at no cost to the local
fire department, the facility owner or operator shall provide to the local fire
department any and all specialized and necessary new rescue or retrieval
equipment occasioned by the use of the particular solar panels being used at
the project (i.e., gurney, body harnesses, etc.). In addition, the facility
owner or operator shall have the responsibility to update, at no cost to the
local fire department, such equipment in possession of the local fire
department as any updates are presented to the facility owner or operator in
the normal course of business. Failure to comply shall be deemed a default
resulting in an immediate shutdown of the CSEF(s). Nothing herein shall
alleviate the need to comply with all other applicable fire laws and
regulations.
   P.   Battery storage systems for any CSEF shall comply with NFPA 855.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-6: INSPECTIONS:
CSEFs shall be inspected by an independent certified inspector approved by the
Building Official upon the completion of installation. Thereafter inspections
shall be performed every three (3) years (triennially), unless otherwise
determined by the Building Official. All inspections shall be at the cost of
the facility owner.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-7:   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY DECOMMISSIONING:
   A.   The decommissioning of a CSEF in accordance with the decommissioning
plan approved by the City shall occur in the event it is not in use for twelve
(12) consecutive months. Decommissioning shall be completed within six (6)
months. Decommissioning will not be required in the event a CSEF cannot be used
for reasons outside of the control of the facility owner or operator and it is
using commercially reasonable means to put the CSEF back in use as
expeditiously as is reasonably possible.
   B.   Prior to the issuance of building permits, financial assurances for
compliance with the decommissioning plan shall be made to the City in a minimum
amount equal to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per acre. Additional financial
assurance shall be supplied, if necessary, to bring the total amount of
security to an amount equaling the City engineer's estimate for
decommissioning. All cash security shall be paid into an escrow account
acceptable to and controlled by the City. Said escrow shall be released when
the CSEF is decommissioned in accordance with the plan.
   C.   The City shall have the authority to decommission the site with the
security held in the event the facility owner or operator fails to do comply
with the decommissioning plan. In the event that escrow funds are not
sufficient to cover the cost of decommissioning, the shortfall shall be due and
owing to the City by the landowner.
   D.   A facility owner or operator shall submit an updated decommissioning
plan, including updating the escrow amount, to the Building Official for his
approval every three (3) years.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-8:   INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant, facility owner or operator of any CSEF shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the City, its officials and employees, from and against any
and all claims, demands, losses, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs,
penalties, expenses and liabilities whatsoever, including attorney's fees,
arising out of acts of omissions of the applicant, facility owner or operator
associated with the siting, construction, maintenance, operation, and
decommissioning of the SEF project.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-9:   CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR OPERATION:
The facility owner of CSEF as listed in the application shall inform the
Building Official of all changes in ownership and operation during the life of
the project, including the sale or transfer of the same, within ten (10) days
of the effective date of such change.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-10:   VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any applicant, landowner, tenant, facility owner, or
operator to:
   A.   Misrepresent or falsify any information associated with a special use
permit and/or building permit for any SEF.
   B.   Fail to site, design, install, operate, maintain, and/or decommission
an SEF or SEF site in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a special
use permit, and/or a building permit.
   C.   Fail to comply with an approved landscaping plan.
   D.   Fail to comply with an approved emergency response plan.
   E.   Fail to comply with an approved decommissioning plan.
(Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
12-16-11:   PENALTIES AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Fines. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Each violation, or
day said violation is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   Permit Proceedings. Any person found in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to
special use permit revocation proceedings before the City Council to the extent
applicable.
   C.   The provisions of this chapter may be administered through the
provisions of Title 1, Administration, Chapter 4, General Penalty, Article A,
Administrative Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Violations, of the Watseka City
Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to City of Watseka.
(Ord. 2662, 10-25-2022; amd. Ord. 2710, 3-26-2024)
TITLE 13: SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
Section
13-1-1: Title
13-1-2: Purposes
13-1-3: Jurisdiction
13-1-4: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
13-1-5: Definitions
13-1-6: Effect On Existing Plats And Site Plans
13-1-7: Prohibited Subdivisions
13-1-8: Prohibited Developments
13-1-9: Offerings Or Dedications Of Land
13-1-10: Resubdivision Of Land
13-1-11: Vacation Of Plats
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be designated as the SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
FOR THE CITY OF WATSEKA, IROQUOIS COUNTY, ILLINOIS.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-2: PURPOSES:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth which will become a permanent community asset by establishing minimum
standards for subdivision design and construction.
   B.   To assure the development of land for the highest and best use with all
the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence which would
adversely affect the living environment or tax base.
   C.   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the City and the developer and to safeguard the interests
of the homeowner, the subdivider, the investor and the City.
   D.   To control the scattered and premature platting of lots beyond the
effective operating range of existing public utilities and improvements.
   E.   To cause the cost of design and installation of improvements in new,
platted subdivisions to be borne by the persons purchasing the lots rather than
be any direct or indirect burden upon existing property owners beyond the
limits of the subdivision who have already paid for the improvements servicing
their property.
   F.   To bring about compact development of both homes and public
improvements without the delay often experienced through future use of special
assessment methods.
   G.   To coordinate new subdivision design with the design of the City as a
whole to allow for the proper capacity of all types of improvements on the
basis of an orderly sequence of subdivisions as a part of neighborhoods and
neighborhoods as a part of the community.
   H.   To secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters.
   I.   To improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plats.
   J.   To otherwise provide for the health, safety, comfort, and convenience
of the residents of the City and surrounding territory.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions, resubdivisions, and
developments of residential or nonresidential territory within the corporate
limits of the City and unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half
(11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any other
municipality. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction with other
municipalities within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of
the City, the extent of jurisdiction of the City shall be as determined and
agreed upon between the municipalities or as provided by statute.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-4: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall
be held to be the minimum requirements.
   B.   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title with
respect to the use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any provisions of any other ordinance or any
law, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   This title is not intended to abrogate the provisions of any easement,
covenant, or any other private agreement with respect to the use of land, but
no such provision shall operate to lessen the restrictions or lower the
standards as provided in this title.
   D.   If any section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this title is,
for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
   E.   Any proposed plat of subdivision or site plan otherwise in conformity
with the provisions of this title may be disapproved where the Plan Commission,
after full examination and review, makes a definite determination that such
proposed subdivision or development would be in conflict with the Comprehensive
Plan or detrimental to the best interest of the public health, safety, or
welfare.
   F.   Any subdivision or development of land which was not lawfully existing
at the effective date hereof shall not be made lawful solely by reason of the
adoption of this title, and to the extent that subdivision of land is in
conflict in any manner with the requirements of this title, said subdivision of
land remains unlawful hereunder.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
APPLICANT: The person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
seeking approval to subdivide or develop a parcel, including the owner of
record, contract purchasers, subdividers, developers and other persons having a
proprietary interest in the parcel, and their successors.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways or the corporate limits of the City.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance
between the property line and building, either at the front or side of the lot.
CITY ATTORNEY: The City Attorney of the City.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
CITY COUNCIL: The Council of the City.
COLLECTOR THOROUGHFARE: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to
the thoroughfare system, or between secondary thoroughfares, and is so
designated as a collector thoroughfare in the Comprehensive Plan.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The general Comprehensive Plan of the City, including the
Official Comprehensive Plan Map and the provisions of this title (see title 1,
chapter 13 of this Code).
CONCEPT PLAN: A plan filed with the Plan Commission prior to the filing of a
preliminary plat or preliminary site plan and which shall contain such
information as set forth in section
13-3-1 of this title.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Mayor and Council of the City.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the convenient reversal of traffic movement.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, building or improvement on a parcel of land or
substantial change in any existing structures, including planned unit
developments.
EASEMENT: A right or privilege in the real property of another.
FINAL PLAT: A plat of subdivision meeting the requirements of section
13-3-3 of this title in the form proposed or approved for recording.
FRONTAGE: The length of the property line of the lot, lots or tract of land
abutting a public street, road, highway or rural right-of-way.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way as specified by
percentage.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer
of ownership or for building development.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any subdivision lot or any parcel of land
held in separate ownership; except, that where any portion of the lot extends
into the abutting street or alley, such portion of the lot line thereof shall
be deemed to be the street or alley line.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as the principal traffic artery and is so designated as a
major thoroughfare on the Official Comprehensive Plan Map, generally having
limited access. Owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from these thoroughfares, except at
such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such trafficway.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A street which is parallel and adjacent to a major or
collector thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic, and is generally referred to as “frontage
road”.
MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
abutting properties and serving the local needs of a neighborhood.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Official Comprehensive Plan Map of the City as designated by
this title (see title 1, chapter 13 of this Code).
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity vested
with the legal incidents of ownership with respect to the land sought to be
subdivided or developed under this title.
PARCEL: The tract of land which is the subject of an application under this
title.
PARKWAY: An unpaved area along or within a public right-of-way reserved for
planting grass, trees, shrubbery or otherwise ornamented to provide a parklike
character.
PEDESTRIANWAY OR CROSSWALK: A right-of-way across or within a block for use by
pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a pedestrianway, crosswalk, or
however otherwise designated, and may include utilities where necessary.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the City (see title 2, chapter 1 of
this Code).
PLAT: A plan, map, drawing or chart representing a plan for subdivision of land
and depicting the information required by this title.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The plat representing the plan of development of a
subdivision and containing the information required under section
13-3-2 of this title, intended to provide the applicant with preliminary
approvals on which he can rely for planning purposes.
PRIVATE STREET: Any street not dedicated or not to be dedicated for public use.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, planting strip, off-street
parking area, or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the
ownership or responsibility for maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC STREET: Any street which is dedicated or is to be dedicated for public
use.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if
such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for
public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded
prior to the adoption of any regulation controlling subdivisions.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad line, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The use
of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY, for land platting purposes in the City, shall mean
that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to
be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way,
and not included within the dimensions of areas of such lots or parcels.
ROADWAY: A paved portion of a street available for vehicular traffic.
SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between the various sections of
the City and is so designated as a secondary thoroughfare on the Comprehensive
Plan.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street or crosswalkway right-of-way, paved or
otherwise surfaced, and intended for pedestrian use only.
SITE PLAN: A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the applicant's plan for the
development of land is presented and which he submits for approval in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means of
vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designed as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, thoroughfare, or however otherwise designed, but
excepting driveways to buildings and alleys.
SUBDIVIDE: The division of land into two (2) or more parcels or lots, and
includes resubdivision.
SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Any parcel of land, vacant or improved, which is divided or is proposed
to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or
interest by any method, including planned unit developments; or
   B.   Any construction, building or improvement on a parcel of land or
substantial change in any existing structures, including planned unit
developments.
   C.   The following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt
from the requirements of this title:
      1.   The resubdivision of land not involving more than three (3) lots,
none of which is substandard, and not requiring new streets to be dedicated.
      2.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land, provided no substandard lot evolves from the transaction.
      3.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as
rights-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access.
      4.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
      5.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
      6.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR: This person is responsible for enforcing these
subdivision regulations. He/she shall bring any violation or lack of compliance
herewith to the attention of the Corporate Authorities. Section 13-2-1 of this
title provides additional clarification.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity, including major,
secondary and collector streets.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance of the City, as amended from time to
time (see title 12 of this Code).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-6: EFFECT ON EXISTING PLATS AND SITE PLANS:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plats, site
plans, construction or designated use of any land or structure in the event
that all of the following apply:
   A.   Final plat or site plan approval for such subdivision or development
was lawfully issued prior to the effective date hereof, or the effective date
of any amendment hereto; and
   B.   Such approval has not, by its own terms, expired prior to such
effective date; and
   C.   Such approval was issued on the basis of an application showing
complete plans for proposed construction.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-7: PROHIBITED SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   No person shall subdivide or resubdivide any parcel of land to which
this title applies within the planning jurisdiction of the City until a
subdivision plat, after review and recommendation by the Plan Commission, has
received final plat approval by the Corporate Authorities as required by this
title.
   B.   No sale of any parcel of land creating a subdivision to which this
title applies shall be consummated until a subdivision plat, after review and
recommendation by the Plan Commission, has received final plat approval by the
Corporate Authorities as required by this title.
   C.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any subdivided lot within the City to
which this title applies until a plat of subdivision has been recorded
following review and recommendation by the Plan Commission and after having
received final plat approval by the Corporate Authorities as required by this
title. In any such subdivision, the building permits shall not be issued prior
to the time the street name and traffic-control signs have been installed; the
bituminous binder course for all roadways has been constructed; and any cash
contribution in lieu of land dedications provided in the final plat approval
have been received; and any other conditions specified for final approval have
been satisfied. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for the use of any
building or structure on a parcel within the City and subject to this title
until sidewalks and streetlights have been installed, and the required sanitary
sewer and water facilities have been installed and made ready for servicing the
parcel.
   D.   No person shall offer for recording any plat of subdivision to which
this title applies until such plat, after review and recommendation by the Plan
Commission, has received final plat approval by the Corporate Authorities as
required by this title.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-8: PROHIBITED DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   No person shall commence or cause to be commenced any development
within the corporate limits or within the planning jurisdiction of the City
until a site plan, after review and recommendation by the Plan Commission, has
received final site plan approval by the Corporate Authorities as required by
this title. This requirement of site plan approval does not extend to any of
the following:
      1.   Any development involving the construction of one single-family
dwelling or one multiple- family dwelling unit.
      2.   Any nonresidential development under single ownership or control
involving the construction of any new buildings or structures of a total floor
area less than five hundred (500) square feet.
   B.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any parcel within the City to which this
title applies until a site plan, after review and recommendation by the Plan
Commission, has received final site plan approval by the Corporate Authorities
as required by this title. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for the
use of any building or structure on any parcel of land within the City until
all conditions specified for site plan approval have been satisfied.
   C.   No person, firm, business entity or corporation proposing to develop a
subdivision within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall proceed with any
construction or development work on the site of the proposed subdivision until
the City has approved and recorded the final plat for the proposed subdivision,
and engineering plans and all fees, charges and contributions have been paid by
the developer, and letters of credit for public improvements have been posted,
all other required governmental permits have been issued and there is otherwise
full compliance with all requisite City ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-9: OFFERINGS OR DEDICATIONS OF LAND:
   A.   All offerings or dedications of land to the City for use as streets,
highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be
referred to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation prior to
acceptance by the Corporate Authorities or by another Municipal body. Title
with respect to all such offerings or dedications of land shall be conveyed in
fee simple to the City or as the Corporate Authorities may direct.
   B.   Where a tract or parcel of land proposed for subdivision is a part of a
larger parcel of land to be subdivided at a later date, the applicant shall
submit to the Plan Commission, in addition to the preliminary plat, a plan of
future development for the remaining land.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-10: RESUBDIVISION OF LAND:
   A.   For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if
such change affects any street layout shown on the map, or area reserved
thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan
legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions, such resubdivision shall be approved by the Plan Commission and
Corporate Authorities by the same procedure, rules and regulations for a
subdivision.
   B.   Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows
one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller
building sites, the Plan Commission or Corporate Authorities may require that
such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate
extension of adjacent streets. Easements provided for the future opening and
extension of such streets may be made by requirement of the plat.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-1-11: VACATION OF PLATS:
   A.   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
   B.   The instrument shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Corporate
Authorities in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The Corporate Authorities
may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in
any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys.
   C.   The instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and
recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly
recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in such plat.
   D.   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein
provided by all the owners in such plat joining in the execution of such
writing.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
13-2-1: Enforcement Official
13-2-2: Variations
13-2-3: Amendments
13-2-4: Violations
13-2-5: Penalty
13-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The Public Works Director is hereby appointed as the Subdivision Administrator
and shall be responsible for enforcing these subdivision regulations. He/she
shall bring any violation or lack of compliance herewith to the attention of
the Corporate Authorities.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-2-2: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Required Findings: Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary
hardship or practical difficulties may result from the strict compliance with
these regulations, it may recommend variances to these regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that
such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of these regulations; and further provided, that the Plan Commission shall not
recommend variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case that:
      1.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property.
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out.
      4.   The variances will not in any manner vary the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, Official Map or any other City ordinance.
   B.   Conditions Of Variance: In recommending variances, the Plan Commission
shall require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially
the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
   C.   Request For Variance: A written request for any variance shall be
submitted by the applicant at the time when the preliminary plat or site plan
application is filed for the consideration of the Plan Commission. The request
shall state fully the grounds and all of the facts relied upon by the
applicant.
   D.   Fees And Costs: The applicant shall pay any and all fees, costs and
expenses of the City and its duly authorized agent that are incurred by the
City in the processing of any and all applications pursuant to this title.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendments to this title shall be made by the Corporate Authorities but
only after receipt of recommendations from the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-2-4: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The owner or occupant of any land, building, structure or any part
thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in or maintains any violation of this title,
may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein
provided.
   B.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the City from
taking such lawful action as is necessary or appropriate to prevent any
violation.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement
of this title shall, upon conviction, be fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE
Section
13-3-1: Preapplication Procedure
13-3-2: Preliminary Plan/Plat Or Preliminary Site Plan
13-3-3: Final Plat Or Final Site Plan
13-3-4: Standards For Review Of Plats And Site Plans
13-3-5: Final Site Plan Approval For Commercial And Industrial Lots
13-3-6: Fees
13-3-1: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Concept Plan: In order to discuss the general purpose of the
subdivision site plan or development in the context of established planning
policies and practices of the City and to ensure that required data is properly
prepared and presented before expending the time and money in preparation and
review of a preliminary plat or site plan, any person desiring to subdivide or
develop land subject to this title, before filing a preliminary plat or site
plan, may file a concept plan of the subdivision site plan or development with
the City Clerk. The concept plan shall contain such information as suggested by
the Subdivision Administrator, the Plan Commission and the City Council, in
order to delineate the concept of the subdivision site plan or development
adequately, including, but not limited to, a plat of survey, a topographical
map, soil information, current aerial photographs and a sketch of the proposed
development showing a road system and general land use categories. It shall
also include information describing the subdivision site plan proposal, such as
the number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, lot sizes,
business areas, school playground and park areas, other public areas, proposed
restrictive covenants and proposed street and utilities improvements.
   B.   Submission Of Plan: After preparation of a concept plan, the applicant
may also request that he be placed on the agenda of a regular Plan Commission
meeting and City Council meeting, at which time he shall submit the information
specified in subsection A of this section and gather additional comments, but
such request shall be made not less than one week prior to the next regularly
scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN/PLAT OR PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN:
   A.   Filing Preliminary Plan/Plat Or Site Plan; Exceptions:
      1.   Any applicant shall first file with the City Clerk an application
and fifteen (15) copies of a preliminary plan or preliminary site plan not to
exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in size. Additional
copies may be required as deemed necessary by the Subdivision Administrator. At
the time of concept plan review, the Plan Commission may authorize the
simultaneous filing of an application for preliminary and final plat or site
plan approvals without compliance with separate procedures in particular cases
where the nature and scope of the subdivision site plan or development proposed
does not require separate review procedures. Preliminary plats containing three
(3) lots or less and which do not involve the opening of any new streets may be
exempted from the requirement of the filing of a preliminary plat and may be
submitted as a final plat.
      2.   Any applications for preliminary plat or preliminary site plan
approval shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the regular monthly
meeting of the Plan Commission at which presentation will be made. The Plan
Commission shall determine whether the application and plat or plan are in
proper form and shall not consider the application as filed until all documents
are in accordance with the requirements as set forth in this title, and the
Plan Commission has been furnished with a statement by the City Clerk that the
filing fee has been paid.
   B.   General Information Required: The following general information, where
applicable, shall be shown on the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan
unless waived by the Plan Commission:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision site plan (which shall not
duplicate or resemble the name of any existing subdivision site plan within a
radius of 5 miles).
      2.   Date of preparation, north point and scale of drawing which shall be
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
      3.   An identification clearly stating that the map is a preliminary
subdivision site plan plat or a preliminary site plan.
      4.   Legal description of the parcel.
      5.   The name and address of the record owner or owners, the applicant,
and the Illinois registered land surveyor or the licensed professional engineer
who prepared the plat with the appropriate seal affixed.
      6.   A vicinity map showing the general location of the parcel within the
City and environs.
   C.   Conditions Of Parcel Provided: The following conditions, if found to
exist on the parcel, shall be shown on any preliminary plat or site plan unless
waived by the Plan Commission:
      1.   The location, width and names of all streets within or adjacent to
the parcel, together with easements, public utility and railroad rights-of-way,
and other important features such as Municipal boundary lines, section lines,
corners and monuments.
      2.   Contour lines of the parcel and all adjacent land within one hundred
feet (100') of the boundaries of the parcel showing intervals no greater than
one foot (1') contour intervals for ground slopes less than one-half percent
(0.5%).
      3.   The location and direction of all watercourses and the location of
all areas subject to flooding, including:
         a.   The flowlines of streams and channels showing their normal
shorelines and floodway and 100-year floodplain limits.
         b.   Lakes, ponds, swamps, marshes, known wetlands and any detention
basins showing their normal shorelines, floodway and 100-year floodplain limits
and lines of inflow and outflow, if any.
         c.   Seeps, springs, flowings and wells.
      4.   Natural features such as rock outcroppings, wooded areas, wetlands,
and isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter.
      5.   Present uses of the parcel including the location of all existing
structures, showing those that will be removed and those that will remain on
the parcel after the final plat is recorded or development completed.
      6.   The location and size of existing sanitary, storm and combined
sewers, water mains, culverts, drain tiles, drainpipes, catch basins, manholes,
hydrants and electric and gas lines within the parcel and in adjacent streets
or rights-of-way. If water mains, sewers or electric or gas lines are not on or
adjacent to the parcel, indicate the direction and distance to, and size of,
the nearest usable facilities.
      7.   Zoning classifications of the parcel and of lands adjacent.
      8.   Houses, barns, shacks and other significant improvements.
   D.   Improvements To Be Shown: The following improvements, if proposed or
required, shall be shown on the preliminary plat or site plan, or in supporting
documents, unless waived by the Plan Commission:
      1.   Streets and rights-of-way, showing the location, widths, number,
names and approximate grades thereof. The preliminary plat shall show the
relationship between existing and proposed streets and also show proposed
walks, curbs and gutters and streetlights.
      2.   Easements, showing width and purpose.
      3.   Lots, showing approximate dimensions, minimum lot sizes and proposed
lot and block numbers.
      4.   Preliminary engineering plan, showing size and location of sanitary
and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and electric and gas lines.
      5.   Sites to be dedicated for school, park, playground or other public
purposes, together with appropriate acreage of each.
      6.   Proposed building setback lines.
      7.   Proposed grading plan of the parcel at intervals of not more than
one foot (1') if the overall plan requires changes in the general topography.
      8.   The floor area and lot coverage of each building or structure and
the floor area ratio for each parcel which is the ratio of the square footage
of a building or structure to the square footage of the lot.
      9.   Legally established centerline elevations.
      10.   Proposed public improvements such as highways or other major
improvements as planned by public authorities for future construction on or
near the parcel.
   E.   Supporting Data: The following supporting data shall be submitted in
separate statements or maps accompanying the preliminary plat or site plan, or,
if practical, such data may be shown on the preliminary plat or preliminary
site plan, unless waived by the Plan Commission:
      1.   Proof of ownership of the parcel and applicant’s interest therein.
      2.   A topographic map extending for a minimum distance of one hundred
feet (100') on all sides of the parcel showing existing use and ownership of
adjacent lands, showing streets, rights-of-way and dedicated easements,
locations of existing structures and elevation of their foundations,
approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments
or retaining walls, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby residential
land uses or adverse influences.
      3.   An aerial map showing the parcel to be subdivided or developed. The
map shall include a scale and show a year in which the photograph was taken.
      4.   Existing or proposed annexation agreement which pertains to the
parcel.
      5.   Estimated cost of the development.
      6.   Estimated construction and development schedule.
      7.   Generalized landscaping plan.
      8.   Proposed building types.
      9.   Sites, if any, for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
      10.   a. Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond and basin on the
parcel and on any adjoining land which may affect the layout or drainage of the
parcel for a minimum of five hundred feet (500') in each direction, upstream
and downstream, showing elevations of the following:
            (1)   The bed.
            (2)   Channel banks, if any.
            (3)   Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets and culverts
into the stream, channel or basin.
            (4)   Flood of record elevation.
         b.   The applicant's engineer shall, in drawing his profiles, extend
or project the established flood of record elevation upstream or downstream for
a distance of five hundred feet (500').
      11.   A preliminary drainage plan, designed to handle safely the
stormwater runoff, accompanied by maps or other descriptive material showing
the following:
         a.   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage
channels of the parcel.
         b.   Existing storm sewers and other storm drains to be built and
sizes.
         c.   Existing streams and floodwater runoff channels to be maintained,
enlarged, altered, or eliminated, and new channels to be constructed, their
locations, cross-sections, and profiles.
         d.   Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas, elevations and
adequacy of waterway openings and new culverts and bridges to be built.
         e.   Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged,
or altered and new ponds or basins to be built with or without dams or flow
retention devices.
         f.   Parking lots shall be so designed so as to not store more than
six inches (6") of rainwater for detention purposes.
   F.   Placement On Plan Commission Agenda: Upon the determination that the
application and preliminary plat or preliminary site plan are in proper form,
the Plan Commission shall place the matter on its agenda and shall serve notice
upon the applicant of the time and place of the meeting at which the matter
will be discussed. The Subdivision Administrator shall also be notified and
supplied with copies of the application, preliminary plat or preliminary site
plan and other documents.
   G.   Plan Commission Recommendation: The Plan Commission shall forward its
written report to the Corporate Authorities recommending approval or
disapproval of the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan within ninety (90)
days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the
last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such
time shall be extended by the mutual consent of the applicant and the Plan
Commission. If the recommendation is to disapprove, the report shall set forth
the reasons for its disapproval and specify with particularity the aspects in
which the proposed plat or site plan fails to meet the standards of section
13-3-4 of this chapter. A copy of the report shall also be forwarded to the
applicant.
   H.   Corporate Authorities Approval Or Rejection: The Corporate Authorities,
by resolution, shall approve or reject the preliminary plat or preliminary site
plan within thirty (30) days after its next regularly scheduled meeting
following the date of action of the Plan Commission, unless such time is
extended by the mutual consent of the applicant and the Corporate Authorities.
If it rejects the plat or site plan, the resolution shall set forth the reasons
for its disapproval and specify, with particularity, the aspects in which the
proposed plat or site plan fails to meet the standards of section
13-3-4 of this chapter. A copy of the resolution shall be furnished to the
applicant.
   I.   Interpretation And Effect Of Preliminary Plat Or Plan: Approval of the
preliminary plat or plan by the Corporate Authorities shall not qualify the
plat or plan for recording, but shall be considered permission to prepare the
final plat or plan with detailed plans and specifications for the proposed
subdivision site plan or development. Such preliminary approval shall be
effective for no more than one year from the date of approval unless, upon
application by the applicant, the Corporate Authorities grant an extension of
time for an additional one year. Such application shall not require an
additional filing fee or the submission of additional copies of the plat or
site plan. The applicant may rely, for planning purposes, on any aspect which
has received preliminary plat approval during the effective period.
   J.   Filing With Other Agencies; Procedure:
      1.   An applicant shall simultaneously file with the State Department of
Transportation, relevant local highway authority or the County Health
Department, as appropriate, a copy of the application for preliminary approval
of any proposed plat filed with the City.
      2.   The department or authority receiving the application shall review
the application based solely upon safety or access control standards and
provide written approval or disapproval to the Plan Commission and to the
Corporate Authorities not later than ninety (90) days from the date the
application is received. The ninety (90) day period may be changed by mutual
agreement.
      3.   If disapproved, the department or authority shall provide reasons
for the disapproval related to safety or access control standards and identify
improvements that will remove the disapproval.
      4.   The Corporate Authorities may approve the plat once the improvements
have been incorporated into the application or in the event that the department
or authority fails to respond in writing to the City within the ninety (90) day
period or other period established by mutual agreement.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-3-3: FINAL PLAT OR FINAL SITE PLAN:
   A.   Filing Final Plat Or Final Site Plan; Specifications: Within one year
after receiving preliminary subdivision plat or site plan approval by the
Corporate Authorities, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk an
application for the initial unit of development, fifteen (15) copies of a final
plat or final site plan not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches
(24" x 36") in size, an electronic copy in a format acceptable to the
Subdivision Administrator, and one eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17")
size copy, in a quantity and form as required by the Plan Commission and in
accordance with this title. Any application for final plat or final site plan
approval shall be filed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the regular monthly
meeting of the Plan Commission in order to receive action at such meeting.
   B.   General Information Required: The following general information, where
applicable, shall be shown on the final plat or final site plan, unless waived
by the Plan Commission:
      1.   The date of preparation, north point and scale of drawing, which
shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or other scale as
approved by the Subdivision Administrator.
      2.   Legal description of the parcel.
      3.   The names and addresses of the record land owner, the applicant and
the Illinois registered surveyor or licensed professional engineer who prepared
the plat with the appropriate seal affixed.
      4.   Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the plat
by distances and bearing, and reference to a field book or map as follows:
         a.   All stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and
used to determine the boundaries of the parcel.
         b.   Adjoining corners of all adjoining parcels.
         c.   When the City has established the centerline of the street
adjacent to or within the proposed parcel, the location of such centerline and
monument found or reset shall be shown.
         d.   All other monuments found or established in making the survey of
the parcel or required to be installed by the provisions of this title or by an
act revising the law of plats adopted March 21, 1874, as amended (ILCS 765).
      5.   Lot and block lines with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles,
and radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings. Parcel boundaries
and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest ten (10) seconds with the
basis of the bearings. All distances shall be shown to the nearest one
hundredth of a foot (0.01'). Lot area in square feet for each lot shall be
designated.
      6.   The width of the portion of any streets being dedicated and the
width of any existing rights-of- way, all shown each side of the centerline.
For streets on a curvature, all curve data shall be based on the street
centerline, and in addition to the centerline dimensions, the radii and central
angles shall be indicated.
      7.   All easements shall be denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly
identified and, if already of record, the recorder's references to such
easement. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient
ties to locate it definitely with respect to the plat must be shown. If an
easement is not precisely located of record, a description of such easement
shall be included. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be
properly referenced in the owner’s certificate of identification.
      8.   Lot numbers beginning with the number one and numbered consecutively
within each block.
      9.   Block numbers or letters beginning with the number one or letter “A”
and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the
subdivision site plan. The figures shall be solid, of sufficient size and
thickness to stand out, and so placed as not to obliterate any figure. Block
figures of an addition to a subdivision site plan of the same name shall be a
continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision site plan.
      10.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property
owners.
      11.   Building setback lines, accurately shown in dimensions.
      12.   The name of each street shown on the plat,
      13.   Street numbers shall be obtained from the City and shown on the
final plat.
      14.   The name of the subdivision plan.
      15.   Existing and proposed grading plan of development at the intervals
specified in section
13-3-2C2 of this chapter if the overall plan requires changes in the general
topography and the regulatory limits of the 100-year flood frequency event,
when applicable.
      16.   Location of adjoining roads, watercourses and bodies of water,
marshes, rock outcroppings, wooded areas, known wetlands and railroads within
one hundred feet (100') of the property.
      17.   Location and dimensions of on-site pedestrian and vehicular
accessways, design of ingress and egress of vehicles to and from the site onto
public streets, and curb and sidewalk lines, including sidewalk ramps for
persons with disabilities where applicable.
      18.   Location of buildings and other structures.
      19.   Location and intensity of outdoor lighting system.
      20.   Use of property within one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries of
the site.
      21.   All off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways, indicating
type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific
schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided.
      22.   Forms of certification as provided in section
13-8-1 of this chapter.
      23.   Specific language that dedicates all public improvements to the
City with the language “Dedicated to the Public”.
      24.   The name and mailing address of the City for return of the plat by
the County Recorder.
   C.   Supporting Data: The following supporting data, where applicable, shall
be supplied in separate statements or maps or, if practical, may be shown on
the final plat or site plan, unless waived by the Plan Commission:
      1.   A copy of any restrictions or covenants to be created by record and
any charter or bylaws of any property owners' association to be created.
      2.   The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate:
         a.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
legal or beneficial interest in the parcel consenting to the preparation and
recording of the plat.
         b.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
interest in the land, dedicating all parcels of land intended for any public
use.
         c.   Certification by the County Clerk showing that all taxes and
special assessments due on the parcel have been paid in full.
      3.   Plans and specifications for the required public improvements,
together with the written report of the Subdivision Administrator required by
subsection
13-3-4C3 of this chapter.
      4.   Existing soil conditions based upon soil borings prescribed by the
Subdivision Administrator in light of the proposed use of the parcel.
      5.   Landscape plan showing location, type and approximate size of
plantings.
      6.   Architectural elevations for building types.
      7.   Development data showing number of floors, floor area, height and
location of each building and proposed general use for each building and the
floor area ratio for the entire development. If a multi-family residential
building, show the number, size and type of dwelling units.
      8.   A final drainage plan providing for the adequate disposition of
natural water and stormwater in accordance with the design criteria and
standards of this title, indicating location, sizes, types and grades of
ditches, catch basins and pipe and connections to an existing drainage system.
The drainage plan shall depict the existing and proposed 100-year flood
frequency boundaries, when applicable.
      9.   An existing drain tile survey must be submitted to the City for
review and must be incorporated into the development plans.
      10.   A soil erosion control plan providing for the adequate control of
erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent
control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of
clearing, grading and construction.
      11.   In all cases where private central sanitary sewer systems are to be
used, the applicant shall secure the necessary permits for installation and
operation of the system from the Environmental Protection Agency of the State,
the County Health Department and the City. In all cases where private septic
systems are to be used, percolation tests shall also be made on each building
lot, and a copy of the data and a recommendation of minimum lot sizes by the
County Health Department shall be submitted to the Plan Commission and the
Subdivision Administrator.
      12.   A schedule showing phasing of other proposed improvements.
   D.   Guarantee Of Improvements: The applicant shall supply the following
forms of guarantee to the City:
      1.   An improvement completion guarantee under which the applicant agrees
to install any required improvements at his own expense in accordance with the
plans and specifications within the time required as a condition of approval.
However, for property outside the corporate limits of the City, no such
agreement shall be required where the applicant has entered into a similar
agreement covering the parcel with the County authorities.
         a.   Acceptable Improvement Completion Guarantees:
            (1)   Letter Of Credit: An irrevocable commercial letter of credit
with any financial institution which must be approved by the City Attorney and
Subdivision Administrator and which provides for administration of such credit.
The letter of credit shall be in an acceptable form as prescribed by the
Corporate Authorities. This is the City-preferred method.
            (2)   Completion Bond: A completion bond to insure the construction
of the improvements in a satisfactory manner and within the period specified by
the Corporate Authorities. The bond shall be payable to the City and be in a
form with surety and conditions as approved by the City Attorney and
Subdivision Administrator.
         b.   Amount Of Guarantee: The amount of the completion guarantee shall
be based on the following:
Total cost of the estimated construction, engineering, surveying and fees for
the required improvements, plus fifteen percent (15%) of such total for
contingencies, and maintenance of improvements and the abatement of
construction nuisance and erosion control during the period prior to acceptance
of improvements, all as approved by the Subdivision Administrator.
         c.   Each improvement completion guarantee shall at least contain the
relevant sections from the following list:
            (1)   Mass grading improvements: Mass grading for public right-of-
way and detention ponds, detention pond stabilization, erosion control, and
detention pond as-built drawings and storage volume calculations.
            (2)   Underground improvements: Storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
water mains, and as-built drawings of same.
            (3)   Basic roadway improvements: Curb and gutter, roadway base
course, roadway binder course, bike trails, street name, traffic-control signs,
and streetlights.
            (4)   Finished roadway improvements: Final surface course.
            (5)   Parkway improvements: Sidewalks, parkway trees, and parkway
restoration.
            (6)   Miscellaneous off-site improvements: Off-site roadway
improvements, off-site storm sewer improvements, off-site sanitary sewer
improvements, off-site water main improvements, etc. A separate completion
guarantee will be required for each off-site improvement.
      2.   From time to time, at the applicant's request, the Subdivision
Administrator may approve reductions in the guarantee to an amount equal to
twenty percent (20%) of the original amount of the completion guarantee. The
City shall not formally accept any portion of the improvements until one
hundred percent (100%) of the project is completed. The City shall approve one
hundred percent (100%) reductions in the guarantee only after all of the
improvements outlined above, as itemized, have been completed and demonstrated
by as-built engineering plans provided by the developer and signed and stamped
by a professional engineer registered in the State of Illinois (see section
13-7-2 of this title). The reduction shall be by written resolution or letter
of the Corporate Authorities. The resolution/letter completely eliminating the
guarantee shall also include acceptance of the public improvements of the
specific phase simultaneously upon reduction of a guarantee for the specific
phase of the improvements. A maintenance guarantee as then provided by this
title shall be submitted to the City (including all off-site improvements
individually).
         a.   All guarantees shall be for two and one-half (21/2) years (30
months) from the date of issuance of said guarantee.
         b.   Mass grading improvements will not be accepted by the City (i.e.,
release of completion guarantee) until the City has approved that the
individual lots have been graded with substantial compliance with the approved
development plans.
      3.   A maintenance guarantee to be furnished upon final completion of
improvements as prescribed under the subsection D1c of this section and prior
to acceptance in a form as prescribed under subsection D1a of this section,
effective for a period of two (2) years (24 months) after the final acceptance
of said improvements for the purpose of:
         a.   Guaranteeing against and securing the correction of any defect in
material or workmanship for such improvements, latent in character, and not
discernible at the time of final inspection or acceptance by the City.
         b.   Guaranteeing against and securing the correction of any damage to
improvements by reason of settling of the ground, base or foundation thereof.
Such maintenance guarantee shall also provide that as such defects develop, the
amount held thereunder may be applied by the City for any amounts incurred to
correct such defects, and that the balance of such deposit, if any, held at the
end of the two-year period shall be released by the City to the depositor
without interest. The amount of the maintenance guarantee shall be not less
than fifteen percent (15%) of the total initial amount of the completion
guarantee.
   E.   Placement On Plan Commission Agenda: Upon the determination that the
application and final plat or final site plan are in proper form, the Plan
Commission shall place the matter on its agenda and shall serve notice upon the
applicant of the time and place of the meeting at which the matter will be
discussed. The Subdivision Administrator shall also be notified and supplied
with copies of the application, final plat or final site plan and other
documents.
   F.   Delay Of Approval: The applicant may elect to have final approval of a
geographic part or parts of the plat that received preliminary approval, and
may delay application for approval of other parts until a later date or dates
beyond one year with the approval of the Corporate Authorities; provided, all
facilities required to serve the part or parts for which final approval is
sought have been provided. In such case, only such part or parts of the plat as
have received final approval shall be recorded.
   G.   Delay Of Guarantees: If the applicant so elects, he may delay
furnishing the guarantees required by subsection D of this section until
notified that the final plat has been approved by the Corporate Authorities in
all other respects; provided, that the signature of the Mayor and the City
Clerk and the Seal of the City not be affixed to the plat until the required
guarantees are furnished and approved.
   H.   Plan Commission Recommendation: The Plan Commission shall forward its
written report to the Corporate Authorities recommending approval or
disapproval of the final plat or final site plan within fifteen (15) days from
the date of its regular or special meeting next following the filing of the
last required document or other paper which shall be considered the date of
filing the application for final approval of the plat or site plan. The
signatures of the Chair and Secretary of the Plan Commission shall be affixed
to the final plat or final site plan after approval by the Corporate
Authorities. If the recommendation is to disapprove, the report shall set forth
the reasons for its disapproval and specify, with particularity, the aspects in
which the proposed plat or site plan fails to meet the standards of section
13-3-4 of this chapter. A copy of the report shall also be forwarded to the
applicant.
   I.   Corporate Authorities Approval Or Disapproval: After receiving the
final recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Corporate Authorities, by
resolution, shall approve or disapprove the final plat or site plan within
sixty (60) days from the date of filing application for final approval of the
plat or site plan unless the applicant and the Corporate Authorities mutually
agree to extend this sixty-day period. If the final plat or final site plan is
disapproved, the resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval,
specifying, with particularity, the aspects in which the final plat or final
site plan fails to meet the standards of section
13-3-4 of this chapter. A copy of the resolution shall be furnished to the
applicant.
   J.   Record Of Final Plat Or Final Site Plan: A certified copy of the
resolution approving or disapproving the final plat or final site plan shall be
filed in the Office of the City Clerk attached to said final plat or final site
plan. The final subdivision plat or final site plan, together with all
covenants and restrictions, shall be recorded by the City Clerk or City
designee in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for the County and returned to
the City Clerk or City designee. All recording fees shall be prepaid by the
applicant. The City Clerk shall notify the Building Official of the recording
of the final plat or final site plan.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-3-4: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF PLATS AND SITE PLANS:
A. The Plan Commission shall recommend approval and the Corporate Authorities
shall approve a preliminary or final plat or a preliminary or final site plan
unless it makes written findings specifying the manner in which:
      1.   The design and layout of the subdivision site plan or development
does not conform to the provisions of this title.
      2.   The applicant has not made adequate provision to install
improvements required by the Plan Commission or Corporate Authorities under
authority of this title.
      3.   The final plat of subdivision or final site plan fails to comply
with an approved preliminary plat of subdivision site plan or preliminary site
plan.
      4.   The plat or site plan does not conform to this title, the
Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map, the flood control ordinance of the City,
City ordinances, or established planning policies of the City.
      5.   The provisions for vehicular loading, unloading, parking or
circulation on the parcel or onto adjacent public rights-of-way will create
hazards to safety or will cause significant burdens on transportation
facilities that could be avoided by modification of the plan.
      6.   The vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation system creates
hazards to safety which could be avoided by modification of the plan.
      7.   The proposed plan unnecessarily and in specified particulars
destroys, damages, or detrimentally alters significant natural, topographic or
physical features of the site and development.
      8.   The proposed landscaping, screening or lighting fails to provide
adequate acoustical or visual privacy to incompatible adjacent uses which could
be avoided by modification of the plan.
      9.   The bulk and location of proposed buildings and structures will have
significant adverse impact on adjacent property, and development of the parcel
is not feasible in a manner that will avoid these consequences.
      10.   The proposed plat or site plan makes inadequate provision for the
use and maintenance of open space, and this failure may result in a burden on
the public or on the adjacent properties.
      11.   The proposed development will impose an undue burden upon off-site
public services, including sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage, which
conclusion shall be based upon a written report of the Subdivision
Administrator; provided, that there is no provision in the capital works
program of the City to correct the specific burden and that the applicant has
not agreed to alleviate that portion of the burden attributable to the proposed
development.
      12.   The subdivision site plan or development is subject to periodic
flooding or contains poor drainage facilities and would make adequate drainage
of the lots and streets impossible.
   B.   If any of the standards in subsection A of this section are cited as
justification for disapproving a plat or site plan, the Plan Commission and the
Corporate Authorities shall specify the manner in which the final plat or final
site plan could be modified to avoid the specified deficiency or shall state
the reasons why the specified deficiency cannot be avoided consistent with the
applicant's objectives.
   C.   Before submitting the final plat or final site plan for review, the
applicant shall submit engineering plans, details or specifications for all
proposed improvements regulated by chapters 4, 5 and 6 of this title for
approval of the Subdivision Administrator.
      1.   Upon the approval of preliminary plat or site plan, the applicant
shall have prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer, drawings
for said improvements which shall be submitted in triplicate to the Subdivision
Administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of the final
plat for approval.
      2.   Engineering drawings for required improvements shall contain the
following data and information:
         a.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates for street
construction, including centerline profile and a grade line for each street
with a typical cross-section of the roadway. The profiles of grade lines shall
be shown to a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontal, and
one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertical. This information shall be shown
on standard plan and profile sheets.
         b.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed
storm drainage improvements, including surface drainage, storm sewers and
appurtenances and detention or retention basins.
         c.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed
water distribution systems and proposed water supply facilities, if any.
         d.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates of sewage
systems and of sewage treatment plants, if any.
         e.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates for proposed
sidewalks or bikeways, if any.
         f.   Plans, details and specifications and cost estimates of the
proposed street lighting system.
         g.   When unusual conditions exist, the Plan Commission may require
additional specifications, plans and drawings as may be necessary for an
adequate review of the improvements to be installed.
      3.   The Subdivision Administrator shall cause to be reviewed all
engineering drawings in order to determine whether such drawings are consistent
with the approved preliminary plat or plan and comply with chapters 4, 5 and 6
of this title. Such drawings shall be distributed to such other persons as may
be necessary. If they are in compliance with this title and with the most
recent design standards adopted by the City, the Subdivision Administrator
shall forward a report to the Plan Commission that they so conform and comply.
If the plans, details or specifications do not conform or comply, the
Subdivision Administrator shall notify the applicant and the Plan Commission of
the specific manner in which they do not so conform or comply.
      4.   The Plan Commission shall not act upon the final plat or final site
plan until the engineering drawings have been reviewed by the Subdivision
Administrator and a report of compliance or noncompliance has been received by
the Plan Commission.
      5.   All costs incurred by the City for the review of plans and
specifications by the Subdivision Administrator or his/her designee shall be
paid by the subdivider/developer/applicant. Additional services required for
complex projects including, but not limited to, outside legal consultants,
special inspectors, or specialists in the stormwater, building, construction,
ecology, planning, or related fields shall be paid for by the developer.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-3-5: FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LOTS:
A. Intent, Jurisdiction And Compliance:
      1.   The intent of this section is to establish procedures and standards
for the review and approval of site plans to ensure full compliance with all
local, State and Federal ordinances and regulations and to ensure that a
proposed land use or activity is compatible with the character of the
surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the
capacities of public services, and will protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
      2.   This section shall apply to the following:
         a.   The construction of any new nonresidential building or structure;
         b.   The expansion of any nonresidential building or structure;
         c.   The conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing building from
residential to nonresidential use;
         d.   The construction of any new residential structure containing
three (3) or more dwelling units;
         e.   The modification or expansion of an existing residential
structure which results in an increase in the number of dwelling units in the
structure to three (3) or more;
         f.   Any development in any district for which a special use permit is
required;
         g.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet; or
         h.   The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no
buildings or structures are proposed.
      3.   This chapter title does not apply to the construction or
modification of single-family detached homes, two-family homes, agricultural
buildings or structures, or existing buildings or premises legally established
prior to the effective date hereof unless one or more of the factors described
in subsection A2 of this section is present.
      4.   No land, building, or structure shall be erected or used, and no
building permit or sign permit shall be issued, for a development within the
scope of this chapter unless and until a site plan has been approved in
accordance with this chapter. No land, building or structure shall be occupied
or used and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements
and conditions of the site plan approval have been implemented and all
improvements completed in accordance with an approved site plan.
   B.   Classification Of Projects: Any development or construction which is
subject to the scope of this title under subsection A of this sections hall be
classified as either a minor or major site plan. The determination of this
classification shall be made by the Subdivision Administrator according to the
following criteria:
      1.   Minor Site Plan Review: A project requiring minor site plan review
shall be any of the following:
         a.   An expansion of any nonresidential building or structure not
exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the existing
floor area, whichever is less.
         b.   A change in use of an existing building that does not comply with
current site design standards such as, but not limited to, landscaping,
lighting, parking, signs or drainage.
         c.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Major Site Plan Review: A project requiring major site plan review
shall be any project which is not classified as a minor site plan review.
   C.   Application And Review Procedures:
      1.   Application; Restrictions On Approval: Application for site plan
approval may be made separate from or in conjunction with an application for
land subdivision. The City Council may approve a site plan prior to the
platting, division, or consolidation of land, conditioned upon such platting,
division or consolidation. Site plans for which the proposed use requires a
zoning map amendment shall only be acted upon by the City after a map amendment
has been approved according to the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance
(see title 12, chapter 3, article D of this Code).
      2.   Preapplication Conference:
         a.   Prior to submitting a site plan application, the applicants or
agent may schedule a preapplication conference with the Subdivision
Administrator. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the applicant with
the review procedures and submission requirements and to familiarize the
Subdivision Administrator with the nature of the project. No decisions relative
to the acceptability of the plan may be made at this meeting. At this time, the
determination will be made, based on the presented information, as to whether
the project shall be considered a minor or major site plan. The applicant
should bring to this meeting any working drawings, plans, sketches, surveys,
reports or other such information that will aid the Subdivision Administrator
in assessing the project.
         b.   The applicant will contact the Subdivision Administrator to
schedule a meeting two (2) weeks prior to the requested meeting date. The
applicant shall also provide to the City four (4) copies of a three-dimensional
color rendering of the proposed building or structure two (2) weeks prior to
the meeting. This drawing shall depict all four (4) sides of the proposed
building or structure, including proposed screening of mechanical equipment and
dumpsters. Samples of building materials are strongly encouraged to be
submitted at this time as well.
         c.   The applicant and the applicant's architect will then present the
building elevations of the proposed project for review and comment. The
Subdivision Administrator may advise the applicant of any suggested changes or
additions to the proposed elevations at this time.
   D.   Workshop Session Review: After receiving a recommendation from
Subdivision Administrator, the City will schedule a workshop session with the
Plan Commission and the City Council (in no particular order) for review of the
proposed building elevations and conceptual site layout. Fifteen (15) copies of
the conceptual site layout and color rendering of the building shall be
provided to the Subdivision Administrator one week prior to each scheduled
meeting.
   E.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Minor Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for
review and approval of a site plan to the City. The applicant shall submit all
information requested by the City staff that is deemed necessary to review the
minor site plan including the following:
         a.   A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review and application fee.
         b.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit.
         c.   All information requested by the City staff that is deemed
necessary to review the minor site plan including drawings, sketches, and
calculations.
      2.   Major Site Plan:
         a.   The applicant shall submit a formal application for review and
approval of a site plan to the City. The application shall consist of the
following:
            (1)   A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site
plan review and application fee.
            (2)   Five (5) copies of the site plan and supporting documents as
described in subsection D of this section.
            (3)   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit.
         b.   Upon receipt of the application, the Subdivision Administrator
shall review the completeness of the application and, upon determination that
the application is complete, forward a copy of the application to City
departments or agencies deemed necessary. If the application is incomplete, the
Subdivision Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of this
determination and specify what materials or information is required to complete
the application. No action will be taken on the application until the
application has been determined to be complete.
   F.   Submission Requirements: The site plan application shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   Minor Site Plan: As determined and requested by the Subdivision
Administrator.
      2.   Major Site Plan: A drawing or drawings prepared at a scale of not
less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), which shall include:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name, address and phone number of the developer.
            (2)   Name, address and phone number of the record owner if
different from the developer.
            (3)   Name, address and phone number of the architect, engineer,
landscape architect, land planner, surveyor or consulting firm responsible for
preparing the plan(s).
            (4)   Seal and registration of any architect, engineer, landscape
architect or similar professional involved in the preparation of the plan(s).
            (5)   Date of plan preparation/revision.
            (6)   North arrow and scale.
            (7)   Legal description of the property.
            (8)   If applicable, a site data table indicating the gross
acreage, net acreage, site coverage percentage, building area(s), and floor to
area ratio.
         b.   Existing Conditions:
            (1)   Zoning and use of the property.
            (2)   Zoning and use of all adjacent properties.
            (3)   Bearings and distance of all property lines and the source of
this information.
            (4)   Existing topography of the site shown at two foot (2')
intervals and extending a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the property
lines of the site.
            (5)   Building setback lines.
            (6)   Location and extent of any water bodies, wetlands, streams
and floodplains on or adjacent to the site.
            (7)   Location and size of existing trees.
            (8)   Location of other notable natural features.
            (9)   Location and dimension of any existing easements.
            (10)   Copies of any applicable covenants or deed restrictions.
      (11)   Location, size, and ground floor elevation of all existing
buildings on the site.
      (12)   Location and dimension of any other structures or improvements on
the site.
            (13)   Location, names, and widths of existing streets and rights-
of-way within or adjacent to the site.
            (14)   Location and size of any existing storm sewer, water main,
sanitary sewer, culverts, drains, field tiles, on-site disposal systems, wells,
power or telephone poles, electrical lines, telephone lines, and gas lines on
the subject site or of any such entities off-site that will serve the subject
site.
            (15)   Location, front view and dimension of existing signs.
         c.   Proposed Development:
            (1)   Proposed use and zoning.
            (2)   A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the topography
of the site at one foot (1') intervals with spot grades provided at significant
points.
            (3)   The location and dimensions of all provisions for water
supply and sanitary sewer.
            (4)   A stormwater detention/retention plan including stormwater
runoff and detention calculation. The methods for computing such requirements
shall be those specified in the City's stormwater management ordinance (see
title 14 of this Code).
            (5)   The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins,
ditches, swales, detention basins and storm sewers.
            (6)   An erosion control plan, the requirements for which shall be
consistent with the City’s stormwater management ordinance.
            (7)   The location, dimensions, and foundation/floor elevations of
all proposed buildings or expansions on the site.
            (8)   The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking
areas, loading areas, and sidewalks.
            (9)   The location, dimensions, front view and materials of
proposed signs.
            (10)   The location and type of exterior lighting, including a
point-by-point photometric plan if required by the City.
            (11)   The location and nature of electrical, telephone, gas, cable
or other utility services to be installed at the site.
            (12)   Building plans showing, at a minimum, the floor plans and
elevations of all proposed principal and accessory buildings and a schedule of
the type and color of exterior surface materials. A three-dimensional color
rendering of the proposed building or structure must be provided.
            (13)   Landscape plans including a schedule of all plantings by
type and size as well as any berming, fencing, screening, or other hardscape
features proposed.
         d.   Other: Supporting reports, documents, exhibits, etc.
   G.   Review Procedures:
      1.   Minor Site Plan:
         a.   The City staff shall review the information requested and either
approve the minor site plan or prepare a report to the applicant indicating any
deficiencies in the site plan in meeting all applicable requirements of this
section. The applicant shall modify the site plan to correct any deficiencies
or apply for formal relief or variance for the deficiency if such application
is available.
         b.   Upon completion of revisions to the minor site plan that correct
the deficiencies identified by the City staff, the minor site plan shall be
placed on the next available City Council agenda for consideration. The City
Council will approve or deny the site plan application based on the approval
criteria and standards. The City Council may impose conditions upon the site
plan, provided they relate to the approval criteria and standards, and are
necessary to meet the intent of this title. If any formal relief or variance is
sought by the applicant, it shall follow the adopted procedures for such relief
or variance.
      2.   Major Site Plan:
         a.   Written Review: Within twenty (20) days of the application being
determined to be complete, any notified City departments or outside consultants
shall provide the Subdivision Administrator a written review of the
application. These reviews shall evaluate the application's conformance with
the approval criteria and standards of this title and identify any areas in
which there are deficiencies in meeting the criteria and standards.
         b.   Staff Report: The Subdivision Administrator shall prepare a
report to the applicant indicating or enclosing the review comments and the
applicant's conformance with the review criteria. This report shall be provided
to the applicant within thirty five (35) days of the application being
determined to be complete. If the staff report does not identify any issues or
deficiencies with the plans, an agenda date will be assigned for the
application to be reviewed by the City Plan Commission. If, however, the staff
report identifies concerns or deficiencies, a staff workshop shall be scheduled
prior to scheduling a Plan Commission agenda date.
         c.   Subdivision Administrator Meeting: If the report identifies any
concerns, issues, or deficiencies with the site plan or any areas in which the
staff does not believe that the approval criteria are met, the Subdivision
Administrator shall schedule a meeting with the applicant. This meeting is
intended to provide the applicant with guidance on how the application could be
modified to comply with the review criteria and standards or address concerns
raised in the review process.
         d.   Pending Application Intentions: Within ten (10) days of the staff
workshop, the applicant shall advise the Subdivision Administrator of his/her
intention with regard to the pending application. If the applicant desires to
proceed without revisions to the application, the Subdivision Administrator
shall schedule a Plan Commission agenda date for the application. If, after the
staff workshop, the applicant chooses to revise the site plan and/or submit
additional materials, fifteen (15) copies of these materials shall be
submitted.
         e.   Review Of Revised Plan: Within five (5) days of receiving the
revised plans/materials, the Subdivision Administrator shall distribute copies
to the City departments for review. Each department shall provide a revised
written review to the Subdivision Administrator within ten (10) days of
receiving the revised plans/materials. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the
revised reports, the Subdivision Administrator shall provide the applicant with
a revised staff report indicating that all issues or deficiencies previously
identified have been addressed or indicating any remaining concerns or
deficiencies in the plans.
         f.   Notice Of Intention: Within ten (10) days of receiving the
revised staff report, the applicant shall notify the Subdivision Administrator
in writing of his/her intention with regard to the pending application. The
applicant may elect to: 1) proceed to have the application set for a Plan
Commission agenda; 2) request another staff workshop; or 3) provide revised
plans or materials to address the remaining concerns/deficiencies. If the
applicant chooses to conduct another staff workshop or submit additional
revisions/information, the procedures shall be the same as before.
         g.   Consideration By Plan Commission: The application shall be placed
on the agenda of the Plan Commission for its review and recommendation. The
Plan Commission shall be provided a copy of the staff reports regarding the
application. After review of the application, the Plan Commission shall, within
sixty (60) days, by majority vote of the members present, make a recommendation
to the City Council regarding action on the application based on its
conformance with the approval criteria and standards. Such recommendation shall
be provided to the City Council in writing within thirty (30) days of the Plan
Commission's decision.
         h.   Consideration By City Council:
            (1)   Following receipt of the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the City Council shall consider the application and its conformance
with the approval criteria and standards and take action on the application
within sixty (60) days of the Plan Commission's review.
            (2)   If the applicant submits a revised application or
supplemental submissions while the application is under consideration by the
Plan Commission or the City Council, the Plan Commission or the City Council
shall table the application to allow for review of the new information. The
application may be tabled by the Plan Commission or the City Council for a
period of time not exceeding the maximum original review periods established in
this title.
         i.   Conditions Of Approval: The City Council may impose conditions on
the site plan. Any condition imposed must relate directly to the approval
criteria and standards and be necessary to meet the intent of this title.
   H.   Approval Criteria And Standards: The Subdivision Administrator, the
Plan Commission and City Council shall review the site plan application to
ensure that it complies with all of the criteria and standards below:
      1.   Site Configuration: Buildings and structures will meet or exceed
setback standards, height and other dimensional standards and be appropriately
placed in relation to natural features of the site.
      2.   Buildings: Buildings shall be designed, situated and constructed so
as to conform to any applicable design criteria of the City. All buildings
shall have a strong visual relationship and design compatibility between the
building, the site, and adjacent development. The exterior appearances and mass
of the building(s) shall complement the existing development and character
within the surrounding area.
      3.   Impact On Surrounding Land Uses And Zoning: The proposed site plan
will be harmonious with and not harmful or injurious to existing and planned
uses in the immediate area. The proposed improvements will be coordinated with
improvements serving the site and other properties in the area. The site plan
shall meet the intent of this section and the intent of the City zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Preservation Of Natural Features: The site plan shall demonstrate
judicious effort to preserve the integrity of the land, natural topography,
drainage, wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, and existing vegetation.
      5.   Public Services And Utilities: The site plan shall be served
adequately with sanitary sewer, public water, and storm sewer, and such
utilities shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations of the
Subdivision Administrator.
      6.   Signs: Proposed signs shall meet the requirements of all applicable
City regulations (see title 12, chapter 13 of this Code) and shall be generally
complementary with surrounding properties and traffic operations. The size,
location, design and lighting of the signs shall be considered in relation to
adjacent sites, glare, traffic safety, and compatibility with adjoining
properties.
      7.   Exterior Lighting: The site plan shall provide for exterior lighting
that meets the following standards:
         a.   At the expense of the developer, all roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities in unsubdivided and other
developments shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of
property and the safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing standards, the following minimum standards shall
apply:
            (1)   For residential uses, lights shall be installed in parking
areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated
between dusk and dawn. For nonresidential uses, lights shall be installed in
all parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be
illuminated between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises are open for
operation. “Open for operation” shall be construed to mean any time that a
retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or a retail, office
or industrial facility actually has employees working within or upon the
premises, other than guards or watchmen. Lights shall not be more than fifteen
feet (15') in height in residential zoning districts and not more than thirty
feet (30') in height in other zoning districts.
            (2)   Where lighted areas are required, lighting shall be provided
as follows:
 
                             Minimum* Maximum*
Residential zoning districts 1.0      2.0
Commercial zoning districts  1.0      3.0
Industrial zoning districts  2.5      5.0
 
*Average ground level footcandles.
Average footcandles at the property line shall not exceed 0.5, as measured at
the property line.
         b.   All lighting shall be constructed, positioned and maintained in
such a way so as not to reflect light either directly or indirectly onto
adjacent properties.
      8.   Parking And Loading: The number, location and dimensions of all
parking and loading spaces and the design of parking and loading areas shall
meet the requirements of all applicable City regulations (see title 12, chapter
12 of this Code). All parking lots/areas are to have curb and gutter (B6.12).
All commercial parking lots shall be constructed with a minimum of ten inches
(10") of aggregate base course type b, two inches (2") of hot-mix asphalt
binder course, and one and one-half inches (11/2") of hot-mix asphalt surface
course. It will be the at the Subdivision Administrator’s discretion as to
whether “heavy-duty” pavement will be necessary for any truck traffic, and of
what that pavement cross-section will consist.
      9.   Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening on the site
shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   Landscaping and screening shall be provided along property lines
between nonresidential uses and residential uses.
         b.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
         c.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one
21/2"-caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every thirty
feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is encouraged, as
opposed to even spacing of trees.
         d.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub
or tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building’s nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
         e.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area (see also subsection
12-12-2C of this Code).
         f.   All trash enclosure areas and containers shall be fully screened
from streets and adjacent properties with a six foot (6') high, sight-obscuring
fence, wall or landscaped area placed around said facility. All trash
enclosures must be placed on a concrete pad sufficient to support the enclosure
to the satisfaction of the Building Official.
         g.   All permanent outdoor storage areas of goods, products,
materials, supplies, machinery, equipment or overnight parking of commercial
vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yard. Where permitted, permanent
outdoor storage areas of goods, products, materials, supplies, machinery,
equipment or overnight parking of commercial vehicles shall be enclosed to a
height of eight feet (8') above grade and screened to an opacity of not less
than seventy five percent (75%). These requirements can be achieved by using
any one or a combination of the following methods:
            (1)   The storage area can be screened with trees having a leafy
structure or with fences having structural components through which only twenty
five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
            (2)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed to a height
where only twenty five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
            (3)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed having a
width or design where only twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining
horizontal image is visible.
      10.   Vehicular Access And Circulation: The site plan shall provide for
the safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined access and circulation of
vehicles (B-40 vehicles with a turning radius of 60 feet). Access to the site
shall be designed to minimize traffic conflicts. All curb returns shall be a
minimum twenty five foot (25') radius (measured from back of curb). All streets
and driveways shall be designed to meet all applicable City regulations (see
title 9, chapters 1 and 3, respectively of this Code). All vehicular aisle
widths shall be a minimum of twenty six feet (26'), and shall encompass the
entire perimeter of all buildings. Parking stalls shall be a minimum eighteen
feet (18') deep by nine feet (9') wide. Furthermore, all gates (powered or
manual) to a site shall have padlocks or bypass opening devices approved and
used by the Fire Department. The clear opening through the gate shall be a
minimum of two feet (2') wider than the traveled way and shall open inward.
      11.   Nonmotorized Transportation Access And Circulation: Safe,
convenient, and aesthetically pleasing pedestrian and bicycle circulation
routes shall be provided within and accessing the site. There shall not be any
utility structures built within the limits of any pedestrian or bicycle path,
and there shall be a minimum two foot (2') clearance from any pedestrian or
bicycle path to utility structures.
      12.   Drainage And Stormwater Management: The site plan shall provide for
site surface drainage and stormwater management facilities that meet or exceed
the applicable standards of the City (see title 14 of this Code).
      13.   Driveways: Driveways in commercial areas shall be a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') from another driveway or intersection. Depending on the
intended use of the property, a traffic analysis may be required in order to
verify the placement of driveways, as well as the need for additional off- site
roadway improvements (turning lanes/acceleration lanes, etc.). All commercial
driveways within the City right-of-way shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete (Class SI) per the City driveway ordinance (see section
9-3-1 of this Code). Concrete for such driveways shall conform to the Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
      14.   Fire Department Connection: A five inch (5") Storz Fire Department
Connection (FDC) with a twenty two and one-half degree (22.5°) elbow toward the
ground shall be provided for the sprinkler/standpipe system for all buildings.
The FDC shall be capable of supplying the entire system, and shall be located
and visible on a street front or location approved by the Watseka Fire
Department. The FDC shall be located between two feet (2') and three and one-
half feet (31/2') from the ground to the centerline on the FDC inlet. There
shall be a minimum clearance of five feet (5') on either side with no
obstructions to the front of the FDC. A remote FDC shall be required if the
distance from the apparatus to the FDC is greater than seventy five feet (75').
   I.   Amendments To Approved Plans:
      1.   Amendments: An applicant may request a change in an approved site
plan. A change in an approved site plan which results in a major change shall
require approval of the amendment by the City Council after recommendation on
the matter by the Plan Commission. All amendments shall follow the procedures
and conditions herein required for original application submittal and review. A
change considered only a minor change shall require only the submission of a
revised plan to the Subdivision Administrator.
      2.   Determination Of Major And Minor Changes: A determination of whether
a change in an approved site plan is a major or minor change shall be made by
the Subdivision Administrator according to the guidelines of this subsection
I2. The applicant may appeal the determination of a major change to the Plan
Commission in writing at least seven (7) days prior to the next regular
scheduled Plan Commission meeting. The Plan Commission will vote to either
uphold or reverse the determination. If the determination is upheld, the
amendment shall proceed only according to the procedures set forth herein.
         a.   Guidelines For Major Change:
            (1)   A change in the original concept of the development.
            (2)   A change in the original use or character of the development.
            (3)   A change in the type of dwelling unit as identified on the
approved site plan.
            (4)   An increase in the number of dwelling units planned.
            (5)   Rearrangement of lots, blocks, or building tracts.
            (6)   A change in the character or function of any street.
            (7)   A reduction in the amount of land set aside for common open
space.
            (8)   An increase or decrease in any building area over five
percent (5%).
            (9)   An increase or decrease over five percent (5%) in any
building height.
            (10)   Significant variations in the design layout of the site
plan, such as, but not limited to, the deletion, relocation or addition of on-
site improvements such as drives, parking lots, structures, berms, curbs,
landscaping, and utilities.
         b.   Guidelines For Minor Changes:
            (1)   Any minor variations in layout that do not constitute a major
change.
            (2)   An increase or decrease in any building area less than five
percent (5%).
            (3)   An increase or decrease less than five percent (5%) in any
building height.
            (4)   Changes in the species of required trees, shrubs or ground
cover designated on the site plan.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-3-6: FEES:
   A.   Land Development Review And Construction Observation Fees: All costs
incurred by the City for the review of plans and specifications by the
Subdivision Administrator or his/her designee shall be paid by the subdivider/
developer/applicant. Additional services required for complex projects
including, but not limited to, outside legal consultants, special inspectors,
or specialists in the stormwater, building, construction, ecology, planning, or
related fields shall be paid for by the developer.
   B.   Plat Fees:
      1.   A fee shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time of submission of
the preliminary and final plat.
      2.   No plat shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission without a receipt
from the City Clerk being exhibited by the owner, subdivider or developer
showing full payment of the fee. Payment of the fee is in no way contingent on
whether or not the plat of subdivision or development submitted is approved or
disapproved.
      3.   The fees shall be as follows:
         a.   Preliminary plat: One hundred dollars ($100.00), plus one dollar
($1.00) for each lot within each preliminary subdivision or development plat
submitted.
         b.   Final plat: One dollar ($1.00) for each lot within each
subdivision or development plat submitted, with a minimum fee of fifty dollars
($50.00).
      4.   In the event that a plat calls for development of residential
property, either as two-family or multiple-family, or as business or industrial
property, then the fee shall be determined as two dollars ($2.00) per each
dwelling unit or ten dollars ($10.00) per acre for businesses or industrial
property.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 4: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
13-4-1: Compliance With Applicable Rules And Regulations
13-4-2: Streets And Alleys
13-4-3: Easements
13-4-4: Blocks
13-4-5: Lots
13-4-6: Building Setback Lines
13-4-7: Construction Entrances
13-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to the design standards established herein, all subdivision site
plan plats shall comply with the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations set
forth by this section.
A. The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended from time to
time.
   B.   The zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the City,
including, but not limited to, the stormwater management ordinance, flood
hazard prevention, and sediment and erosion control regulations (see title 14
of this Code), all as amended from time to time.
   C.   The Comprehensive Plan and Official Map of the City or any portions
thereof.
   D.   The special requirements of this title and any rules of the City, the
Environmental Protection Agency of the State and the County Public Health
Department relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision site plan
is not served by public water or by a public sewer, and provision for one or
both of these services has not been made.
   E.   The rules of the State Division of Highways relating to safety of
access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the
streets if the subdivision site plan or any lot contained therein abuts a State
truck highway or connecting street.
   F.   All design, dimensions, materials and methods of construction of
improvements not specifically established in this title shall conform to
applicable Federal, State and City regulations which are located in the Office
of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-4-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such as
streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets.
It is the intent that the street system, whether public or private, encourage
safe and efficient traffic flow (B-40 vehicle with a turning radius of 60
feet), as well as provide safe vehicular storage space for stopping and turning
movements so as to not conflict at intersecting streets or driveway entrances.
   B.   1. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on
the Official Map.
      2.   All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and
shopping centers, to population densities and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
      3.   Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to
the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets
necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property.
      4.   The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily
be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets shall be encouraged where
such use will result in a more desirable layout. The use of cul-de-sacs and u-
shaped streets is not encouraged.
      5.   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
parcel to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
site plan with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development
of adjacent parcels.
      6.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys and truck loading and
maneuvering areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various
types of traffic.
      7.   Dual access shall be provided in any subdivision site plan,
beginning with the initial construction, and shall be maintained in suitable
condition for passage of private and emergency vehicles.
   C.   Where a subdivision site plan borders on or contains a railroad or
highway, the Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and
on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, for park purposes in residential
districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts.
Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
   D.   Where a subdivision site plan abuts or contains an existing or proposed
highway or major thoroughfare, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or Official
Map (see title 1, chapter 13 of this Code), the Plan Commission may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nuances reservation, at least ten feet (10') wide, along the rear property
line; deep lots with rear service alleys; or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
   E.   1. Street right-of-way widths shall be as specified in section
13-8-2 of this title.
      2.   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities or streets
shall be prohibited.
      3.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten degrees (10°), they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to ensure clear sight distances.
   F.   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the
first floor elevation of the houses or buildings to permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of the lots. Driveway slopes shall be between
two percent (2%) and eight percent (8%).
   G.   Street gradients shall be as specified in section
13-8-2 of this title.
   H.   Tangents (minimum length 100 feet) shall be introduced between
horizontal reverse curves on all streets. Tangents (minimum length 50 feet,
measured from the right-of-way of the intersecting road) shall be introduced at
the end of all curvilinear roads at intersections.
   I.   1. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and no new street shall intersect any existing street at less
than sixty degrees (60°). A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an
angle of less than seventy five degrees (75°) shall not be acceptable. Not more
than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically
approved by the City.
      2.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') shall be avoided.
      3.   All street intersections should encourage safe traffic flow.
   J.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected
whenever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the City.
   K.   1. Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business and industrial
districts; except, that the City may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed and in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance (see
title 12, chapter 12 of this Code).
      2.   The width of alleys shall be as specified in section
13-8-2 of this title.
      3.   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where
deemed necessary by the City.
      4.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, corners may be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movement.
      5.   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-4-3: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements shall be provided for drainage and utilities on all side yard
and rear yard lot lines. These drainage and utility easements shall be at least
five feet (5') wide on all side yard lot lines and ten feet (10') on all rear
yard lines.
   B.   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
No building shall be constructed upon any easement.
   C.   All 100-year overflow routes shall be contained within an easement
referred to as “surface overland flow easements” on the plat of subdivision.
Overland drainage easements shall be wider than twenty feet (20') if needed to
convey the 100-year overland drainage flow during emergency conditions while
maintaining a minimum one foot (1') of freeboard from all structures.
   D.   Where a subdivision site plan is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such
watercourse and shall include such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose and as determined by the City. Parallel
streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-4-4: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the types of uses contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limits of the City.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200')
or be less than six hundred feet (600'). Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed six
hundred feet (600') in length.
   C.   Pedestrian crosswalk easements not less than ten feet (10') wide shall
be required by the Plan Commission to provide for pedestrian circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other
community facilities.
   D.   Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use
shall be designed as such, and the plan shall show adequate off-street areas to
provide parking, loading docks and other such facilities as may be required by
the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-4-5: LOTS:
   A.   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision site plan and for the type of development
and use contemplated. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
   B.   Residential lot sizes, regardless of jurisdictional boundary, shall
meet the minimum requirements herein established and shall comply with the
rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health and the County
Health Department.
   C.   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have
a minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site and
to afford the minimum usable area required in this title or the zoning
ordinance for front, rear and side yards.
   D.   Depths and widths of lots or properties reserved or laid out for
commercial, business or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for
the off-street service and parking facilities required in the zoning ordinance
(see title 12, chapter 12 of this Code).
   E.   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
   F.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from highways or
thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10'), and across
which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the
rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
   G.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   H.   Where residential lots fronting on thoroughfares are permitted by the
Plan Commission, they should be platted with extra depth to permit generous
distances between the buildings and such trafficways. Where lots front on
thoroughfares, the normal building setback line shall be increased by an
additional twenty feet (20'). Business, commercial, or industrial buildings in
residential blocks shall be provided with setbacks at least equal to the
setback of the residential properties in that block and shall comply with all
applicable zoning requirements.
   I.   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid
concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
   J.   Lots at right angles to each other shall be avoided wherever possible,
especially in residential areas.
   K.   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from, and orientation to, both streets.
   L.   Lot lines shall follow Municipal boundary lines whenever practicable,
rather than cross them.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-4-6: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform
to the front, side and rear yard provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-4-7: CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCES:
   A.   All developments of property which are subject to this title shall,
whenever practicable, provide a construction entrance (per the Illinois Urban
Drainage Manual) over the private property being developed for the use of all
vehicles and equipment used in connection with the development and the making
or delivery of materials and supplies thereto. The construction entrance shall
be continuously maintained by the developer in a dust-free manner.
   B.   Every construction entrance herein required shall be depicted on the
final development plans.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 5: REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
Section
13-5-1: Indemnification And Insurance Requirements
13-5-2: Monuments And Markers
13-5-3: Streets
13-5-4: Utilities
13-5-5: Utility Lines
13-5-6: Sidewalks
13-5-7: Landscaping
13-5-8: Driveways
13-5-9: Traffic-Calming Devices
13-5-10: Final Plan Approval Requirements
13-5-1: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No subdivision development plan shall be approved by the Plan
Commission unless the applicant has included the following indemnification and
insurance requirements on the plan:
      1.   Indemnification: The applicant and the contractor shall indemnify
the City of Watseka (“Municipality”) and the Municipal engineer, their
officials, officers, employees, and agents acting in the scope and course of
their employment and shall protect them from claims arising out of or in
connection with any operation of the applicant or contractor including personal
injury, death, or for destruction of or damage to property to the full extent
allowed by the laws of the State of Illinois and not beyond any extent which
would render these provisions void or unenforceable.
      2.   Insurance: The applicant and contractor shall also protect the
Municipality and the Municipal engineer by including them as additional insured
on their comprehensive general liability insurance policy. The minimum level of
insurance shall be as specified in section 100 “General Requirements and
Covenants” of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction by
the Illinois Department of Transportation. “Claims made” type policies are
unacceptable. Certificates of insurance shall be filed and approved by the
Municipality and the Municipal engineer a minimum of five (5) days before
starting construction. Failure of the Municipality and Municipal engineer to
request the certificate of insurance shall in no way be considered a waiver of
this requirement.
      3.   Personal Liability: In carrying out any of their duties or in
exercising any power or authority granted to the Municipal engineer by the
Municipality, there shall be no personal liability upon the Municipal engineer
or his/her authorized representative, it being understood that in such matters
he/she acts as an agent and representative of the Municipality. By beginning
work, the applicant and contractor covenant and agree that they each shall
neither commence nor prosecute any action or suit whatsoever against the
Municipal engineer or Municipality, their officials, officers, employees or
agents in any action or omission done or not done in the course of their
duties. Further, by beginning work, the applicant and contractor agree to pay
all attorney fees and all costs incurred by the Municipality or Municipal
engineer, their officials, officers, employees or agents because of any action
or suit in violation of this chapter.
      4.   Hold Harmless: The applicant and contractor doing work shall hereby
defend, indemnify, keep, and save harmless the Municipality and the Municipal
engineer, and their respective legislative and Council members,
representatives, agents, and employees, in both individual and official
capabilities, against all suits, claims, damages, losses, and expenses,
including attorney fees, caused by or growing out of, or incidental to, the
performance of the work by the applicant or the contractor to the full extent
allowed by the laws of the State of Illinois and not beyond any extent which
would render these provisions void or unenforceable.
      5.   Construction Observation: All materials and each part or detail of
the work portrayed on the plans may be subject at any time to observation by
the Municipal engineer. Observation may be made at the site, or at the source
of material supply, whether that is at a mill, plant, ship, etc. The Municipal
engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be
furnished with such information and assistance by the applicant and contractor
as needed to perform these observations. The contractor shall be held strictly
to the true intent of the plans in regard to quality of materials and
workmanship.
   B.   1. The Municipal engineer is not responsible for safety on the worksite
nor does the Municipal engineer have any duty to review in any manner the
adequacy of the contractor's safety measures incident to the work portrayed on
the plans.
      2.   The Municipal engineer is not responsible for any construction
means, methods, techniques, sequences or procedures for the work portrayed on
the plans.
      3.   The Municipal engineer has no charge of the construction and has no
right, duty, or responsibility to stop work because of any contractor’s failure
to follow proper safety precautions. The Municipal engineer is not responsible
for the acts, errors or omissions of any applicant, engineer or contractor, or
any of their agents or employees, or any other person performing any of the
work portrayed on the plans.
   C.   The contractor shall, upon written notice from the Municipality, remove
or uncover such portions of the finished work, as it may direct, before the
final acceptance of the same. After examination, the contractor shall restore
said portion of the work to the standard required by the plans. The expense of
uncovering, removing and replacement shall be borne by the applicant and/or the
contractor and not the Municipality nor the Municipal engineer.
   D.   Any reference to “supervision” by the engineer in the Illinois
Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, or any other referenced documents shall be changed to
“observation”.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-2: MONUMENTS AND MARKERS:
   A.   Iron rods, nine-sixteenths inch (9/16") in diameter and not less than
thirty inches (30") long, shall be placed at all corners and angle points of
the outside boundary, but no farther than one-fourth (1/4) mile apart. Iron
rods, nine-sixteenths inch (9/16") in diameter and not less than thirty inches
(30") long, shall also be set at all corners of lots.
   B.   Each lot shall have a marker board with the lot number on it (built on
a 4 inch by 4 inch post) placed in the center of the lot at the front property
line, and shall extend four feet (4') above the finished grade.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-3: STREETS:
   A.   Street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision site plan
in accordance with the regulations set forth in this section and the tables of
minimum standards and typical section as set forth in sections
13-8-2 and
13-8-3, respectively, of this title. The regulations for street improvements
are as follows:
      1.   All streets in single-family residential zoning areas shall be
constructed in accordance with this title.
      2.   All streets in multi-family and commercial zoning areas shall be
constructed in accordance with collector thoroughfare standards.
      3.   For industrial and other special use areas, as determined by the
Plan Commission and the Subdivision Administrator.
      4.   All street construction, including those listed above, shall conform
to the requirements of the Illinois Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
   B.   It should be noted that all curb returns shall have a minimum radius of
twenty five feet (25') (measured from the back of curb).
   C.   It should be noted that no building permit will be issued until such
time that the roadway bituminous binder course has been installed.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-4: UTILITIES:
   A.   Sanitary Sewer System: Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of the City (see title 10, chapter 3 of this
Code) and the State Environmental Protection Agency. No oxidation ponds,
seepage lagoons or holding lagoons will be constructed except upon specific
approval of the Subdivision Administrator. Sewers may be placed only in public
rights-of- way or in easements.
   B.   Drainage System: The drainage system within the development shall be
designed to anticipate and provide capacity for drainage from naturally
tributary land. Such design shall provide adequate capacity for transmitting
such drainage from the other tributary areas on the basis of the ultimate
development of such other tributary areas, but such drainage system need not
make provision for the retention of drainage from other tributary areas.
Drainage, stormwater detention and compensatory storage calculations shall be
submitted with the plans as requited by the Subdivision Administrator. Where a
storm sewer discharges into an open ditch or natural watercourse, a concrete
headwall may be required according to standards from the Subdivision
Administrator.
   C.   Water System: All residential, commercial, industrial and community
facility buildings or structures shall be served by an adequate water supply
and distribution system. The design of the system shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the State Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-5: UTILITY LINES:
   A.   All utility lines for telephone, cable television and electric service
shall be placed entirely underground (minimum depth of 24 inches from finished
grade). Said conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated
public ways, in a manner which will not conflict with other underground
services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public.
   B.   The utility lines shall be parallel to and not less than twelve inches
(12") from the property lines.
   C.   An “x” shall be scribed into the curb at all road crossing locations.
   D.   Corner markers as required in section
13-5-2 of this chapter shall not be disturbed by the installation of utility
lines.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-6: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Concrete Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalks shall be provided throughout the
subdivision site plan to serve the anticipated needs of its residents.
   B.   Location And Width:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be located in accordance with proper land planning
procedures and with due regard for public safety and anticipated concentration
of pedestrian traffic.
      2.   All sidewalks shall be five feet (5') wide and typically be
installed one foot (1') from the property line (within the right-of-way). Where
practicable, all sidewalks shall be located so that a parkway separates the
curbs from the sidewalk.
   C.   Compliance With ADA Requirements: All sidewalks must be in conformance
with the latest ADA requirements.
   D.   Location Of Utility Structures: There shall not be any utility
structures built within the limits of any pedestrian or bicycle paths, and
there shall be a minimum two foot (2') clearance from any pedestrian or bicycle
paths to utility structures.
   E.   Time Extensions For Completion: Notwithstanding the fact that
installation of sidewalks is required to be completed within two (2) years of
final plat approval, the Corporate Authorities may, upon application, grant
extensions for up to six (6) months for such sidewalk completion. No more than
four (4) such extensions may be granted. No extension shall be granted unless
or until the applicant's (developer's) subdivision security bond or letter of
credit has been extended to remain valid during the term of any such extension.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed a waiver of the applicant's
(developer’s) responsibility to complete the sidewalks; and provided, further,
that if the applicant (developer) transfers ownership of any lot, the sidewalk
of which has not been accepted by the City, the applicant (developer) and the
owner of the lot shall be jointly and severally responsible for the completion
and maintenance of the sidewalk.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
9-2-2 of this Code
13-5-7: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Topsoil Replacement: In the event that topsoil is removed prior to,
during or after construction, it shall be replaced to a depth not less than
four inches (4") in all lawns and planting areas. Said topsoil shall be
provided and spread by the general contractor or subcontractor.
   B.   Vegetation On Unpaved Areas: All unpaved areas within the street right-
of-way shall be seeded or restored with natural plantings approved by the City.
Before the release of the two-year maintenance bond can be recommended by the
Subdivision Administrator, all unpaved areas between the edge of the road
pavement and the right-of-way line must support an adequate mat of grass.
Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping.
   C.   Parkway Trees: Notwithstanding any other provision specified herein,
parkway trees are to be planted in the parkway in accordance with the City tree
code (see title 9, chapter 8 of this Code and appropriate subsections in the
regulations for the City zoning districts) with at least two (2) street trees
per lot and four (4) street trees on a corner lot.
   D.   Protective Screening: Protective screen planting may be required to
secure a reasonably effective physical barrier between residential properties
and adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The
screen planting plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet
the approval of the Plan Commission.
   E.   Stormwater Basins: All stormwater basins shall be designed to enhance
water quality, control erosion and sedimentation, and discourage nuisance
waterfowl. All stormwater basins shall be landscaped as designated in the City
stormwater management ordinance (see title 14 of this Code).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-8: DRIVEWAYS:
Except where improved alleys are existing, prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit, every subdivided lot shall have a driveway paved with an
asphalt and/or concrete surface minimally extending from an adjacent public
street to the front setback line of the principal structure located on the lot.
Driveway slopes shall be between two percent (2%) and eight percent (8%).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-9: TRAFFIC-CALMING DEVICES:
The City may, at its discretion, require the use of traffic-calming devices in
the design of roadways within a subdivision.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-5-10: FINAL PLAN APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Upon receiving approval of the development plans by the Subdivision
Administrator, the developer's engineer shall submit to the Subdivision
Administrator five (5) signed and sealed full-size (24 inches by 36 inches)
sets and four (4) signed and sealed reduced-size (11 inches by 17 inches) sets
of the final plans, as well as one copy of the final plans and one copy of the
plat of subdivision in electronic format described as follows:
   A.   Media Type: Files may be submitted on the following media types, which
are IBM and Microsoft compatible:
      CD-ROM
      DVD
      Flash or “jump” drive
   B.   File Types: All submissions must be in a drawing file format compatible
with AutoCAD (current version). If the drawing file is in a micro station
format (*.dgn), then a text file must accompany the drawing. This text file
must reference the micro station layer number and give a corresponding
definition for that layer. ESRI shape files or personal geodatabases are also
acceptable.
   C.   General Drawing Requirements:
      1.   The drawing must be drafted at full scale and will contain all
existing and proposed objects that are contained in the construction plans.
      2.   All files shall be included for submittals. Check that x-referenced
or attached files are also submitted.
      3.   All utility structures will be drawn as a block with an insertion
point. All utility structures shall have a unique block name for the different
types of structures.
      4.   Layers will be descriptive and numerous enough as to separate
utility types as well as determining proposed from existing.
      5.   All utilities, which include a direction of flow, will be drafted in
the direction of that flow.
      6.   All pipes will be drafted such that a single line is drawn and
snapped from the center of the structure to the center of the next structure.
Break pipes at structures.
      7.   All pipes connected to other pipes without a structure shall also be
snapped.
      8.   All pipe sizes are to be included as text labels or in a schedule
somewhere on the drawing.
   D.   Specific Utility Requirements:
      1.   Storm Sewer: Include the following structures as blocks in addition
to the storm pipe:
         Manhole.
         Inlet.
         Catch basin cleanout.
         Flared end section.
      2.   Sanitary Sewer:
         a.   Include the following structures as blocks in addition to the
sanitary pipe:
            Manhole.
            Grease trap.
            Air release valve.
            Lift stations.
         b.   Include and differentiate gravity and forced sewer pipes.
      3.   Water System:
         a.   Include the following structures as blocks in addition to the
water pipe:
            Valve.
            Reducer.
            Hydrant.
            Meter vaults.
            Wells.
         b.   Include and differentiate distribution, service and private
pipes.
      4.   Parcels: Include any plat of survey or plat of subdivision in one of
the accepted drawing file formats.
      5.   Lights: Include the following structures as blocks in addition to
the electrical wire runs:
         Light pole.
         Control box.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 6: ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS
Section
13-6-1: Compliance With Standards; Certification Required
13-6-2: Sewers
13-6-3: Water Supply
13-6-4: Trench Backfill
13-6-5: Streets
13-6-6: Alleys
13-6-7: Sidewalks
13-6-8: Street Lighting
13-6-9: Street Signs
13-6-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS; CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
   A.   The applicant shall install storm and sanitary sewers, a water supply
system, detention basins, street grading and pavement, alleys, pedestrianways,
public utilities, and street lighting in accordance with applicable ordinances
and standards of construction of the City.
   B.   No subdivision of land shall be approved by the Corporate Authorities
without receiving a statement signed by the Subdivision Administrator
certifying that the improvements described in the applicant's plans and
specifications, together with any agreements, are in substantial compliance
with ordinances of the City and that they comply with the standards in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-2: SEWERS:
   A.   Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be
installed to serve all properties in the subdivision. Sanitary sewerage
facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Such
improvements shall be installed in accordance with the minimum standards and
specifications as contained in section
13-8-4 of this title or as approved by the City Council after recommendation by
the Plan Commission.
   B.   Storm Sewers: Storm sewers shall be installed to serve all properties
in the subdivision. Sump pump discharge conveyance pipes, either separate or in
combination with storm sewers, shall be installed unless it can be empirically
demonstrated that site specific soils exhibit an infiltration rate greater than
or equal to 3.2x10-3 cubic feet per second per square foot. Generally, within
rear yard drainage easements, sump pump discharge conveyance systems shall
consist of an inlet provided at alternating lot corners with capped service
tees for each adjacent lot and installed so as not to interfere with other
public utilities. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards and specifications as contained in section
13-8-5 of this title or as approved by the City Council after recommendation by
the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-3: WATER SUPPLY:
Water distribution facilities, including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves,
valve vaults, water services and all other appurtenances adequate for fire and
domestic needs shall be installed to serve all properties within the
subdivision. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards and specifications as contained in section
13-8-6 of this title or as approved by the City Council after recommendation by
the Plan Commission. At no time shall anyone other than City authorized
personnel operate valves or hydrants.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-4: TRENCH BACKFILL:
   A.   All trenches caused by the construction of sewers, sewer services,
water mains, water services, and in excavation around catch basins, manholes,
inlets and other appurtenances which occur within two feet (2') of the limits
of existing or proposed pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be
backfilled and properly compacted with trench backfill material. When, in the
opinion of the Subdivision Administrator, proper compaction of the trench
cannot be obtained, a controlled low strength material (flowable fill) shall be
utilized.
   B.   Trench backfill shall be compacted in place to ninety five percent
(95%) of maximum density at optimum moisture as determined by the Standard
Proctor Test, and as specified in the appendices to this title (see chapter 8
of this title), for the specific type of improvement.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-5: STREETS:
   A.   The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded to the required
section.
   B.   All unsuitable sub-base material shall be removed and shall be replaced
with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices. Soil test reports are to be submitted to the Subdivision
Administrator at the time of plan submittal. Sub-grade stability improvements
may be required for soils with an IBR less than six (6) and at the discretion
of the Subdivision Administrator. Lime stabilization may be utilized upon
receipt of approval by the Subdivision Administrator, and must be in accordance
with DOT sections 302 and 310.
   C.   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in centerline gradient
occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one and one-half
percent (11/2%) or less. The length of vertical curves shall be established on
the basis of design, speed and stopping distance in accordance with standards
obtainable from the Subdivision Administrator.
   D.   All pavement thicknesses, including surface, base and sub-base courses,
shall be designed in accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation
standards. The minimum thicknesses for Class IV streets (as designated in
IDOT’s Bureau of Design and Environmental Manual) shall be as specified in
section
13-8-3 of this title. Proof roll of the sub-base and base courses shall be
conducted and densities of the sub-base, base, binder, and surface courses of
all streets shall be field verified during construction with nuclear methods by
a developer-employed testing service.
   E.   Class III streets (as designated in IDOT’s Bureau of Design and
Environmental Manual) require design data to be submitted to the Subdivision
Administrator at the time of plan submittal and shall always meet or exceed the
minimum requirements in section
13-8-3 of this title. However, alternate materials may be considered by the
Plan Commission, if recommended by the Subdivision Administrator, if
structurally equal.
   F.   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and shall be
combination (integral) concrete. Curbs may be constructed integrally with the
portland cement concrete pavement. All curbs and gutters shall be installed in
accordance with the minimum standards and specifications as contained in
section
13-8-7 of this title or as approved by the City Council after recommendation by
the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-6: ALLEYS:
Alley pavement shall conform to the specifications of section
13-6-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-7: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete (Class SI)
to a minimum thickness of five inches (5"), except at driveway locations, where
the thickness shall be a minimum thickness of six inches (6"). An aggregate
base with a minimum thickness of four inches (4") shall be provided under all
sidewalks and shall be compacted as approved by the Subdivision Administrator.
Concrete for such sidewalks shall conform to the Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   B.   All sidewalks are to be constructed with two inch by 6 inch (2" x 6")
forms.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-8: STREET LIGHTING:
Street lighting improvements shall be installed to serve all properties within
the subdivision. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards as approved by the City Council after recommendation by the
Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-6-9: STREET SIGNS:
The developer will pay for all street name and regulatory signs and install
same in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (latest
edition) and consistent with the Traffic Control Plan. The cost of all signage
is to be included in the letter of credit posted for the improvements. All
signs are to be installed within one week of the construction of the roadway
bituminous binder. The signs shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Signs supports shall be UNISTRUT TELESPAR. perforated sign posts 2"x
2", 14 gauge, 13' long upright and 21/4" x 21/4" gauge 3' long or approved
equal.
   B.   A sign map is required for the development to be approved by the City
Council and Police Department before signs are to be installed.
   C.   Stop sign: Thirty inches (30") diamond grade V.I.P. stop sign on local
streets (reflective).
   D.   Stop sign: Thirty six inches (36") diamond grade V.I.P. stop sign on
collector/arterial streets (reflective).
   E.   Speed limit sign: Twenty four inches by thirty inches (24" x 30")
diamond grade V.I.P., 25 MPH on local streets.
   F.   Speed limit sign: Twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36")
diamond grade V.I.P. on collector/arterial.
   G.   Residential street name signs: Green with four inch (4") white letters
- six inch (6") double extruded blade (letters to be reflective) high intensity
sheeting (18 inch minimum blade).
   H.   Collector streets and greater: Six inch (6") white letters - eight inch
(8") double extruded blade (letters to be reflective) high intensity sheeting
(18 inch minimum blade).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 7: INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
Section
13-7-1: Construction Observation
13-7-2: Record Drawing Requirements (As-Builts)
13-7-1: CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATION:
   A.   All infrastructure improvements required for the development shall be
observed during the course of construction by the Subdivision Administrator.
All reasonable fees (including reasonable attorney fees, engineering fees and/
or staff costs) associated with such activity, including the reviewing of the
plans and specifications for such improvements, shall be paid for by the
applicant. The applicant may be required to post a deposit with the City to
cover the anticipated costs of such services before they are undertaken. In the
event that these fees are not paid in a timely manner, the City may, at its
sole discretion, draw down on any subdivision improvement/maintenance security
which may be available.
   B.   The applicant shall give at least forty eight (48) hours’ written
notification to the Subdivision Administrator prior to the performance of any
of the following:
      1.   The construction of any roadway or street.
      2.   The surfacing of any roadway or street.
      3.   The installation of any curbing or gutters.
      4.   The grading or backfilling of any open trench or excavation in which
any utility facilities, including, but not limited to, water lines, sewer
lines, and electrical cables, have been installed.
      5.   The construction of any sidewalk.
      6.   The filling, pressure testing, chlorination, or water sampling of
any water main.
   C.   Within the forty eight (48) hour notice period, the Subdivision
Administrator may conduct on-site observation to determine that the proposed
work complies with the engineering drawings. If, in the opinion of the
Subdivision Administrator, the proposed work does not comply with such final
drawings, the Subdivision Administrator shall have the authority to order that
all such proposed work be terminated until such time as necessary steps are
taken to correct any defects or deficiencies. Upon the correction of such
deficiencies, the applicant shall again notify the Subdivision Administrator.
   D.   There shall be no development work on Sundays. Development work is
allowed on Saturdays, but any necessary City inspections/testing observation
must be preapproved and coordinated with the Subdivision Administrator.
Development work hours shall be from sunrise to sunset (see also subsection
5-8-2G and section
11-11-13 of this Code).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-7-2: RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS (AS-BUILTS):
Record drawings (as-builts) are required to provide a means of schematic
verification that the intent of the approved engineering design has been met,
thereby substantiating that the health, safety, and welfare aspects of the
engineering design have been adequately provided by the construction of the
project. Secondly, record drawings serve as a reference tool for future
location and maintenance operations. The following requirements will be applied
to each set of record drawings developed for the City:
   A.   General Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   The first sheet of the set will have a vicinity map in the upper
right-hand corner.
      2.   Record drawings shall be submitted as revisions shown on the
original engineering plans and as AutoCAD (current version) files. Record
drawings will have the original data lined through and the record data added to
the drawing. At no time will the original data be accepted as the record data.
      3.   All record drawings for major projects are required to be twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and shall bear the name, address,
and telephone number of the firm preparing the drawings and the date the record
data is added to the original drawings via the revision block.
      4.   Surveyor’s/engineer’s statement (with embossed or wet seal and with
original signature on each sheet) shall verify that the record drawings reflect
the true conditions in the field.
      5.   “Record Drawing” shall be labeled on each sheet in one inch (1")
high letters.
      6.   Street names shall be shown on all streets.
      7.   If the utility system is to be private (not to be dedicated to local
authority), then indicate such on each sheet.
      8.   The location and elevation of the bench marks referenced will be
shown on the drawing (and should be the same bench mark datum. as the original
approved design plans). If the referenced bench marks are not within the
project limits, then complete descriptions of locations must be provided.
      9.   Show all easements within the project limits on the record drawings.
   B.   Detention Pond Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Topographic map of the detention area.
      2.   Spot elevations on top of bank to confirm minimum design bank
elevations as well as spot elevations on any overflow weir.
      3.   Observed water elevation at date of the record drawing for wet
bottom basins.
      4.   Location of top of bank and existing water edges at time and date of
taking elevations.
      5.   Spot elevations on the bottom of dry bottom basins, or, if requested
by the Subdivision Administrator, for wet bottom basins.
      6.   A stage/storage table showing the design and as-constructed pond
volumes and release rates.
      7.   A signed/sealed statement by a professional engineer that the
detention pond(s) provides the required detention storage and does not exceed
the allowable outflow rate(s) per the approved construction plans and hydrology
study. If significantly different than the approved drawings (as determined by
the Subdivision Administrator), the engineer must submit a revised hydrology
study using the as-constructed conditions in order to document this statement.
   C.   Water System Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Locate all valves, services (b-boxes), and fire hydrants in two (2)
directions (station and offset).
         a.   Locations shall be perpendicular to the right-of-way and parallel
to the water main.
            (1)   Lot lines may be used to locate water services.
            (2)   Permanent structures that are properly located may also be
used.
            (3)   Radial ties are not acceptable.
         b.   All horizontal distances shall be shown to the nearest foot. All
vertical distances shall be shown to the nearest tenth of a foot.
      2.   Show all materials, sizes, and types of valves, pipes and special
fittings (crosses, tees, reducers, etc. - not elbows).
      3.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all structure frames/lids
and for the top of all pipes entering/exiting each structure.
      4.   Special detail drawings will be required where installations are not
shown on approved engineering drawings for whatever reason or where required
for clarity.
      5.   Show location and elevation for pipes where bury depths are greater
than six feet (6').
      6.   Details for water services deviating from typical installation
details of the approved engineering plans shall be noted on the record drawings
(i.e., instances where the corp stop location is not evident).
   D.   Sanitary Sewer System Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Locate all wyes, cleanouts and manholes in two (2) directions in the
same manner as subsection B of this section.
      2.   Horizontal dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. Vertical
elevations shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
      3.   Identify the length, size, material, and slope of all pipe (i.e.,
300 feet of 8" PVC SDR 35 at 0.4%).
      4.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all manhole covers and for
the inverts of all pipes entering/exiting each manhole.
      5.   Service laterals are to be identified with location of end of
service/plug (station and offset measured upstream).
      6.   Details for drop manholes deviating from the details on the approved
engineering plans shall be indicated on the record drawings.
   E.   Force Mains Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Locate all valves and manholes in two (2) directions in the same
manner as subsection B of this section.
      2.   Show all materials, sizes, and types of valves, pipes, and special
fittings (crosses, tees, etc. - not elbows).
      3.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all structure frames/lids
and for the top of all pipes entering/exiting each structure.
      4.   Special detail drawings will be required where installations are not
shown on approved engineering drawings for whatever reason or where required
for clarity.
   F.   Lift Station Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Wet well and valve vault size and location shall be indicated along
with wet well high and low water levels.
      2.   Elevations for top, bottom, inverts, adjacent ground and type and
size of lines and fittings for all lines entering or leaving the wet well and
valve vault shall be indicated.
      3.   Any amended schedules which show pump, motor and electrical data
shall be indicated.
   G.   Storm Sewer System Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all storm sewer structure
frames/lids and for the inverts of all pipes entering/exiting each structure.
      2.   Any on-site field tiles which remain on-site must be identified on
record drawings.
      3.   Identify the length, size, material, and slope of all pipe (i.e.,
300 feet of 12" RCCP at 1.0%).
      4.   Horizontal dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. Vertical
elevations shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
      5.   Provide elevations and cross-sectional information, as well as
slope, on all ditches, canals, etc.
   H.   Street Lighting Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Provide horizontal ties for light foundations and control cabinets
as referenced to the approved plan stationing or coordinates.
      2.   Service cables and service transformers shall be depicted in
schematic form.
   I.   Electronic File Record Drawing Requirements: Include AutoCAD compatible
version of all record information as described in section
13-5-10 of this title.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 8: APPENDICES
Section
13-8-1: Appendix A, Certifications For Final Plat
13-8-2: Appendix B, Street Design Guidelines
13-8-3: Appendix C, Roadway Specifications
13-8-4: Appendix D, Sanitary Sewer System Standards And Specifications
13-8-5: Appendix E, Storm Sewer System Standards And Specifications
13-8-6: Appendix F, Water Supply System Standards And Specifications
13-8-7: Appendix G, Curb And Gutter Materials Standards And Specifications
13-8-1: APPENDIX A, CERTIFICATIONS FOR FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The following certification forms for the final plat are on file in the
Office of the City Clerk:
      Survey Certification
      Certificate of Ownership
      Design Engineer Drainage Certification
      School Certificate
      Plan Commission Approval
      Corporate Authorities Approval
      County Clerk Certification
      County Recorder Certification
   B.   Detention And Drainage Easements:
      1.   All easements indicated as detention or drainage easements on this
plat are reserved for and granted to the City of Watseka and to their
successors and assigns. No buildings shall be placed on said easement, but the
same may be used for other purposes that do not adversely affect the storage/
free flow of stormwater. Each owner or subsequent purchaser shall be equally
responsible for maintaining the easement and shall not destroy or modify grades
or slopes without having first received written approval of the City.
      2.   In the event any owner or subsequent purchaser fails to properly
maintain the easement, the City shall, upon ten (10) days’ prior written
notice, reserve the right to perform, or have performed on its behalf, any
maintenance work to or upon the easement reasonably necessary to ensure
adequate stormwater storage and free flow of stormwater through the easement
area.
      3.   In the event the City shall be required to perform, or have
performed on its behalf, any maintenance work to or upon the easement, the
cost, together with an additional sum of ten percent (10%) of said cost, of
completion of the work constitutes a lien against any lot or lots created by
this plan which may require maintenance. The lien may be foreclosed by any
action brought by or on behalf of the City.
   C.   Surface Overland Flow Easement: All easements indicated as “SURFACE
OVERLAND FLOW EASEMENT” on this plat are reserved for and granted to the City.
No buildings or other structures shall be erected or maintained in the surface
overland flow easement areas that would adversely affect the free flow of
stormwater. Each owner or subsequent purchaser shall be equally responsible for
maintaining the surface overland flow easement areas and shall not destroy or
modify grades or slopes without having first received prior written approval of
the City. In the event any owner or subsequent purchaser fails to properly
maintain the surface overland flow easement areas, the City or any other unit
of local government having jurisdiction over drainage shall have the right to
perform, or have performed on its behalf, any maintenance work to or upon the
surface overland flow easement area reasonably necessary to ensure proper flow
of stormwater and charge the owner or subsequent purchaser for the maintenance
work performed.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-8-2: APPENDIX B, STREET DESIGN GUIDELINES:
Street Parking Right-Of-Way Pavement Design Speed Number Of Curb Type Allowed
Classification Width        Width                 Lanes
Street Parking Right-Of-   Pavement    Design Speed Number Of Curb Type Allowed
Classification Way Width   Width                    Lanes
Major arterial 120-150 ft. State       55 mph       4-6       B-6.24    no
                           standards
Secondary                  (2)24'E-E,
arterial       120 ft.     plus 30'    45 mph       4-5       B-6.24    no
                           median
Major          100 ft.     40' E-E     45 mph       3         B-6.12    no
collector
Minor          80 ft.      36' E-E     40 mph       2-3       B-6.12    yes
collector
Commercial     100 ft.     36' E-E     35 mph       3         B-6.12    yes
districts
Industrial     80 ft.      36' E-E     35 mph       2         B-6.12    no
districts
Local          66 ft.      30' E-E     30 mph       2         M-3.12/B- yes
residential                                                   6.12
Subdivision                (2) 16' E-
boulevard      100 ft.     E, plus 30' 30 mph       2         B-6.12    no
                           median
                           100' E-
                           E res.      n/a          n/a       M-3.12/B- yes
Cul-de-sac     130 ft.     110' E-                          6.12      yes
                           E comm./ind n/a          n/a
                           .
Alleys         20 ft.      16' E-E     10 mph       1         n/a       no
Bike trails    20 ft.      10' E-E     20 mph       2         n/a       n/a
 
Note: The table above to be used as guidelines for various roadway
classifications. Actual designs shall be subject to review and approval by
Subdivision Administrator.
Street Classification Minimum Pavement Requirements
                      Bituminous Alternate
Street Classification    Minimum Pavement Requirements
                         Bituminous                 Alternate
                         6" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         base                       6" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         9" bituminous base course  base
Major arterial*          2.5" bituminous binder     10" PC concrete with wire
                         course                     fabric
                         2" bituminous surface
                         course
                         4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         base                       4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         8" bituminous base course  base
Secondary arterial*      2.5" bituminous binder     8" PC concrete with wire
                         course                     fabric
                         1.5" bituminous surface
                         course
                         4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         base                       4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         7" bituminous base course  base
Major collector          2.5" bituminous binder     7" PC concrete with wire
                         course                     fabric
                         1.5" bituminous surface
                         course
                         4" CA-6 crushed stone sub- 4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         base                       base
Minor collector and      6" bituminous base course  8" CA-6 crushed stone base
commercial districts     2.5" bituminous binder     2.5" bituminous binder
                         course                     course
                         1.5" bituminous surface    2" bituminous surface
                         course                     course
                         6" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         base                       6" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
Industrial districts     8" bituminous base course  base
(incl. cul-de-sacs)      2.5" bituminous binder     8" PC concrete with wire
                         course                     fabric
                         1.5" bituminous surface
                         course
                         4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
                         base                       10" CA-6 crushed stone base
Local residential (incl. 6" bituminous base course  2.5" bituminous binder
entrance, cul- de-sacs)  2.5" bituminous binder     course
                         course                     2" bituminous surface
                         1.5" bituminous surface    course
                         course
                         10" CA-6 crushed stone
                         base                       4" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
Alleys                   1.5" bituminous binder     base
                         course                     7" PC concrete
                         2.5" bituminous surface
                         course
                         6" CA-6 crushed stone base 2" CA-6 crushed stone sub-
Bike trails              2" bituminous surface      base
                         course                     5" PC concrete
 
Note:   The table above to be used as guidelines for various roadway
classifications. Actual designs shall be subject to review and approval by the
Subdivision Administrator.
 
Type                   Maximum Gradient Minimum Gradient Clear Sight Distance
                                                         As approved by the
Arterials                                                Subdivision
Major collectors       6%               0.50%            Administrator (minimum
                                                         500' horizontal curve
                                                         radius - centerline)
                                                         As approved by the
                                                         Subdivision
Minor collectors       6%               0.50%            Administrator (minimum
                                                         300' horizontal curve
                                                         radius - centerline)
                                                         As approved by the
                                                         Subdivision
Residential            8%               0.50%            Administrator (minimum
                                                         175' horizontal curve
                                                         radius - centerline)
                                                         As approved by the
Commercial, industrial 5%               0.50%            Subdivision
                                                         Administrator
                                                         As approved by the
Alley-business*                                          Subdivision
                                                         Administrator
                                                         As approved by the
Alley-resident*                                          Subdivision
                                                         Administrator
 
*Standards for these streets shall be as indicated or as determined by the Plan
Commission and the Subdivision Administrator. See appendix C, section
13-8-3 of this chapter.
13-8-3: APPENDIX C, ROADWAY SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All developments shall be provided with street pavements and
appurtenances designed in accordance with this appendix.
      2.   All roadway improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
material, installation and testing requirements of the latest edition of the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois”, and the
latest edition of the “Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions”, unless otherwise modified in this section.
      3.   Specification references made herein for manufactured items, such as
pipe, cement, aggregates, etc., refer to designations of the American Society
for Testing and Materials (ASTM). Design references made herein refer to the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
      4.   All contractors constructing public roads in the City shall be
prequalified with the Illinois Department of Transportation. Bituminous and
concrete plants supplying materials shall be IDOT certified.
      5.   A permit is required prior to the start of any construction on
public easement or right-of-way that would cut, alter, grade or excavate the
surface or support for the surface of any street, road, highway, parkway, curb,
sidewalk or way within the City. A permit may be obtained at the City Hall, 201
Brianna Drive, Watseka, IL 60970.
   B.   Basic Design Standards: The design of roadways in the City shall be in
accordance with the general guidelines and typical cross-sections found in
appendix B, section
13-8-2 of this chapter. Variations from these guidelines are required to be
approved by the City in advance.
   C.   Material Specifications: All pavement elements shall conform to the
following specifications:
      1.   Bituminous concrete binder courses shall meet HOT-MIX ASPHALT BINDER
COURSE IL-19, N-50. Up to twenty five percent (25%) RAP will be allowed in
binder course.
      2.   Bituminous concrete surface courses shall meet HOT-MIX ASPHALT
SURFACE COURSE IL-19, Mix D N-50 unless approved in advance by the Subdivision
Administrator. Up to fifteen percent (15%) RAP will be allowed in surface
course.
      3.   Mix designs and material suppliers shall be submitted to the City
thirty (30) days prior to work.
      4.   Bituminous pavers shall have a minimum closed screened width of ten
feet (10') and shall be equipped with electronic grade control.
      5.   All concrete roadway construction materials for curb and gutter,
concrete pavement, lighting base foundations, etc., shall meet IDOT material
requirements for Class SI concrete as applicable.
      6.   Paint and thermoplastic materials used for pavement markings and
roadway striping shall meet applicable articles of IDOT Standard
Specifications. This work shall be undertaken in accordance with IDOT allowable
calendar dates and weather conditions unless approved in advance by the City.
   D.   Testing And Acceptance:
      1.   The contractor shall notify the Subdivision Administrator and the
materials testing firm forty eight (48) hours prior to work or test being
performed. If an existing street is to be partially or totally closed, the
developer is to notify the City Public Works Department, Fire Department,
Police Department, and all school districts forty eight (48) hours in advance
prior to closing.
      2.   Pavement observation procedures (including bike paths) shall be as
follows:
         a.   Proof roll sub-grade: (Acceptable proof roll vehicle-14 ton
(50,000 gross) semitruck 21 ton (73,000 gross)).
            (1)   Before curb and gutter is installed.
            (2)   One inch (1") rut and one inch (1") roll maximum.
            (3)   Repair sub-grade until an acceptable proof roll is obtained.
         b.   String-line sub-grade: Plus one-half inch (1/4") maximum.
         c.   Proof roll sub-base (if applicable):
            (1)   No movement rutting or rolling allowed.
            (2)   Repair sub-base and other underlying layers if necessary
until an acceptable proof roll is obtained.
         d.   String-line sub-base (if applicable): Plus one-fourth inch (1/4")
maximum.
         e.   Proof roll aggregate base course (if applicable).
            (1)   No movement rutting or rolling allowed.
            (2)   Repair aggregate base course and other underlying layer if
necessary until an acceptable proof roll is obtained.
         f.   String-line aggregate base course (if applicable): Plus one-
fourth inch (1/4") maximum.
         g.   Proof roll bituminous base course (if applicable).
            (1)   No movement rutting or rolling allowed.
            (2)   Repair bituminous base course and other underlying layer if
necessary until an acceptable proof roll is obtained.
         h.   Density test bituminous base course (if applicable). On-site
density testing is performed by an independent testing firm acceptable to the
Subdivision Administrator and cores taken to check thickness per the
Subdivision Administrator.
         i.   String-line bituminous base course (if applicable): Plus one-
fourth inch (1/4") maximum.
         j.   Check condition of pavement/aggregate prior to base course.
            (1)   Bituminous material (prime coat) must be cured prior to
placement of binder.
            (2)   Priming immediately in front of paver is not allowed.
         k.   Density test binder course.
            (1)   On-site density testing performed by an independent testing
firm acceptable to the Subdivision Administrator and, if needed, cores taken to
check thickness.
            (2)   Repair bituminous binder course by removal and replacement
for failed areas or a method acceptable to the Subdivision Administrator.
         l.   (1)   Check conditions of pavement binder course prior to surface
course. The developer is responsible for pavement maintenance including filling
potholes when requested by the City.
               (A)   Only after one winter season and seventy five percent
(75%) of occupancy permits issued.
               (B)   Surfacing shall be completed within three (3) years of
installation of the binder.
            (2)   Clean pavement and curbs prior to proof roll.
               (A)   Proof roll bituminous binder course. No movement rutting
or rolling allowed. Repair binder course by removal and replacement.
               (B)   If cracks are greater than one-half inch (1/4") wide and
occur over twenty five percent (25%) of the pavement, then repair bituminous
binder course and other underlying layers until an acceptable proof roll is
obtained.
               (C)   If cracks are less than one-half inch (1/4") wide, and
occur over twenty five percent (25%) of the pavement, then repair bituminous
binder course by HEATER SCARIFY, overlay method, or a method acceptable to the
Subdivision Administrator.
                  (i)   If cracks are less than one-half inch (1/4") and less
than twenty five percent (25%) of the area, then repair binder and base course
as necessary.
                  (ii)   If longitudinal and transverse cracking are less than
ten percent (10%) of the length, then repair with mix for cracks.
                  (iii)   If longitudinal and transverse cracks are greater
than ten percent (10%) of the length, then repair with crack fill acceptable to
the Subdivision Administrator.
               (D)   Remove and replace damaged curb and gutter. The minimum
length of removal and replacement is ten feet (10').
            (3)   (A)   Two (2) rebar dowels are required in replacement
sections.
               (B)   Replacement curb requires two (2) dowel bars at each end.
Maximum diameter is three-fourths inch (3/4").
               (C)   Any pavement disturbed by curb replacement shall be saw
cut a minimum of eighteen inches (18") wide. Length to be determined by the
Subdivision Administrator,
               (D)   Bituminous driveway aprons disturbed by curb removal shall
be saw cut a minimum twenty four inches (24") wide and replaced full width.
               (E)   Any concrete driveway aprons disturbed by curb removal
shall be saw cut at the closest joint and replaced full width.
            (4)   Remove cold patch and replace with hot mix. Place level
binder in binder irregularities, trench settlement, etc.
            (5)   Bituminous material (tack coat) will be placed only if the
Subdivision Administrator accepts the conditions of the pavement.
            (6)   Bituminous surface course placed on pavement not accepted by
the Subdivision Administrator will be removed and replaced.
            (7)   Bituminous material (tack coat) must be cured prior to
placement of surface. Priming immediately in front of the paver is not allowed.
         m.   Density test bituminous surface course (if applicable).
            (1)   On-site density testing performed by an independent testing
firm acceptable to the Subdivision Administrator and cores taken to check
thickness.
            (2)   Repair bituminous surface course by removal and replacement
areas or a method acceptable to the City.
      3.   Material Testing:
         a.   Generally: The City will observe all testing performed.
 
Test Items Test         Who Performs Number Of      Test Paid By Test Ordered
                        Test         Tests                       By
Sub-grade  Proof roll   Contractor   Entire project Developer    Developer
           String-line  Contractor   Entire project Developer    Developer
Aggregate  Proof roll   Contractor   Entire project Developer    Developer
           String-line  Contractor   Entire project Developer    Developer
           Concrete                  Concrete
Structural See IDOT     Testing firm See IDOT       Developer    Developer
           Stand.                    Stand.
Bituminous Rolling                   Bit. concrete
concrete   pattern      Testing firm See IDOT       Developer    Developer
                                     Stand.
           Asphalt      Testing firm Bit. concrete  Developer    Developer
           temperature               See IDOT Stand
           Nuclear                   Bit. concrete
           density text Testing firm See IDOT       Developer    Developer
                                     Stand.
 
*The thickness of the completed pavement will be verified by the cores. A
minimum of 4 core specimens per day are required.
All firms used for bituminous and concrete testing shall be approved or chosen
by the Subdivision Administrator at the developer's cost. The testing firms
shall be agreed upon at the preconstruction conference meeting. The developer
shall notify the Subdivision Administrator a minimum of forty eight (48) hours
prior to any bituminous paving or concrete placement.
         b.   Asphalt Testing Requirements:
            (1)   Testing shall consist of all applicable site testing. Site
testing shall include establishing a rolling pattern, asphalt temperature,
nuclear density test (see the IDOT Non-QC/QA Testing Requirements), and any
other testing deemed necessary by the Subdivision Administrator. The testing
company’s technician shall provide verbal test results while paving, and
written results within forty eight (48) hours, to the Subdivision
Administrator.
            (2)   If any individual street has an average density per IDOT
requirements of less than minimum requirements, that street shall be deemed as
having failed, and further testing and/or replacement shall be required.
            (3)   The developer will supply the Subdivision Administrator with
a list of plants that will be used for work on-site. The plant list will
include a list of plant codes as they correlate to IDOT approved mixes. This
list must be delivered to the Subdivision Administrator ten (10) working days
prior to asphalt being placed. The testing firm's inspector shall fill out the
City form, and return it to the Subdivision Administrator, along with a copy of
field and lab reports. The testing firm is responsible for all field and lab
tests and reports.
         c.   Concrete Testing Requirements:
            (1)   Structural concrete to be tested per the IDOT Non-QC/QA
Testing Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, bridges, box
culverts, beams, retaining walls, and items noted by the Subdivision
Administrator. Nonstructural items, such as curbs and sidewalks, will be
visually inspected by the City and will also be subject to additional testing
as described in the IDOT Non-QC/QA Testing Requirements. The developer must
notify the City forty eight (48) hours prior to all concrete placement.
            (2)   The developer will supply the Subdivision Administrator with
a list of batch plants that will be used for work on the site. The batch plant
list will also include a list of plant codes as they correlate to IDOT approved
mixes. The list must be delivered to the Subdivision Administrator prior to any
concrete being placed.
            (3)   The testing firm’s inspector shall fill out the City form and
return it to the Subdivision Administrator, along with a copy of field and lab
reports. The testing firm is responsible for all field and lab tests, making,
picking up, and breaking of cylinders, and reports.
   E.   Striping:
      1.   Raised reflective pavement markers will be required for major
collectors, minor and major arterials on centerline skip dash, double yellow
centerline turn lanes.
      2.   Stop bars shall be twenty four inches (24") wide and required at all
sop sign locations.
      3.   Crosswalks shall have six inch (6") wide lines at intersections and
twelve inch (12") wide bars at school crossings.
      4.   All permanent striping shall be thermoplastic.
      5.   Temporary paint striping shall be required after binder placement on
all collector or greater streets.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-8-4: APPENDIX D, SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All developments shall be provided with sanitary sewers and
appurtenances designed in accordance with this appendix.
      2.   All sanitary sewer improvements shall be installed in accordance
with the material installation and testing requirements of the “Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois”, latest
edition, unless otherwise modified in this section.
      3.   Specification references made herein for manufactured items, such as
pipe, fittings, and manholes, refer to designations of the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM), American Water Works Association (AWWA), or
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
   B.   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   Compliance With City And State Regulations: The design of the
sanitary sewer system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City
and of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s latest edition of title
35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, subtitle C, chapter II, part 370.
      2.   Service Area: All sewers shall be designed to accommodate an
ultimate service area as defined by the Subdivision Administrator.
      3.   Location: Sewers shall be placed only in public rights-of-way or in
easements. The location of proposed extensions to the existing sanitary sewer
system shall be approved by the Subdivision Administrator.
      4.   Sewer Design Hydraulics:
         a.   Sanitary gravity sewers shall be designed to provide design flow
capacity, without surcharging, using the formula specified in the latest
edition of the Illinois Administrative Code.
         b.   Design mean velocity, flowing full, shall not be less than two
feet (2') per second. If velocity exceeds fifteen feet (15') per second,
erosion and shock protection measures shall be provided.
      5.   Minimum Sewer Size:
         a.   Minimum sanitary sewer size shall be eight inch (8") diameter.
         b.   Minimum building sanitary service sewer size shall be six inch
(6") diameter.
      6.   Alignment: Sewers shall be laid straight in both horizontal and
vertical planes between manholes. Service connections to sewer mains shall be
made by a factory wye or tee connection only.
      7.   Sewer Size Changes: Sanitary sewers of different diameters shall
join only at manholes. The invert elevations shall be adjusted to maintain a
uniform energy gradient by matching the 0.8 depth points of different
diameters.
      8.   Sanitary Sewer Manholes:
         a.   At a minimum, manholes shall be provided at the following
locations:
            (1)   Termination of existing and future lines.
            (2)   Changes in direction horizontal or vertical.
            (3)   Changes in shape or pipe size.
            (4)   Junctions with other sanitary sewers.
            (5)   Access spacing shall be:
 
Sewer Pipe Size (in inches) Maximum Interval (in feet)
8-15                        400
18-54                       500
60 or larger                1,000
 
         b.   An external drop manhole shall be provided for manholes with any
pipe having a difference in invert elevation more than twenty four inches (24")
above the invert of the sewers leaving such manholes. Internal drop manholes
are not allowed.
         c.   Where flows, pipe size, or other conditions dictate, special
manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and constructed.
         d.   Minimum manhole diameter.
 
Sewer Pipe Size (in inches) Manhole Diameter (in inches)
8-18                        48
21-36                       60
For sewers greater than 36 inches in diameter, the manhole shall have an
offset riser of 48 inches inside diameter.
 
         e.   No more than three (3) precast concrete adjusting rings nor more
than six inches (6") maximum height adjustment shall be allowed.
      9.   Sewer Depth: Sanitary sewers shall be constructed with a minimum
cover over top of the pipe of four feet (4') and shall be deep enough to
provide an outfall for all sanitary sewage within the ultimate service area,
both existing and future.
   C.   Material Specifications: All sanitary sewer system elements shall
conform to the following specifications:
      1.   Sewer And Service Connection Pipe: Gravity sanitary sewer main
material shall be in accordance with the following guidelines unless otherwise
approved by the City:
 
24" diameter or under PVC SDR 26 (less than 20' deep)
                      PVC SDR 21 (20'-25' deep)
                      PVC DR 18 (over 25' deep) or
                      DISP ANSI 21.51
Over 24" diameter     PVC profile pipe
                      DISP 21.51
                      Interior lined RCP
 
         a.   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings: ASTM D-3034, SDR 26
minimum strength.
         b.   Reinforced concrete pipe: Circular reinforcement, minimum Class
3, Wall B, ASTM-76, interior lined.
         c.   Ductile iron pipe: ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C-151), minimum thickness
Class 52 per ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C-150), cement lined. Fittings meeting ANSI
21.10 (AWWA C-110).
         d.   All force main material shall be ductile iron pipe per CL 52
unless otherwise approved by the Subdivision Administrator,
      2.   Sewer And Service Connection Pipe Joints:
         a.   PVC pipe: Flexible elastomeric seal joints, ASTM D-3212.
         b.   Reinforced concrete pipe: Continuous O-ring gaskets, ASTM C-361.
         c.   Ductile iron pipe: Rubber gasket joints, ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C-
111).
      3.   Jacking And Boring:
         a.   Casing installation under railroad tracks, pipelines, County and
State highways, Township roads, etc., shall be approved by the appropriate
agency which has jurisdiction.
         b.   Steel casing pipe shall be in accordance with American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) B36.10 with yield strength of thirty five thousand
(35,000) psi minimum and minimum wall thickness per the following table:
MINIMUM WALL THICKNESS FOR STEEL CASING PIPE
 
Nominal Inside Diameter (in) Nominal Wall Thickness (in)
24 and under                 0.375
24-36                        0.500
36                           0.625
>36                          As approved by the Subdivision Administrator
 
         c.   Welds shall be in accordance with the American Welding Society
(AWS) D1.1 and be continuous circumferential welds. The casing pipe shall have
a bituminous coat on the inside and outside surface in accordance with American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) M190.
         d.   The void between the casing and conduit shall be filled with pea
gravel, flowable fill or other approved method, and ends sealed. Properly
installed casing spacers may be used as an accepted alternate.
         e.   Casing chocks shall be stainless steel, restrained chocks
manufactured by the Ford Meter Box Co., or approved equal.
         f.   Casing end seals shall be synthetic rubber with stainless steel
bonding as manufactured by Pipeline Seal and Insulator, Inc. (PSI), Cascade
Waterworks Mfg. Co. - Model CCES, or approved equal.
      4.   Manholes:
         a.   Concrete: Precast reinforced concrete ASTM C-478 with tongue and
groove joints sealed with gaskets conforming to ASTM C-443 or bituminous
jointing material. Bitumastic material shall be placed between precast
reinforced concrete sections and between frame.
         b.   Pipe Seals: All pipe connection openings shall be precast with
resilient rubber watertight pipe to manhole sleeves or seals, per ASTM C-923.
Flexible rubber gasketed manhole coupling shall be Kor-N-Seal, A-Lok, or
approved equal.
         c.   Chimney Seals: External flexible watertight rubber sleeves
conforming to the applicable requirements of ASTM C-923, with stainless steel
bands, shall extend from the manhole cone to the manhole frame and shall be
provided on all sanitary manholes. Where conditions prohibit the use of an
external seal, an internal seal shall be used. Acceptable products shall be the
following: lnfi-Shield, Canusa Wrapid Seal, Cretex Chimney Seal and Mac Wrap.
Manholes shall not be backfilled until inspected by the City.
         d.   Top Section: Top cone shall be offset type designed to accept an
external chimney seal. Flat slabs shall be provided where sufficient height is
not available for a cone.
         e.   Bottom Sections: All bottom sections shall be monolithically
precast, including bases and invert flowlines. All manhole bases shall be set
on a minimum six inch (6") CA-7 cushion, No structures will be placed in
driveways or sidewalks unless approved in advance by City. Unsuitable materials
beneath the manhole bedding area shall be excavated and replaced with
additional CA-7 if so determined by the City.
         f.   Manhole Bottoms: Bottom fillets shall conform to the bottom half
of the pipe. Where pipes enter the manhole at an angle, curved flowlines shall
be formed from the inlet pipe(s) to the outlet pipe.
         g.   Steps: Cast in place, fiberglass or steel reinforced plastic
conforming to ASTM C478 and OSHA standards, sixteen inches (16") on center.
      5.   Castings: Manhole frame and cover - Heavy Duty E.J.l.W. No. 1020A
with machined bearing surfaces and self-sealing Type A heavy duty lid.
      6.   Pipe Bedding And Cover Material And Trench Backfill: IDOT gradation
CA-7 crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following gradation
requirements:
 
Sieve Size
Percent Passing
Grade No. 3" 21/2" 2" 11/2" 1" 3/4" 1/2" 3/8" No. 4 No. 16 No. 50 No. 200
CA-7      100               95±5   45±15    5±5
 
   D.   Installation Requirements:
      1.   Compliance With State Regulations: Sewer system design and
construction shall in all respects be in accordance with the regulations of the
Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Illinois. No construction shall
commence until a copy of a permit from this agency is filed with the City.
      2.   Notification: Prior to beginning the sanitary sewer installation,
the contractor shall give the Subdivision Administrator forty eight (48) hours'
notice of his intended time of starting work.
      3.   Excavation:
         a.   The width of trench, at and below the top of pipe shall not
exceed the widths given in section 20-2.03 of the Standard Specifications.
         b.   The trench shall be excavated so that a minimum of six inches
(6") of CA-7 can be placed as bedding material below the pipe.
         c.   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for the bottom of
the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy, or other unsuitable soil,
such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of the trench and
replaced with well compacted CA-7 material or an equal substitute if such
compacted material proves unsatisfactory. Where rock in either ledge or boulder
formation is encountered, it shall be removed below grade and replaced with a
well compacted cushion of CA-7 material having a thickness under the pipe of
not less than eight inches (8").
      4.   Safety: The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on-site during all trenching operations to ensure that all
OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by construction means and
methods.
      5.   Pipe Bedding: A minimum of four inches (4") of CA-7 material shall
be used as bedding under the pipe. The bedding stone shall be graded along the
entire length of pipe to provide full bearing. The bedding stone shall extend
to the spring line of the pipe.
      6.   Pipe Cover: CA-7 shall be used as cover material for the pipe. The
cover material shall extend from the spring line to twelve inches (12") above
the top of all flexible pipe.
      7.   Backfilling: Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by
careful replacement of the excavated material after the bedding, pipe and cover
material have been installed. Any pipe installed under an existing or proposed
street pavement, or within two feet (2') of an existing or proposed pavement
edge, curb and gutter, bike trail or sidewalk, shall be backfilled to the top
of the trench with CA-7 material compacted in lifts not exceeding twelve inches
(12") and the final twelve inches (12") with compacted CA-6 material. Jetting
of trenches shall be performed as may be required by the Subdivision
Administrator.
      8.   Laying: The pipe shall be laid accurately to the line and grade as
designated. The lubricant, mastic, or other joint material shall be used and
installed as recommended by the pipe or joint manufacturer’s specifications.
      9.   Separation From Water Main: The sanitary sewer pipe shall be laid at
least ten feet (10') horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. If
the sanitary sewer must cross a water main, the top of the sewer pipe must be
laid at least eighteen inches (18") below the bottom of the water main pipe. If
neither of these conditions can be met, other protective methods as described
in the “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois” shall be followed.
      10.   Service Laterals:
         a.   Each single-family lot shall have one six inch (6") service. Each
duplex lot shall have two six inch (6") service lines (one for each unit).
Multi-family attached/detached and commercial/industrial buildings shall have a
minimum of one 6-inch service line for each unit.
         b.   Service laterals shall consist of a wye or tee fitting at the
sewer main and extension of the specified service pipe to the property line of
the lot being served. The service lateral shall slope toward the main at the
minimum rate of one percent (1.0%).
         c.   Where the depth of the sewer main is greater than twelve feet
(12') below the surface of the ground, a service riser shall be constructed to
an elevation of eight feet (8') below the ground elevation, or as shown on the
plans.
         d.   The service lateral shall be terminated at the lot line five feet
(5') left of the center of the lot as viewed from the street and plugged with a
watertight factory plug. The plug shall be backfilled to withstand air test
pressure to five (5) psi. The plugged lateral shall be marked by a four inch by
four inch (4" x 4") stake extending four feet (4') above the finished grade,
and the lot number painted green on stake.
         e.   The curb shall be stamped with an “s” at all sewer service stub
locations.
   E.   Testing And Acceptance:
      1.   Generally: All the required testing of the sanitary sewer system
shall be performed before curb/gutter, pavement or other permanent type surface
improvement work begins. All testing shall take place in the presence of the
Subdivision Administrator.
      2.   Cleaning: Any pipe containing debris or sediment shall be cleaned
prior to testing and televising,
      3.   Air Test: All sanitary sewer pipes shall be low pressure air tested
in accordance with the Standard Specifications. All sanitary sewer manholes
shall be vacuum tested per IEPA regulations.
      4.   Deflection Testing: All flexible thermoplastic sewer main pipe shall
be deflection tested by pulling a mandrel through the pipe from manhole to
manhole. Deflection testing shall be performed a minimum of thirty (30) days
after sewer construction for sewer less than twelve inches (12") in diameter
and a minimum of forty five (45) days after sewer construction for sewer twelve
inches (12") and greater in diameter and shall be performed in accordance with
the Standard Specifications.
      5.   Televising: All sanitary sewer mains shall be televised a minimum of
one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after deflection testing is completed.
Written report detailing manhole locations, footages of lateral connections,
etc., and DVD copy of the televised main shall be provided to the City prior to
final LOC reduction.
      6.   Defects: Any piping with dips, cracks, improperly sealed joints, or
variations from the approved grades and alignment shall be repaired by removing
and replacing the involved sections of pipe. The repaired section of pipe shall
then be re-tested. The City may also request other types of testing on the
sanitary sewer installation as a condition of initial acceptance.
      7.   Record Drawings:
         a.   Prior to final acceptance of work, as-built drawings shall be
submitted to the City for review.
         b.   Upon City approval of as-built drawings, two (2) full-size (36
inch by 48 inch) copies (signed and sealed by a registered Illinois
professional engineer) shall be submitted to the City, along with an electronic
copy in accordance with current City requirements (see section
13-5-10 of this title).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-8-5: APPENDIX E, STORM SEWER SYSTEM STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All developments shall include provisions for the construction of
storm sewers and appurtenances designed in accordance with this appendix.
      2.   Storm sewer systems shall be installed in accordance with “Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois”, and “Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois”, latest
edition, unless otherwise modified in this appendix.
      3.   Specification references made herein for manufactured items, such as
pipe, fittings, and manholes, refer to designations of the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM), American Water Works Association (AWWA), or
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
   B.   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   All storm sewers, streams, or channels shall be designed to
accommodate all areas which naturally flow to the area of the development and
also any additional areas which are planned to contribute to the drainage area
as identified by the Subdivision Administrator.
         b.   Stormwater system design and detention shall be in accordance
with the City Stormwater Detention Ordinance (see title 14 of this Code), and
subsequent amendments. A minimum velocity of three feet (3') per second shall
be maintained in pipes flowing full, in accordance with the guidelines
contained in the Illinois Department of Transportation's Drainage Manual.
Drainage calculations shall be submitted with the development plans.
      2.   Separate Systems: The stormwater drainage system shall be separate
and independent of the sanitary sewer system.
      3.   Minimum Sewer Size: Public storm sewers shall not be less than
twelve inches (12") in diameter.
      4.   Alignment: Sewer shall be laid straight in both horizontal and
vertical planes between manholes.
      5.   Sewer Size Changes: Storm sewers of different diameters shall join
only at structures. The invert elevations shall be adjusted to maintain a
uniform energy gradient by matching the 0.8 depth points of the different
diameter.
      6.   Stormwater Inlets:
         a.   Surface drainage inlets shall be provided so that surface water
is not carried across any street intersections or parking lot drives. Surface
runoff shall not extend a distance of more than four hundred feet (400') along
the surface of the ground and shall not build up a flow of more than two (2)
cubic feet per second in a 10-year storm before being intercepted by drainage
inlets. Inlets shall discharge into storm sewers, which shall not discharge
into side lot or rear lot drainage ditches. Inlets shall be provided at all low
points.
         b.   Inlets shall have a twenty four inch (24") minimum inside
diameter.
         c.   At least one 2-inch precast concrete adjusting ring shall be used
on each inlet barrel to provide a base for the frame and grate. No more than
three (3) precast concrete adjusting rings, totaling six inch (6") maximum
height adjustment, will be allowed. Offsetting or corbelling of adjusting rings
is not allowed.
      7.   Lot Drainage: Positive drainage shall be established for each lot,
whether or not it is the intention to construct a building on that lot.
      8.   Catch Basins:
         a.   Catch basins shall generally be provided on every other lot
corner, such that each structure will collect runoff from no more than four (4)
adjoining lots. Additional structures shall be provided as determined to be
necessary by the Subdivision Administrator.
         b.   Type C catch basins are allowable for catch basins no deeper than
four feet (4') only.
         c.   Type A catch basins shall be used for all catch basins over four
feet (4') deep or if pipe size and configuration prohibits the use of a Type C
basin.
      9.   Storm Sewer Manholes:
         a.   Manholes shall be located as follows:
            (1)   At the termination of all sewers which do not terminate at a
catch basin or inlet.
            (2)   Changes in direction, horizontal or vertical.
            (3)   Changes in shape or pipe size.
            (4)   Functions with other storm sewers.
            (5)   Access spacing shall be:
 
Storm Sewer Pipe Size (in inches) Maximum Manhole Interval (in feet)
12-24                             300
27-36                             350
42-54                             400
60 and greater                    500
 
         b.   Where flows, pipe size, or other conditions dictate, special
manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and constructed.
         c.   Manhole size shall be as required to accommodate the intersecting
sewer pipes. The following table contains the minimum design sizes:
 
Sewer Pipe Size (in inches) Manhole Diameter (in inches)
18 or less                  48
21-36                       60
42-48                       72
T-manholes with risers or other appropriate structure approved by the
Subdivision Administrator shall be used with pipes larger than 48 inches.
 
      10.   Sewer Depth: Storm sewers shall be constructed sufficiently deep so
as to prevent freezing and to provide an outfall for all stormwater within the
ultimate service area, both existing and future.
      11.   Sewer Pipe Class: Sewer pipe class shall be determined based upon
the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction”, latest edition.
      12.   End Of Pipes: All pipes shall be terminated with precast reinforced
flared end sections.
   C.   Material Specifications: All storm sewer system elements shall conform
to the following specifications:
      1.   Sewer Pipe:
         a.   Reinforced concrete pipe (12 inch diameter and larger), circular
reinforcement: Minimum Class 3, Wall B, ASTM C-76.
         b.   Nonreinforced concrete sewer pipe: Minimum Class 3, ASTM C-14.
         c.   Reinforced concrete elliptical culvert pipe: Minimum Class HE-III
or VE-III, ASTM C-507.
         d.   Galvanized corrugated steel culvert pipe: AASHTO M246, Type B,
minimum wall thickness 14 gauge. (Shall only be used for culverts upon City
approval).
         e.   Reinforced concrete arch culvert pipe: Double line reinforcement
minimum Class 3, ASTM C-507.
         f.   High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe may be utilized for sump
pump discharge conveyance systems when in conformance with all applicable ASTM
and AASHTO standards.
      2.   Sewer Pipe Joints:
         a.   Reinforced concrete pipe: ASTM C-443 or ASTM C-361 (O-ring).
         b.   Reinforced arch or elliptical pipe: ASTM C-877.
      3.   Casing Pipes: Steel pipe: ASTM A-120, three-eighths inch (3/8")
minimum thickness.
      4.   Manholes And Catch Basins:
         a.   Precast reinforced concrete shall be ASTM C-478.
         b.   Manhole bases shall be Type A, precast concrete.
         c.   Storm sewer manhole joints shall be sealed with O-ring gaskets or
mastic material. Storm sewer pipe connections to manholes shall be mortared.
         d.   Steps shall be sixteen inches (16") on center, fiberglass or
steel reinforced plastic conforming to OSHA standards.
      5.   Inlets: Precast reinforced concrete, ASTM C-478.
      6.   Castings: All castings shall be set in bituminous mastic material.
External frame shields (Infi-Shield, Cretex, or approved equal) shall be
required for all storm structures located in paved areas.
         a.   Manhole frame and cover: Heavy duty EJIW No. 1020-Z Frame with
1020 A heavy duty cover.
         b.   Six inch (6") curb and gutter inlet: Heavy duty EJIW No. 7205
with Type M1 grate.
         c.   Rolled curb and gutter inlet: Heavy duty EJIW No. 7525.
         d.   Depressed curb and gutter: Heavy duty EJIW No. 7210 with Type M3
grate.
         e.   Yard inlet: EJIW No. 6527 with Type 8 beehive or Type M2 flat
grate.
      7.   Bedding Stone And Trench Backfill: IDOT gradation CA-7, crushed
stone or crushed gravel, meeting the following gradation requirements:
 
Sieve Size
Percent Passing
Grade No. 3" 21/2" 2" 11/2" 1" 3/4" 1/2" 3/8" No. 4 No. 16 No. 50 No. 200
CA-7      100               95±5   45±15    5±5
 
   D.   Installation:
      1.   Notification: Prior to beginning the storm sewer installation, the
contractor shall give the Subdivision Administrator forty eight (48) hours’
notice of his intended time of starting work.
      2.   Erosion Control: All soil erosion control measures are to be in
place prior to and during the installation of the stormwater piping and
detention system. The soil erosion measures shall be in accordance with the
“Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion Control in Illinois”, the
general national pollution discharge elimination (NPDES) permit, the project
plans and specifications, or as directed by the Subdivision Administrator.
      3.   Excavation:
         a.   The width of the trench, at and below the top of pipe, shall not
exceed the widths given in section 20-2.03 of the Standard Specifications.
         b.   The trench shall be excavated so that a minimum of six inches
(6") of CA-7 can be placed as bedding material.
         c.   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for the bottom of
the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy, or other unsuitable soil,
such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of the trench and
replaced with well-compacted CA-7 material or an equal substitute if such
compacted material proves unsatisfactory. Where rock in either ledge or boulder
formation is encountered, it shall be removed below grade and replaced with a
well-compacted cushion of CA-7 material having a thickness under the pipe of
not less than eight inches (8").
      4.   Safety: The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on-site during all trenching operations to ensure that all
OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by construction means and
methods.
      5.   Pipe Bedding: A minimum of six inches (6") of CA-7 material shall be
used as bedding under the pipe for pipe diameters up to twenty four inches
(24"). For larger pipes, a bedding thickness of one-fourth inch (1/4") the pipe
diameter shall be used. The bedding stone shall be graded along the entire
length of pipe to provide full bearing. The bedding stone shall extend to the
springline of the pipe.
      6.   Backfilling: Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by
careful replacement of the excavated material after the pipe and the bedding
material have been installed. Any pipe installed under an existing or proposed
street pavement, or within two feet (2') of an existing or proposed pavement
edge, curb and gutter, bike trail or sidewalk shall be backfilled to the top of
the trench with CA-7 material compacted in lifts not exceeding twelve inches
(12") and the final twelve inches (12") with compacted CA-6 material.
      7.   Laying: The pipe shall be laid accurately to the line and grade as
designated. The lubricant, mastic, or other joint material shall be used and
installed as recommended by the pipe or joint manufacturer's specifications.
      8.   Separation From Water Main: The storm sewer pipe shall be laid at
least ten feet (10') horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. If
the storm sewer must cross a water main, the top of the storm sewer pipe must
be laid at least eighteen inches (18") below the bottom of the water main pipe,
If neither of these conditions can be met, other methods as illustrated in the
“Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois”
shall be followed.
      9.   Stub For Sump Pumps: A four inch (4") diameter stub for sump pump
connection, having minimum length of six feet (6") outside the structure, shall
be provided for each lot adjacent to a rear yard inlet or catch basin. The stub
shall be PVC SDR 26 or approved equal. Stubs shall be identified by a four inch
by four inch (4" x 4") stake placed at the end of the PVC stub which extends
four feet (4') above grade and painted red with lot number.
   E.   Testing And Acceptance:
      1.   Generally: All the required testing and correction of defects of the
storm sewer system shall be performed before curb and gutter or other permanent
type surface improvement work begins.
      2.   Cleaning: Any pipes or manholes containing debris or sediment shall
be cleaned prior to acceptance.
      3.   Defects:
         a.   Any piping with cracks, improperly sealed joints, or variations
from the approved grades and alignment shall be repaired by removing and
replacing the involved sections of pipe.
         b.   The Subdivision Administrator may require compaction, leakage, or
other types of testing as a condition of the storm sewer system initial
acceptance.
      4.   Record Drawings:
         a.   Prior to final acceptance of work, as-built drawings shall be
submitted to the City for review.
         b.   Upon City approval of as-built drawings, two (2) full-size (36
inch by 4 inch) copies (signed and sealed by a registered Illinois professional
engineer) shall be submitted to the City, along with an electronic copy in
accordance with current City requirements (see section
13-5-10 of this title).
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-8-6: APPENDIX F, WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All development shall include provisions for the construction of
water distribution facilities complete with valves, fire hydrants, and other
such appurtenances designed in accordance with this appendix. As a minimum, the
water distribution system shall provide a service connection(s) near the front
property line of each individual lot or parcel within the development. Where
more than one building is located or planned on one lot or parcel of property
for fire protection, the proposed construction shall also include all water
main construction and appurtenances within the lot or parcel except service
lines.
      2.   Water distribution systems shall be constructed in accordance with
“Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois”,
latest edition, and “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
in Illinois”, latest edition, unless otherwise modified in this appendix.
      3.   Specification references made herein for manufactured materials,
such as pipe, hydrants, valves, and fittings, refer to designations of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the American Water Works
Association (AWWA), or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
      4.   The contractor shall coordinate all water system work with City.
Only an authorized representative of the City can open, close, or operate a
water system valve, unless otherwise approved in advance by the Watseka water
operator.
      5.   Construction shall be staged such that service is maintained to
adjacent properties at all times unless otherwise approved in advance by the
City. Temporary system shutdowns shall not be allowed unless approved in
advance by the City.
   B.   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   System Extension:
         a.   Extension to the water distribution system shall form a complete
network extension or part of a complete network extension that includes all
primary mains, secondary mains, and gridiron mains complimenting the existing
distribution system network.
         b.   Primary mains are those that form the arterial portion of the
system. Primary mains under construction within a development are further
defined as mains that are twelve inches (12") or larger. Secondary mains shall
be sized, looped, and spaced as required for fire flows and shall have a
minimum diameter of eight inches (8").
         c.   Gridiron mains shall form a grid to supply water to the local
fire hydrants and service lines. Gridiron mains shall have a minimum diameter
of eight inches (8"). Dead ends shall be avoided whenever possible and shall
not exceed six hundred feet (600') in any case.
         d.   The maximum number of valves to be operated for a shut down shall
be three (3). Four (4) may be allowed in unique cases with the approval of the
City.
      2.   Minimum Day Consumption:
         a.   For purposes of water main design, minimum day consumption for
water main design shall be based on the following table:
 
Type Of Establishment Unit                 Minimum Day Consumption*
                                           (gal/day/unit)
Retail                Employee (one shift) 15
Office                Person (one shift)   15
Industrial            Person (one shift)   35
Restaurant            Per seat             10
Theater               Per seat             5
Hotel                 Per guest            75
 
*Quantities are exclusive of process water requirements which must be estimated
and added.
         b.   For other than residential developments, when the details of the
development are not known, the maximum day consumption and fire flow may be
estimated by the Subdivision Administrator. Such estimates shall not relieve
the owner or developer of the responsibility of providing adequate main
capacity for any and all future needs within the development.
      3.   Head Losses: Head losses due to friction shall be computed using the
Hazen-Williams formula with a “C” factor no greater than 100. Head loss
calculations shall be submitted to the City for approval.
      4.   Main Capacity: Primary mains, secondary mains, and gridiron mains
shall be sized to provide sufficient capacity to deliver the required fire flow
plus the consumption at the maximum daily rate to all areas served by the
proposed construction.
      5.   Required Fire Flow And Pressure: A separate fire flow report shall
be prepared that indicates that at selected locations, and at any other
locations that may be selected by the Subdivision Administrator, the fire flows
required in excess of maximum daily consumptive demands will be supplied using
a “C” factor of 100, ignoring fittings, and with a minimum residual hydrant
pressure of twenty (20) psi. Required fire flow shall be computed as detailed
in the “Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow”, latest edition,
published by the Insurance Service Office. The developer's engineer shall
furnish any necessary design calculations to ensure that all water mains are
sized to provide ISO fire protection flow rates or the rates shown in the
following table, whichever are higher:
 
Single-family residential 2,000 gpm @ 25 psi
Multi-family residential  2,500 gpm @ 25 psi
Commercial/industrial     3,500 gpm @ 25 psi
 
      6.   Fire Hydrant Spacing:
         a.   The maximum distance between fire hydrants shall be three hundred
fifty feet (350'). In addition to this requirement, fire hydrants in
commercial/industrial areas shall be located so that the near corner of all
construction on the site that could burn will not be farther than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from a fire hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be provided so as to
provide the required fire flows to structures as described in the “Fire
Suppressions Rating Schedule”, latest edition, published by the Insurance
Service Office. Where water transmission lines or off-site water lines are
installed in existing easements, hydrants must be installed at five hundred
foot (500') intervals.
         b.   Fire hydrants shall be placed on private property when the Fire
Chief of the Watseka Fire Department determines that fire hydrants are at too
great a distance to provide proper protection for multi-family, commercial, or
industrial properties. Easements shall be provided for all hydrants on private
property.
         c.   Fire hydrants shall be placed within one hundred feet (100') of
all sprinkler and standpipe siamese connections provided on buildings, unless
otherwise directed by the Fire Department because of existing or proposed
circumstances.
         d.   Fire hydrants shall be placed at the end of all cul-de-sacs and
dead-end water mains.
      7.   Valve Spacing: A sufficient number of valves shall be provided so
that a break or other failure will not affect more than twenty five (25)
residential units or one thousand feet (1,000') of the main in nonresidential
areas.
      8.   Valve Vaults: All water main valves ten inches (10") and greater
must be installed in valve vaults. All water main valves, regardless of size,
that are underneath pavement must also be installed in valve vaults.
   C.   Material Specifications And Details: All water distribution system
elements shall conform to the following specifications:
      1.   Ductile Iron Pipe:
         a.   Pipe class thickness: Class 52, minimum thickness per AWWA C-151,
or as required by AWWA C-150 for various depths, with bituminous coated cement
lining.
         b.   Joints: Push-on and mechanical, AWWA C-111, with neoprene
gaskets.
         c.   Polyvinyl wrap: AWWA C-10S. (Only to be used if warranted by soil
conditions.)
         d.   Fittings: Cast or ductile iron, AWWA C-110 and AWWA C-111
Duranton Sac Nut or equal is required on every other bolt on all fittings. All
fittings rated to a minimum three hundred fifty (350) psi.
      2.   Valves:
         a.   Ten inches (10") and smaller: Mechanical joint, epoxy coated,
cast iron resilient wedge with bronze nonrising stem gate valves, counter-
clockwise to open, with an O-ring seal conforming to AWWA C-509.
         b.   Twelve inches (12") and larger: Mechanical joint, epoxy coated
iron body, rubber seat, butterfly valve, counter-clockwise to open, AWWA C-504.
         c.   Valves shall have stainless steel bolts and nuts on the bonnet
and stuffing box.
         d.   Valve boxes shall be adjustable, two-piece cast iron, roadway
type with five and one-fourth inch (51/4") throat and a no-tilt drop cover lid
with “WATER” cast into it in raised letters (Mueller or Tyler). The valve box
must have additional upward and downward travel when adjusting to grade.
         e.   PVC or Rubber Valve box stabilizers provided by Valve Box Adapter
II for six inch (6") and eight inch (8") valves shall be provided.
      3.   Fire Hydrants:
         a.   Mueller Super Centurion 250, painted red, with a five and one-
half foot (51/2') bury.
         b.   Valve size: Five and one-fourth inches (51/4") counter-clockwise
to open.
         c.   Nozzles, two (2) at two and one-half inches (21/2"), one at four
and one-half inches (41/2") with threads conforming to National Standard
Specifications.
         d.   Breakaway type with break line flanges located one inch (1")
above finished grade.
         e.   Hydrant to be installed with MJ swivel tee with swivel MJ gland.
Retainer lock flanges (Megalug) should be used on all MJ joints. No spool
pieces allowed.
         f.   Auxiliary valve to be flanged attachment to the fire hydrant and
to be the same manufacture as the fire hydrant. Auxiliary valves to be keyable
and adjusted to final grade.
         g.   Fire hydrants shall be thrust blocked behind and under the
hydrant shoe. Hydrant drain fields are required.
      4.   Hydrant Valve Box:
         a.   Tyler 664-S or Mueller H-10360.
         b.   Lid embossed “WATER”.
         c.   Stabilizer for box shall be used.
      5.   Corporation Stops: Mueller H-15000, one inch (1") minimum.
      6.   Service Pipe:
         a.   Copper tube two inches (2") and smaller: Type K (1 inch minimum).
Continuous from corporation stop to curb stop, and curb stop to inside
building. Maximum length shall be one hundred twenty feet (120'). Exceptions
only as may be approved by the Subdivision Administrator. Any approved
exception for length greater than one hundred twenty feet (120') will require a
minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") service size (final size as approved by
the Subdivision Administrator).
         b.   Ductile iron: Larger than two inches (2").
         c.   Mueller flair fittings or equal.
      7.   Curb Stop:
         a.   Copper service: Mueller B-25154.
         b.   Ductile iron service: Conform to subsections C2a and C2c of this
section.
      8.   Curb Box:
         a.   Copper service: Mueller H-10302 or H-10304.
         b.   B-box shall be Tyler 95E with stabilizer.
         c.   Ductile iron service, four inches (4") and smaller: Conform to
subsection C4 of this section.
         d.   Ductile iron service, six inches (6") and larger: Conform to
subsection C11 of this section.
      9.   Thrust Restraints:
         a.   Horizontal reactions: Thrust restraints at all tees, plugged
ends, hydrants, and bends between eleven and one-fourth degrees (111/4°) and
ninety degrees (90°).
         b.   Vertical reactions: Individual designs for each location shall be
submitted with the development plans.
         c.   Material: Precast concrete.
         d.   Where undisturbed earth is not available or not likely to be
available to back up pressure- type concrete thrust blocks, the development
plans shall specify Megalug retainer glands or tie rods with or without anchor
type thrust blocks. Design data shall be submitted for such specifications.
Care shall be taken when pouring concrete so that the mix will not interfere
with access to joints or with hydrant drainage.
      10.   Casing Pipes:
         a.   Casing installation under railroad tracks, pipelines, County and
State highways, Township roads, etc., shall be approved by the appropriate
agency which has jurisdiction.
         b.   Steel casing pipe shall be in accordance with American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) B36.10 with yield strength of thirty five thousand
(35,000) psi minimum and minimum wall thickness per the following table:
MINIMUM WALL THICKNESS FOR STEEL CASING PIPE
 
Nominal Inside Diameter (in) Nominal Wall Thickness (in)
24 and under                 0.375
24-36                        0.500
36                           0.625
>36                          As approved by the Subdivision Administrator
 
      11.   Valve Vaults:
         a.   Precast reinforced concrete: ASTM C-478.
         b.   (1)   For valves twelve inches (12") diameter or less, valve
vaults shall have a forty eight inch (48") inside diameter.
            (2)   For pressure connections and valves sixteen inches (16") and
larger, valve vaults shall have a sixty inch (60") inside diameter.
         c.   No more than three (3) precast concrete adjusting rings with six
inch (6") maximum total height adjustment shall be allowed.
         d.   Bitumastic material shall be placed between all precast concrete
sections and adjusting rings and to set castings.
         e.   Valve vaults requiring offset cones shall be positioned so that
neither the inside of the cone nor the manhole steps will interfere with the
operation of the valve. A valve operating nut shall be accessible through the
frame opening.
      12.   Castings:
         a.   Manhole frame and cover: Heavy duty East Jordan Iron Works, Inc.
(EJIW) 1060, with heavy duty gasketed, self-sealing lid cast with “WATER”.
         b.   Manhole steps: Fiberglass or steel reinforced plastic conforming
to OSHA standards, sixteen inches (16") on center.
      13.   Pipe Bedding Cover And Trench Backfill: IDOT gradation CA-7,
crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following gradation requirements:
 
Sieve Size
Percent Passing
Grade No. 3" 21/2" 2" 11/2" 1" 3/4" 1/2" 3/8" No. 4 No. 16 No. 50 No. 200
CA-7      100               95±5   45±15    5±5
 
   D.   Installation Requirements:
      1.   Environmental Protection Agency Permit: Water system design and
construction shall, in all respects, be in accordance with the regulations of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No construction shall commence
until a copy of a permit from this agency is filed with the Subdivision
Administrator.
      2.   Installation: The installation of water mains and appurtenances,
including services, shall conform to the requirements of this appendix and
shall conform to AWWA C-600.
      3.   Notification: Prior to beginning the water main installation, the
contractor shall give the Subdivision Administrator forty eight (48) hours'
notice of his intended time of starting work.
   E.   Water Service Line Installation And Location: A water service line is a
water pipe connected at the water main by a brass corporation stop or a ductile
iron fitting. Such pipe is extended horizontally at right angles with the water
main to the front line of the lot or single building which it is to serve and
shall have a minimum burial depth of sixty six inches (66"). For all service
taps larger than one inch (1"), a service saddle designed for the size and type
of water main pipe shall be used. A cast iron curb box shall be installed over
curb stops for four inch (4") and smaller gate valves. A valve vault shall be
provided for gate valves larger than four inches (4"). The water service line
shall be terminated with a brass curb stop or gate valve seven and one-half
feet (7.5') from the lot line and five feet (5') right of the center of the lot
as viewed from the street. The end of the service line shall be marked with a
wooden four inch by four inch (4" x 4") stake painted blue with lot number,
extended four feet (4') above finished grade. The curb shall be stamped “w” at
the water service location.
   F.   Fire Service Line: All fire sprinklers shall be connected to the water
system through a separate fire service line constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this appendix.
   G.   Separation From Sewers: The water main pipe shall be laid at least ten
feet (10') horizontally distant from any existing or proposed sewer pipe. If
the water main must cross a sewer pipe, the bottom of the water main pipe must
be laid at least eighteen inches (18") above the top of the sewer pipe. If
neither of these conditions can be met, other protective methods, as described
and illustrated in the “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois”, shall be followed.
   H.   Construction Requirements:
      1.   Excavation:
         a.   The trench shall be excavated so that the water main shall have a
minimum of five feet (5') of cover.
         b.   The trench shall be excavated so that a minimum of six inches
(6") of CA-7 stone be placed as bedding material. The pipe shall then be
covered with a minimum of six inches (6") of the same stone.
         c.   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for the bottom of
the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy, or other unsuitable soil,
such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of the trench and
replaced with well-compacted CA-7 material or an equal substitute if such
compacted material proves unsatisfactory. Where rock in either ledge or boulder
formation is encountered, it shall be removed below grade and replaced with a
well-compacted cushion of CA-7 material having a thickness under the pipe of
not less than eight inches (8").
      2.   Safety: The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on-site during all trenching operations to ensure that all
OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by construction means and
methods.
      3.   Laying Water Main:
         a.   The contractor shall keep the trench free from water while the
water main is being placed and the pipe joint has been sealed to the
satisfaction of the Subdivision Administrator.
         b.   Adequate provision shall be made for the safety, storage, and
protection of all water pipe prior to actual installation in the trench. Care
shall be taken to prevent damage to the pipe castings, both inside and out.
Provisions shall be made to keep the inside of the pipe clean throughout its
storage period and to keep mud and other debris from being deposited therein.
All pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned on the inside before laying of the pipe.
Proper equipment shall be used for the safe handling, conveying, and laying of
the pipe. All pipe shall be carefully lowered into the trench, piece by piece,
in such manner as to prevent damage to water main materials and protective
coatings and linings. Under no circumstances shall water main materials be
dropped or dumped into the trench.
         c.   In making joints, all portions of the joining materials and the
socket and spigot ends of the joining pipe shall be wiped clean of all foreign
materials. The actual assembly of the jointing shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions and as directed by the Subdivision
Administrator. During construction, until jointing operations are complete, the
open ends of all pipes shall be at all times protected and sealed with
temporary watertight plugs.
         d.   Polyurethane wrapping of the water main will be required only in
areas where unsuitable soils are found to exist as determined by the
Subdivision Administrator.
      4.   Pipe Cutting:
         a.   The cutting of pipe for inserting valves, fittings, or closure
pieces shall be done in a neat and workerlike manner without damage to the
cement lining and so as to leave a smooth end at right angles to the axis of
the pipe.
         b.   Flame cutting of the pipe by means of an oxyacetylene torch shall
not be allowed.
         c.   All cut-in connections for greater than a two inch (2")
connection shall be made by cast iron sleeve or City-approved equal.
      5.   Trench:
         a.   The trench bottom shall be flat and shall provide full bearing of
the length of the pipe.
         b.   Thrust blocks shall be used to prevent movement at all tees,
caps, valves, and hydrants.
         c.   Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by careful
replacement of the excavated material after the pipe and the bedding material
(if applicable) have been installed. Any pipe installed under an existing or
proposed street pavement, or within two feet (2') of an existing or proposed
pavement edge, curb and gutter, bike trail or sidewalk shall be backfilled to
the top of the trench with CA-7 material compacted in lifts not exceeding
twelve inches (12") and the final twelve inches (12") with compacted CA-
6 material.
      6.   Fire Hydrant:
         a.   Fire hydrants shall be placed as specified herein. There shall be
no obstructions within four feet (4') of the fire hydrant. All nozzles shall
stand plumb, their steamer nozzle pointing normal to the road. They shall
conform to the established grade, with nozzles at eighteen inches (18") above
the finished grade.
         b.   A drainage pit two feet (2') in diameter shall be excavated
around each hydrant and filled completely with three-fourths inch (3/4") washed
gravel under and around the bowl of the drain opening. No hydrant drainage pit
shall be connected to a sewer.
      7.   Water Main Installation: During water main installation, to make a
closure between two (2) pipe ends, or between a pipe end fittings, or between a
pipe end and valve, short lengths shall be used with proper connections or
couplings. Repair sleeves shall not be used to make closures during new
construction.
      8.   Dewatering: Where water is encountered in the trench, it shall be
removed during pipe laying and jointing operations. Trench water shall not be
allowed to enter the pipe at anytime.
      9.   Connections To Existing Mains: All connections to the City water
distribution system shall be made under full water service pressure, unless
otherwise approved by the Subdivision Administrator at locations approved by
the Subdivision Administrator.
   I.   Pressure Test:
      1.   As part of the construction, the water mains shall be pressure
tested in accordance with this appendix. All testing shall be performed before
curb and gutter or other permanent type surface improvement work begins. The
Subdivision Administrator shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours
before the test. The filling of the water main shall be at a rate set by the
City, with all hydrants and whips in the open position and slowly closed in the
order in which water appears. A form documenting the test procedure and results
shall be signed by the contractor and the representative for the City
witnessing the test,
      2.   All newly laid pipe shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of
one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch, in accordance with AWWA
Standard C-600-93, latest edition, section 4: Hydrostatic Testing. Allowable
leakage, measured in gph (gallons per hour) per one thousand feet (1,000') of
pipeline, as specified in Table 6A of the AWWA Standard C-600-93, shall apply.
Duration of each pressure test shall be for a period of not less than two (2)
hours. Each valved section of pipe shall be filled with water, and the
specified test pressure shall be applied by means of a pump connected to the
pipe. Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled
from the pipe. All leaks shall be repaired until tight. Any cracked or
defective pipes, fittings, valves or hydrants discovered in consequence of this
pressure test shall be removed and replaced and the test repeated until
satisfactory results are obtained.
      3.   All testing shall be performed before the installation of service
lines.
   J.   Preliminary Flushing: Prior to chlorination, the main shall be flushed
as thoroughly as possible with the water pressure and outlets available. The
Subdivision Administrator shall be notified before any water is drawn from City
mains. Flushing shall be done after the pressure test is made. Because such
flushing removes only the lighter solids, it cannot be relied upon to remove
heavy material allowed to get into the main during laying. If no hydrant is
installed at the end of the main, a tap should be provided large enough to
affect a velocity in the main of at least two and one-half feet (21/2') per
second.
   K.   Disinfection:
      1.   The preferred point of application of the chlorinating agent shall
be at the beginning of the pipeline extension (or any valved section of it) and
through a corporation stop in the top of the newly laid pipe. The injector for
delivering the chlorine gas into the pipe should be supplied from a tap on the
pressure side of the gate valve controlling the flow into the pipeline
extension.
      2.   Water from the existing distribution system or any other source of
supply shall be controlled so as to flow slowly into the newly laid pipeline
during the application of chlorine gas. The rate of chlorine mixture flow shall
be in such proportion to the rate of water entering the pipe that the chlorine
dose applied to the water entering the newly laid pipe shall be at least fifty
(50) ppm, or enough to meet the requirements during the retention period. This
may require as much as one hundred (100) ppm of chlorine in the water left in
the line after chlorination.
      3.   Valves shall be manipulated so that the strong chlorine solution in
the line being treated shall not flow back into the line supplying the water.
The pipe section being chlorinated shall be kept at a lower pressure than the
water system pressure.
      4.   Treated water shall be retained in the pipe long enough to destroy
all spore-forming bacteria. This retention period shall be at least twenty four
(24) hours. After the chlorine-treated water has been retained for the required
time, the chlorine residual at the pipe extremities and at other representative
points shall be at least ten (10) ppm.
      5.   In the process of chlorinating newly laid pipe, all valves or other
appurtenances shall be operated while the pipeline is filled with the
chlorinating agent.
      6.   Water mains shall be disinfected and tested according to the
requirements of the “Standards for Disinfecting Water Mains”, AWWA C-601, as
amended from time to time, and as required by this appendix. All disinfection,
as required by this appendix, shall be performed by an independent firm
exhibiting experience in the methods and techniques of this operation, and
shall be approved by the Subdivision Administrator. The firm shall be bonded
and insured and have proof of both in the firm's vehicle (as well as on file
with the City). The insurance shall include the City of Watseka as additionally
insured and must include coverage for the handling and transporting of chlorine
gas. Furthermore, the firm must comply with all State and Federal regulations
regarding the handling and transporting of chlorine gas. City personnel must be
present during any chlorination work (including the collection of samples). The
Subdivision Administrator is to receive a forty eight (48) hour notification
prior to any disinfection work.
      7.   Disinfecting shall be done by the continuous feed method.
      8.   Only authorized City employees shall operate water system valves.
      9.   A minimum of two (2) people are required for chlorinating
procedures, one to monitor the chlorine at the cylinder and one to monitor the
chlorine at the sample (whip) locations.
      10.   Samples shall only be taken from copper “whips” (not hydrants).
      11.   All chlorine cylinders shall be secured to the vehicle in a
vertical position.
      12.   Under no circumstances shall any heat be applied directly to the
chlorine cylinder.
      13.   A yoke adaptor for connection to the chlorine cylinder shall be
used.
      14.   Clear neoprene tubing shall be used for the dissemination of the
chlorine.
      15.   A needle valve shall be used for the accurate control of the
chlorine.
      16.   A back-pressure gauge and plastic check valve shall be used.
      17.   The chlorine assembly shall not use any “quick-connects” or clamps;
only threaded fittings.
      18.   The firm performing the chlorinating shall have an up-to-date
certified air pack in their vehicle.
      19.   All building service lines (4 inches in diameter or larger) shall
be chlorinated/disinfected only after permanent fittings have been installed.
Removal of any such fitting may require the service line to be re-sampled or
re-chlorinated at the discretion of the City.
   L.   Final Flushing And Testing:
      1.   No disconnection from an existing or connection to a new water main
is to be performed until the new water main is tested and placed into service.
For replacement water mains, all work shall be performed prior to abandoning
the existing water main. In the event that an interruption of service is
required, the contractor shall notify all affected users, in writing, at least
twenty four (24) to forty eight (48) hours in advance.
      2.   Following chlorination, all treated water shall be thoroughly
flushed from the newly laid pipeline at its extremities until the replacement
water, throughout its length, shall, upon test, be approved as safe water by
the Subdivision Administrator. This quality of water delivered by the new main
should continue for a period of at least two (2) full days, as demonstrated by
laboratory examination of samples taken from a tap located and installed in
such a way as to prevent outside contamination. Samples should never be taken
from an unsterilized hose or from a fire hydrant because such samples seldom
meet current bacteriological standards.
      3.   After disinfecting and flushing, a minimum of two (2) water samples
shall be collected by the contractor on two (2) successive days, with notice
given, so that the collection may be witnessed by the City. Bacteriological
sampling and analyses of the samples shall be performed by a laboratory
approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health and the City. Should the
initial treatment result in an unsatisfactory bacteriological test, the
procedure shall be repeated until satisfactory results are obtained. The
contractor or developer shall pay for the sampling and analyses. Results shall
be transmitted by the laboratory directly to the Subdivision Administrator.
Test results shall indicate the date the sample was made, the exact locations
at which the sample was taken, the firm submitting the sample, and the project
at which the sample was collected. Sufficient samples shall be collected in
order to ensure that the system is bacteriologically safe.
      4.   The City shall operate the valves, hydrants, and any other
appurtenances to flush the water main after the receipt of satisfactory water
samples. Any operation difficulties or deficiencies shall be noted and
submitted to the developer or contractor for repair.
      5.   All corporation stops used for testing and chlorination purposes
shall be removed and plugged with a tapered brass plug.
      6.   Fire flow testing will be performed by the Superintendent of Water.
      7.   Record drawings:
         a.   Prior to final acceptance of work, as-built drawings shall be
submitted to the City for review.
         b.   Upon City approval of as-built drawings, two (2) full-size (36
inch by 48 inch) copies (signed and sealed by a registered Illinois
professional engineer) shall be submitted to the City, along with an electronic
copy in accordance with current City requirements (see section
13-5-10 of this title).
   WATER MAIN TESTING
   SUBDIVISION:      TEST START TIME:      
   CONTRACTOR:   TEST END TIME:
TEST DATE:      TEST DURATION:
TEST PRESSURE:   STATIC PRESSURE:
   Allowable Water Loss
      Pipe Size      in.          in.          in.         
      Total Lengths   ft.          ft.          ft.         
   Allowable Calculations FORMULA:      L= SD/P
                     133,200
   Where:
            L = allowable leakage, in gallons per hour
         S = length of pipe tested, in feet
         D = nominal diameter of the pipe, in inches
         P = average test pressure in pounds per square inch (gauge)
   Calculations
   Total Allowable Loss Per Hour (Gallons)
 
Test Number Date Allowable Loss Actual Loss Pass Fail
 
Remarks:
Signatures:      City Representative                       
            Contractor                                
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
13-8-7: APPENDIX G, CURB AND GUTTER MATERIALS STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   All curb and gutter shall be installed in accordance with the
material installation and testing requirements of “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois”, latest edition, unless otherwise
modified in this appendix.
      2.   For specification references made herein for manufactured items,
such as reinforcement, refer to designations of the American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM).
   B.   Curb Standards:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   Rolled type or barrier combination curb and gutter as approved by
the Subdivision Administrator shall be used, see section
13-8-2 of this chapter for type of curb and gutter. Furthermore, two(2) No. 4
reinforcing bars with a minimum lap of fifteen inches (15") shall be placed
continuously in all curb and gutter.
         b.   The back of the curb shall be depressed at all sidewalk ramps for
persons with disabilities locations.
         c.   The top of the curb shall be stamped with the letter “W” for
water and “S” for sanitary sewer at the location where the respective service
to each lot crosses under the curb.
      2.   Commercial/Industrial:
         a.   Vertical face barrier type combination curb and gutter conforming
to the dimensions shown in the vertical-faced curb and gutter detail shall be
used. See section
13-8-2 of this chapter for type of curb and gutter. Furthermore, two (2) No. 4
reinforcing bars with a minimum lap of fifteen inches (15") shall be placed
continuously in all curb and gutter.
         b.   Depressed curb shall be provided at all sidewalk ramps for
persons with disabilities locations and at all driveways where locations are
known at the time of curb installation. If the driveway location is not known
at the time of curb and gutter installation, vertical face barrier curb shall
be installed, and the driveway opening will be provided later by the lot owner.
         c.   The top of the curb shall be stamped with the letter “W” for
water and “S” for sanitary sewer at the location where the respective service
to each lot crosses under the curb.
   C.   Material:
      1.   Concrete: Portland cement concrete (Class SI) having a minimum
compressive strength of four thousand (4,000) pounds per square inch in twenty
eight (28) days shall be used. Air entrainment shall be in the three percent
(3%) to six percent (6%) range, and slump shall be two inches (2") to four
inches (4"); except, if a slipform paver is used, the slump shall be adjusted
to meet the requirements of the slip forming process.
      2.   Expansion Joint Filler: Bituminous preformed expansion joint filler,
three-fourths inch (3/4") thick, and preshaped to the profile of the curb,
shall be used.
      3.   Expansion Joint Dowels: Smooth steel dowels, three-fourths inch (3/
4") in diameter and eighteen inches (18") long with pinched stop caps on one
end, shall be used.
      4.   Reinforcement Bars: Reinforcement bars shall be ASTM A-615, minimum
grade 40 steel.
      5.   Joint Sealant: A cold poured joint compound shall be used.
      6.   Curing Compound: Curing compound shall be Type II or III, as
specified in section 722 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
      7.   Curb Base Course: Curb base course shall be IDOT gradation CA-
7 crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following gradation requirements:
 
Sieve Size
Percent Passing
Grade No. 3" 21/2" 2" 11/2" 1" 3/4" 1/2" 3/8" No. 4 No. 16 No. 50 No. 200
CA-7      100               95±5   45±15    5±5
 
   D.   Installation:
      1.   Base Preparation: The base course shall be CA-7 and a minimum of
four inches (4") thick, trimmed or filled as necessary to provide a full depth
of curb and gutter as shown in the curb detail. Prior to concrete placement,
the base course shall be compacted and proof rolled in accordance with the
testing and acceptance requirements below.
      2.   Reinforcement: Two (2) No. 4 reinforcing bars with a minimum lap of
fifteen inches (15") shall be placed continuously in all curb and gutter.
      3.   Placing And Finishing Concrete:
         a.   Concrete shall be thoroughly tamped to remove all voids. The curb
and gutter surface shall be broom finished at right angles to the flow line of
the curb and gutter. Any honeycombed areas along the sides of the curb shall be
pointed with mortar. The City shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours
before pouring the curb.
         b.   The curb shall be depressed for ramps for persons with
disabilities at all sidewalk locations.
      4.   Curing And Protection: The curb shall be sealed with curing compound
as the finishing work proceeds. Protection shall be in accordance with the
Standard Specifications.
      5.   Joints:
         a.   Expansion joints shall be placed, as a minimum, at all curb
radius points and all construction joints in the curb, and shall consist of
expansion joint filler and dowels with end caps.
         b.   Contraction joints shall be saw cut at twenty foot (20') maximum
intervals to a depth of two inches (2"). Sawing shall be done as soon as
practical before any random shrinkage cracking occurs and no later than twenty
four (24) hours after the concrete has been placed. The clean joint space shall
be sealed with a cold poured joint compound.
   E.   Testing And Acceptance:
      1.   Proof Roll: The curb and gutter base course shall be proof rolled
with a fully loaded dump truck before the curb and gutter is poured. The
Subdivision Administrator shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours
before proof rolling. Additional proof rolls shall be provided to verify that
any unstable areas have been repaired.
      2.   Concrete:
         a.   The contractor shall make at least two (2) test cylinders from
each concrete pour less than twenty five (25) cubic yards, and at least four
(4) cylinders for each pour of twenty five (25) cubic yards and above, in
accordance with ASTM C-31. The contractor shall have the cylinders tested in
accordance with ASTM C-39 at twenty eight (28) days by an independent IDOT-
certified testing firm and the test results mailed directly to the Subdivision
Administrator. If the materials tested fail to meet any of the requirements of
the tests, the portions of the job for which the particular test was made may
be rejected.
         b.   The City may require that the slump and air content of the
concrete also be tested. All costs of testing shall be borne by the contractor.
Any concrete not conforming to the Standard Specifications will be rejected.
   F.   Defects: Any curb that has been installed at the improper line and
grade that is damaged or badly cracked, or that has been installed with
improper material, shall be removed and replaced as a condition of acceptance.
(Ord. 2420, 6-24-2014)
TITLE 14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSE; APPLICATION; INTERPRETATION
Section
14-1-1: Purposes
14-1-2: Scope
14-1-3: Interpretation
14-1-4: Exemptions From Provisions
14-1-5: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
14-1-6: Severability
14-1-7: Repealer
14-1-1: PURPOSES:
The principal purpose of this title is to promote effective, equitable,
acceptable, and legal stormwater management measures by establishing reasonable
rules and regulations for development within the City. Other purposes of this
title include:
   A.   Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage throughout the City through planning, appropriate engineering
practices and proper maintenance.
   B.   Protecting from, and reducing the existing potential for, loss of human
life, health, safety and property from the hazards of flooding damages on a
watershed basis.
   C.   Preserving and enhancing the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions
and natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains to protect water
quality, protect aquatic habitats, reduce flood damages, reduce soil erosion,
provide recreational and aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
   D.   Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities,
developments, agricultural fields, and construction sites and reducing and
repairing stream bank erosion.
   E.   Requiring that planning for development provides for water resource
management, taking into account natural features such as vegetation, wildlife,
waterways, wetlands, and topography in order to reduce the probability that new
development will create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion.
   F.   Protecting environmentally sensitive areas from deterioration or
destruction by private or public actions.
   G.   Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff control,
especially when the land is developed with a large amount of impervious
surface.
   H.   Requiring the design and evaluation of each site's stormwater
management plan consistent with watershed capacities.
   I.   Encouraging the use of stormwater storage and infiltration of
stormwater in preference to stormwater conveyance.
   J.   Lessening the taxpayers’ burden for flood-related disasters, repairs to
flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations.
   K.   Meeting the Illinois Department of Natural Resources-Office of Water
Resources floodway permitting requirements delineated in 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18g (“An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes, and
Streams of the State of Illinois”), as amended from time to time.
   L.   Making federally subsidized flood insurance available in the City by
fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   M.   Complying with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified in title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   N.   Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities that
will not adversely affect the potential for flood damage.
   O.   Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management
facilities.
   P.   Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and
realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-1-2: SCOPE:
This title applies to all development within the City, including that under the
control of any governmental entity, agency, or authority. When the City shall
undertake development in the regulatory floodway, or regulatory floodplain
where no regulatory floodway has been designated, it shall obtain a permit from
IDNR/OWR prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit. All units of
local government shall obtain stormwater management permits from the City for
all development projects within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   This title shall be liberally construed to protect the health, welfare,
safety, and environment of the residents of the City and to effectuate the
purposes of this title and the enabling legislation.
   B.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed to consent to, license, permit to
locate, construct, or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation, or
to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity.
   C.   When provisions of this title differ from any other applicable law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall
apply.
   D.   The provisions of this title are cumulative of all other laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations which relate to the subject matter
hereof and, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing in this
title shall be construed as a limitation upon the application or enforcement of
any such law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this title shall be construed to be consistent with
the provisions of such other laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations,
and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their
fullest application.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-1-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   This title does not apply to:
      1.   Development which has been substantially completed before the
effective date hereof; and
      2.   Development which has been determined to be exempt by the City.
   B.   Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any
manner unless such replacement or enlargement conforms to the requirements of
this title.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-1-5: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   The degree of flood protection provided by this title is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond
the control of any governmental authority. This title does not, therefore,
guarantee that areas outside the floodplain or permitted land uses within the
floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages.
   B.   Nothing in this title shall be construed or applied in any manner to
create liability on the part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality
or other governmental authority, or any elected official, or any officer,
agent, or employee of any of the foregoing, or any certified review specialist
for any flood damage resulting from reliance on the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-1-6: SEVERABILITY:
The several provisions of this title shall be severable in accordance with the
following rules:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this title.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge to be invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular parcel of land, a
particular structure, or a particular development, such judgment shall not
affect the application of said provision to any other land, structure or
development.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-1-7: REPEALER:
This title repeals the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to
meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to
replace any ordinance or resolution passed in order to establish initial
eligibility for the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
14-2-1: Definitions Of Terms
14-2-1: DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:
Within the context of this title, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings set forth in this section except where otherwise specifically
indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by
common dictionary definition.
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION: An administrative violation of this title occurs when
rules and procedures regarding permit applications and stormwater management
permits are not followed.
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the City of Watseka to administer and
enforce this title, which is the City of Watseka Public Works Director.
AGRICULTURAL SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE: A water management technique driven by
economic and safety concerns, where the rate at which surplus groundwater
should be removed is determined primarily by the moisture/air requirements of
the vegetation (commonly called “tiles”, “field tiles”, etc.).
APPLICABLE ENGINEERING PRACTICE: Procedures, methods, or materials recommended
in standard engineering textbooks or references as suitable for the intended
purpose.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary
forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out
construction of a development from the City.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The list of permissible uses is
contained in chapter 8 of this title.
ARMORING: A form of channel modification which involves the placement of
materials (concrete, riprap, bulkheads, etc.) within a stream channel or along
a shoreline to protect property above streams, lakes and ponds from erosion and
wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in a given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The highest water surface elevation that can be
expected during the base flood.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): A measure used to control the adverse
stormwater-related effects of development. BMPs include structural devices
(e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches, and detention basins)
designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes, and protect
aquatic habitats. BMPs also include nonstructural approaches, such as public
education efforts to prevent the dumping of household chemicals into storm
drains.
BOUNCE: The difference between the normal water level and the design high water
level in a wet bottom pond, and the invert of the outlet control and the design
high water level for a dry bottom pond.
BUFFER: An area of predominantly vegetated land located adjacent to channels,
wetlands, lakes or ponds for the purpose of reducing contaminants in stormwater
that flows to such areas.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, a mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway
use.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the construction, erection or
alteration of a structure or building.
BULKHEAD: A retaining wall that protects property along water.
BULLETIN 70: “Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics of
Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois” by Floyd Huff and James Angel of the Illinois
State Water Survey (1989).
BYPASS FLOWS: Stormwater runoff or groundwater from upstream properties
tributary to a property’s drainage system but not under its control.
COE: The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface water, groundwater, effluent, or
industrial discharges flow either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation, but does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash or
dredging to previously documented thalweg elevations and side slopes.
CHANNELIZATION: A severe form of channel modification involving a significant
change in the channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the
existing channel (e.g., straightening).
CITY: The City of Watseka, Iroquois County, Illinois.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
COMMERCIAL: Sale of goods to the public at large where the traffic generated
warrants construction of site improvements.
COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT: Development on a parcel upon which the existing
condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
commercial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious
surfaces added after the effective date hereof are specifically excluded from
this definition.
COMMUNITY: The City of Watseka.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An excavated, hydrologically and hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood storage.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA): A FEMA comment letter
conditionally removing a development proposed to be located in, and affecting
only that portion of the area of, a floodplain outside the regulatory floodway
and having no impact on the existing regulatory floodway or base flood
elevations.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter that indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries, or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM after the record
drawings are submitted and approved.
CONSERVATION PLANNING: The practices and procedures associated with the
management of soil, water, plants, plant nutrients and other elements of
agricultural production. Documentation of the management system shall only be
as required by the NRCS or in cases of a complaint, as requested by the
Administrator in response to a notification of a complaint.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to limit the rate of flow that passes
through the structure to a specific rate, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
COUNTY: Iroquois County, Illinois.
CRITICAL DURATION: The duration of a storm event that results in the greatest
peak runoff.
CULVERT: A structure designed to carry drainage water or small streams below
barriers such as roads, driveways, or railway embankments.
DAM: Any obstruction, wall embankment, or barrier, together with any abutments
and appurtenant works, constructed to store or divert water or to create a pool
(not including underground water storage tanks).
DEPRESSIONAL AREA: Any area which is lower in elevation on all sides than
surrounding properties (i.e., does not drain freely), or whose drainage is
severely limited such as by a restrictive culvert. A depressional area will
fill with water on occasion when runoff into it exceeds the rate of
infiltration into underlying soil or exceeds the discharge through its
controlled outlet. Large depressional areas may provide significant stormwater
or floodplain storage.
DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE: The volume contained below a closed contour on a one foot
(1') contour interval topographic map, the upper elevation of which is
determined by the invert of a surface gravity outlet.
DETENTION BASIN (SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY): A constructed structure for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff with a controlled release rate.
DEVELOPER: A person who creates or causes a development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any constructed change to real estate including: a) construction,
reconstruction, repair, or replacement of a building or an addition to a
building; b) installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on-site for less than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; c) drilling and mining,
installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects; d)
construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts, channel
modifications, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface, storage materials, or
deposit of solids or liquid waste; e) any other activity of man that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of floodwater or surface water,
including extensive vegetation removal; f) plowing and cultivation and other
similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or
construction of levees as regulated in subsection
14-6-5E of this title. The following are not considered development:
maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or
resurfacing of roads with an impervious surface when there is no increase in
elevation.
DRAINAGE AREA: The land area upstream of a given point that may contribute
runoff flow at that point from rainfall.
EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this title.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA, or its equivalent, that is
used to certify the base flood elevation and the lowest elevation of usable
space to which a building has been constructed.
EMERGENCY OVERLAND FLOW ROUTE: The flow path of stormwater runoff calculated,
assuming all enclosed storm sewers are inoperable.
EPHEMERAL STREAM: A stream whose bed elevation does not intersect the
groundwater table. It carries flow only during and immediately after a runoff-
producing rainfall event.
EROSION: The process whereby soil is detached by the action of water or wind.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
EXTENDED DETENTION: A volume of runoff temporarily detained and released over a
long period of time as specified in subsection
14-6-4E of this title.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The Federal Agency and its
regulations at 44 CFR 59-79, effective as of September 29, 1989, or as amended.
FEE-IN-LIEU OF DETENTION: A fee paid by a developer to the City of Watseka,
commensurate with the costs and fee schedules adopted by the City based on the
detention volume required for the development to meet release rates in this
title. Rules and procedures for fee-in-lieu of detention are contained in
chapter 11 of this title.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILTERED VIEW: The maintenance or establishment of woody vegetation of
sufficient density to screen developments from a stream or wetland, to provide
for stream bank stabilization and erosion control, to serve as an aid to
infiltration of surface runoff, and to provide cover to shade the water. The
vegetation need not be so dense as to completely block the view. FILTERED VIEW
means no clear cutting.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the
grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland waves or the unusual and rapid
accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): A floodplain management map issued by
FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analyses, the boundaries of the base
flood, the two-tenths percent (0.2%) probability flood, and the floodway.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: Normally expressed as a period of years, based on a percent
chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical analysis, during which
a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. For
example, the 2-year flood frequency has a fifty percent (50%) chance of
occurrence in any given year. Similarly, the 100-year flood frequency has a one
percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any given year.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): A map issued by FEMA that is an official
Community map which depicts generalized areas of floodplains replaced by a
detailed flood insurance study.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map upon which map FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Community. This map may or
may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A study of flood discharges and flood profiles for
the Community, adopted and published by FEMA.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the BFE plus one foot (1')
of freeboard for structures within the plane limits of the base flood
elevation. Outside the plane limits, the water table or 100-year design water
surface elevation of any adjacent stormwater facility, including emergency
overland flow routes, whichever is higher, plus one foot (1') of freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation
including detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The
FLOODPLAIN is also known as the “special flood hazard areas (SFHA)”.
FLOODPROOF: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes
or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or eliminate flood damage
to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE: The measure of the flow-carrying capacity of the floodway
section and is defined using Manning’s equation as, K = 1.4863 AR2/3n where “n”
is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective area of the cross-section
and “R” is the ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
FLOODWAY OR DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: Includes the channel, on-stream lakes, and
that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or channel which is needed
to store and convey the critical duration 100-year frequency flood discharge
with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in flood stage due to the loss of flood
conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities.
FREEBOARD: An increment of height added to the BFE or 100-year design water
surface elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in
calculations, unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects
such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
FUNCTIONAL: Refers to stormwater facilities which serve their primary purpose
of meeting developed release rate requirements but do not meet all of the final
design conditions. For example, a detention basin, which has been excavated but
has not had the side slopes graded nor the final landscaping placed, may be
considered FUNCTIONAL as a site runoff storage facility.
GOOD HUSBANDRY: Generally accepted agricultural practices found in good farm
management.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROUNDWATER: Water that is located within soil or rock below the surface of the
earth. Also known as “subsurface water”.
GROUNDWATER CONTROL SYSTEM: A designed system which may consist of tiles,
underdrains, French drains, or other appropriate stormwater facilities the
purpose of which is to lower the groundwater table to a predictable elevation
throughout the year.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: a) listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register; b) certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a
district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; c) individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic
Places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; d) individually listed on
a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDRAULIC CHARACTERISTICS: The features of a watercourse that determine its
water conveyance capacity. These features include, but are not limited to: size
and configuration of the cross-section of the watercourse and floodway; texture
and roughness of materials along the watercourse; alignment of the watercourse;
gradient of the watercourse; amount and type of vegetation within the
watercourse; and size, configuration, and other characteristics of structures
within the watercourse. In low-lying areas, the characteristics of the overbank
area also determine water conveyance capacity.
HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA: Shall consist of those areas of
concrete, asphalt and gravel surfaces, along with rooftops, which convey flows
directly to an improved drainage system consisting of storm sewers or paved
channels. Rooftops whose downspouts discharge to unpaved surfaces which are
designed for the absorption and filtration of stormwater runoff shall not be
considered as hydraulically connected impervious surfaces. Roadways whose
primary conveyance is through open ditches and swales shall not be considered
as hydraulically connected impervious surface. Roadways drained by curb and
gutter and storm sewer, and driveways hydraulically connected to those
roadways, shall be considered as directly connected impervious surface.
HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED: An area where the land surface has been cleared,
grubbed, compacted, or otherwise modified that changes runoff, volumes, rates,
or direction.
HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE: Compensatory storage either
adjacent to the floodplain fill or not located adjacent to the development but
can be shown by hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be equivalent to
compensatory storage located adjacent to the development.
HYDRAULICS: The science and study of the mechanical behavior of water in
physical systems and processes.
HYDROLOGY: The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics,
composition, and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth
and underground.
IDNR/OWR: The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
IMPERVIOUS: Surfaces that cause the majority of rainfall to be converted to
direct runoff. Asphalt, concrete and roofing systems are to be considered
IMPERVIOUS.
INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT: Development on a parcel upon which the existing
condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
industrial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious
surfaces added after the effective date hereof are specifically excluded from
consideration as INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT.
INTERMITTENT STREAM: A stream whose bed intersects the groundwater table for
only a portion of the year on the average, or any stream which flows
continuously for at least one month out of the year but not the entire year.
LAKE: A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two (2) or
more acres, which retains water throughout the year.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): The official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain. A "LOMA" amends the
effective FHBM, FBFM, or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): A letter from FEMA that revises base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries, or floodway as shown
on an effective FHBM, FBFM, or FIRM.
LOT: An area of land, with defined boundaries, that is designated in the
Official Assessor’s records as being one parcel.
MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: That portion of a stormwater facility needed to store
and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor stormwater system.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other
similar vehicles placed on-site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MASS GRADING: Development in which the primary activity is a change in
topography affected by the movement of earth materials.
MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: Shall consist of all infrastructure including curb,
gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and swales, storm sewers, and sub-surface
drainage systems intended to convey stormwater runoff at less than a 100-year
flood frequency. The design frequency for minor stormwater systems shall be in
accordance with the applicable ordinances of the Community or Highway
Department jurisdiction.
MITIGATION: Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development in
wetlands or the floodplain.
NRCS: The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): A Federal program whose requirements
are codified in title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
NATURAL: In reference to watercourses, means those stream channels, grassed
waterways and swales formed by the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by unnatural causes. A natural stream tends to follow a
meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the
bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and
geologic materials typical of the area with no alteration of the course or
cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes caused by unnatural causes.
NET BENEFIT IN WATER QUALITY: The institution of best management practices as
part of a development that, when compared to the pre-development condition, can
be judged to reduce downstream sediment loading or pollutant loadings.
NET WATERSHED BENEFIT: A finding that, when compared to the existing condition,
the developed project will do one of the following: substantially reduce (more
than 10 percent) downstream peak discharges; reduce downstream flood stages
(more than 0.1 foot); or reduce downstream damages to structures occurring in
the pre-development condition. The demonstration of one of these conditions
must be through detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of watersheds on a
regional scale as approved by the Administrator.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
NONRIVERINE: Areas not associated with a stream or river such as isolated
depressional storage areas, ponds and lakes.
OBSERVATION STRUCTURES: Structures built on a field tile where the pipe inflow
and outflow is visible upon removal of a lid.
OPEN CHANNEL: A conveyance system with a definable bed and banks carrying the
discharge from field tiles and surface drainage. Open channels do not include
grassed swales within farm fields under agricultural production, which are
ephemeral in nature.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
OVERLAND FLOW PATH: A design feature of the major stormwater system which
carries flows in excess of the minor stormwater system design capacity in an
open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to
withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
PARCEL: All contiguous land under common ownership or control including right
(s)-of-way to be dedicated in conjunction with the proposed development.
PERENNIAL STREAMS: Riverine watercourses whose thalweg generally intersects the
groundwater table elevation and flows throughout the year.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY: The City of Watseka.
POND: Any inland water body fed by spring or surface water flow that is not a
lake.
PRIMARY GRAVITY OUTLET: The outlet structure designed to meet the release rate
requirements of this title.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the State of Illinois, under
the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.), as
amended.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois
under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act (225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.), as amended.
PROPERTY: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers and streams which, in their natural conditions, were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of, the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project, which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT: An easement acceptable to the appropriate jurisdictional
body that meets the regulations of the IDNR/OWR, and the Community, and that
provides legal assurances that all areas subject to flooding in the created
backwater of the development will remain open to allow flooding.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person trained in one or more of the disciplines of
biology, geology, soil science, engineering, or hydrology whose training and
experience ensure a competent analysis and assessment of stream, lake, pond and
wetland conditions and impacts.
RECORD DRAWINGS: Drawings prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor representing the final as-
built record of the actual in-place elevations, location of structures, and
topography.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is: a) built on a singe
chassis; b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping travel or
seasonal use.
REGISTERED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the State
of Illinois as a structural engineer.
REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: The floodplain as depicted on maps recognized by FEMA as
defining the limits of the SFHA.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: Those portions of the floodplain depicted on maps as a
floodway and recognized by the IDNR/OWR for regulatory purposes.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying.
RETENTION FACILITY. A facility that stores stormwater runoff without a gravity
release.
RIVERINE: Related to, formed by, or resembling a channel (including creeks and
rivers).
RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary
drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of that
basin.
(SFHA) SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: An area having special flood, mudslide or
mudflow, or flood-related erosion hazards, and which area is shown on an FHBM
or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.
SEASONAL HIGH GROUNDWATER TABLE: The upper limits of the soil temporarily
saturated with water, being usually associated with spring wetness conditions.
This may be indicated by soil mottles with a Munsell color of two (2) chroma or
less.
SEDIMENT TRAP: A structure or area that allows for the temporary deposit and
removal or disposal of sediment materials from stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits hydraulically moved soils, debris, and
other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
stormwater drainage systems.
SEEPAGE: The movement of drainable water through soil and rock.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance between any portion of a structure or any
development activity and the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond, or the
edge of a wetland, measured from the structure's or development's closest point
to the ordinary high water mark, or edge.
SITE: A parcel on which development is proposed or has occurred. The area of
the site shall include rights-of-way to be dedicated in conjunction with the
development.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the City which permits development,
or limited development, of a site in accordance with approved plans and in
accordance with this title.
STORMWATER FACILITY: All ditches, channels, conduits, bridges, culverts,
levees, ponds, natural and manmade impoundments, wetlands, riparian
environment, tile, swales, sewers, or other natural or artificial structures or
measures which serve as a means of draining surface and subsurface water from
land.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT: The permit issued under chapter 4 of this title.
STRUCTURE: The results of a built change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless they are fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: If any one of the following three (3) conditions
applies when work is performed on an existing building, then the work will be
classified as a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   An improvement made to a building whose cost is equal to or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the building's market value before the improvement;
   B.   Reconstruction or repair of a building, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building before
reconstruction or repair; or
   C.   Additions to an existing building, the cost of which equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of a structure, or increases the floor
area by more than twenty percent (20%).
Note, that if a building is substantially improved, then the entire building
must comply with the building protection standards.
SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE: The removal of excess soil water to control water table
levels at predetermined elevations for structural, environmental or other
reasons in areas already developed or being developed for agricultural,
residential, industrial, commercial, or recreational uses.
SUBSURFACE WATER: Water beneath the ground or pavement surface. Sometimes
referred to as “groundwater” or "soil water”.
T FACTOR: The soil loss tolerance. It is the maximum amount of erosion at which
the quality of a soil as a medium for plant growth can be maintained. Erosion
losses are estimated by Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE) and Revised
Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE).
THALWEG: A line along the lowest point in a channel.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross- section to a wide cross-section, or vice versa.
USABLE SPACE: Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities, or other beneficial
purposes including, without limitation, basements.
VEGETATION: All plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses, and grasses.
WATER TABLE: The upper limit of a free water surface in a saturated soil or
underlying material.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert,
swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway,
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater runoff
and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE U.S.: As defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers in
their Federal Methodology for the Regulation of Wetlands. For purposes of this
title, “waters of the U.S.” include wetlands, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks,
bogs, fens, and ponds. "Waters of the U.S." do not include maintained
stormwater facilities.
WATERSHED: All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same stream,
lake, stormwater facility, or draining to a point.
WATERSHED BENEFIT: See definition of Net Watershed Benefit.
WATERSHED CHARACTERISTICS: Include land use, physiology, habitat, climate,
drainage system and community profile.
WATERSHED PLAN: A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin's
stormwater management, floodplain management, water quality and flood control
needs and capabilities.
WETLAND: An area of land which meets the criteria as defined in current Federal
methodology recognized by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, whether or not the
area of land is subject to the regulatory authority of U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, or any other regulatory authority.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section
14-3-1: Responsibility For Administration
14-3-2: Notices And Other Documents
14-3-3: Inspection And Maintenance Authority
14-3-4: Required Inspections
14-3-5: Violations And Offenses
14-3-6: Penalties And Remedies
14-3-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Responsible Bodies:
      1.   The City Council shall determine policy related to this title.
      2.   The Administrator shall administer this title. In performing his
duties, the Administrator may delegate and oversee enforcement of
responsibilities to any named designee.
      3.   The City shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the
National Flood Insurance Program, including:
         a.   The maintenance of all records and the submission of all reports
required for eligibility in the program, including elevation certificates,
floodproofing certificates, and lowest floor elevations; and
         b.   The notification of FEMA and IDNR/OWR of any proposed amendment
to this title.
   B.   Duties Of Administrator: The Administrator shall:
      1.   Receive a listing of all required Federal, State, regional and
County permit applications filed for the project prior to issuing a permit
under this title for areas covered by other stormwater related jurisdictions.
The Administrator may request copies of the stormwater related permit
applications.
      2.   Ascertain whether any floodplains/floodways exist on any site that
is the subject of an application for a permit under this title and whether or
not any new development is within the SFHA.
      3.   Review permit applications and determine whether to issue or deny
permits.
      4.   Ensure that the required notice of an application for a variance has
been given in accordance with section
14-3-2 of this title.
      5.   Notify an applicant for a variance that such variance may result in
increased rates for flood insurance.
      6.   Provide for inspections of developments as required by this title.
      7.   Investigate complaints of violations of this title within the City.
      8.   Notify violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to
comply with the provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program could make
them ineligible to receive flood insurance.
      9.   Initiate any proceeding necessary to enforce this title within the
City.
      10.   Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to
promote the purposes of this title.
      11.   Maintain copies of all applications and submittals, Federal, and
State permits, variances, CLOMR, LOMR, CLOMA, LOMA and all documentation
associated with any of the foregoing for public inspection.
      12.   Maintain documentation and data on the cost of any improvement to a
structure in the floodplain in order to enforce the provisions of this title
pertaining to substantial improvements to such structures.
   C.   Representative Capacity: In all cases when any action is taken by the
Administrator, or his duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of
this title, such action shall be taken in the name of the City of Watseka, and
the Administrator, nor his designee, in so acting, shall be rendered personally
liable.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-3-2: NOTICES AND OTHER DOCUMENTS:
   A   Service: Unless otherwise provided herein, service of any notice or
instrument under this title may be made upon any person in one of the following
manners:
      1.   By certified mail/return receipt requested, postage prepaid and
addressed to the address then on file for such person, if any, or if none, to
such person’s last known address; or
      2.   By any method prescribed under the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure
(735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.)
   B.   Publication: Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of any
notice or other instrument under this title shall be made by publishing such
notice or other instrument once in a newspaper published within the City (or if
no newspaper is published within the City, then a newspaper published in the
County and having a general circulation within the City), such publication
being not less than fifteen (15) or more than thirty (30) days before the
hearing or other event to which the publication relates.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-3-3: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the authority granted by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1104 and
5-1062, the City may, after thirty (30) days' notice to the owner or occupant,
enter upon any lands or waters within the City for the purpose of inspecting
and/or maintaining stormwater facilities or causing the removal of any
obstruction to an affected watercourse. Such requirement of notice shall not
infringe upon any rights of the City to take immediate actions to protect the
public health and safety.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-3-4: REQUIRED INSPECTIONS:
Any development constructed pursuant to a stormwater management permit shall be
subject to periodic inspections by the Administrator or his designee to ensure
conformity with permit provisions and conditions. Such inspections may be
conducted without notice at any time during or while the permit is effective.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-3-5: VIOLATIONS AND OFFENSES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development
without first securing a stormwater management permit as required by this
title.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect
or refuse to comply with, or resist enforcement of, any provision of this title
or any condition of a stormwater management permit.
   C.   Any person who violates, disobeys omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with, or resists the enforcement of, any provision of this title (“ordinance
violation”) or any requirement or condition in any permit issued pursuant to
this title (“permit violation”), and, in the case of a permit violation, fails
to correct such violation, omission or neglect, or cease such disobedience,
refusal or resistance after notice and reinspection as provided in subsection D
of this section, shall be guilty of an offense under this title.
   D.   Whenever the Administrator determines that a permit violation exists,
he shall give notice of the violation in the manner prescribed in subsection
14-3-2A of this chapter to the permittee. Such notice shall state the nature of
the violation and fix a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice when the site will be reinspected.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-3-6: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
   A.   Fine: Any person found guilty of an offense under this title shall pay
a civil fine in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each calendar day during which such
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Where
monetary penalties are imposed for violations of the section
14-6-5 of this title by regional, State or Federal agencies, the amount of
these other agency fines will be offset against the monetary penalties for
violation of this title.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In addition to any fine imposed under subsection
A of this section, the Administrator may revoke any stormwater management
permit issued to such person.
   C.   Stop Work Order: In addition to any fine imposed under subsection A of
this section or action taken under subsection B of this section, the
Administrator may issue an order requiring the suspension of any further work
on the site. Such stop work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the
reason for its issuance, and shall specify the action, if any, required to be
taken in order to resume work. One copy of the stop work order shall be posted
on the site in a conspicuous place, and one copy shall be delivered in the
manner prescribed in subsection
14-3-2A of this chapter to the permittee, if any, or if none, to the person in
whose name the site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records of
the Building Official/Inspector.
   D.   Additional Remedies: In the enforcement of this title, the
Administrator may bring any action, legal or equitable, including an action for
injunctive relief, that may be necessary.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Section
14-4-1: Permits Required
14-4-2: Permit Fees
14-4-3: Professional Seals And Certifications Required
14-4-4: Duration And Revision To Permits
14-4-5: Required Submittals
14-4-5-1: Stormwater Submittal
14-4-5-2: Floodplain Submittal
14-4-5-3: Additional Submittals
14-4-6: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit; Appeals
14-4-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   A stormwater management permit shall be required if:
      1.   The development or a substantial improvement is located in the
regulatory floodplain or there is a regulatory floodplain within the property
boundary; or
      2.   The development disturbs more than five thousand (5,000) square feet
of ground cover, or five hundred (500) square feet if within twenty five feet
(25') of a lake, pond, stream or wetland, unless the development solely
involves one or more of the following:
         a.   Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system,
potable water service line, or other utility to serve an existing structure; or
         b.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in rights-of-way or public
utility easements for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities, not
including storm sewers; or
         c.   Maintenance, repair, or at grade replacement of existing lawn
areas not otherwise requiring a stormwater permit under this title; or
         d.   Maintenance of an existing stormwater facility not requiring
other State or Federal permits or approvals.
   B.   All development shall secure all appropriate stormwater management
related approvals, including, without limitation, an IDNR/OWR floodway/
floodplain construction permit, a USACOE 404 permit and an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit if required, from all Federal, State and regional authorities and other
appropriate Federal, State, and regional approvals prior to the issuance of a
stormwater management permit for areas of a site requiring such other
approvals.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-2: PERMIT FEES:
All permit fees, as established by separate ordinance by the City Council,
shall be paid at the time of application. Fees may include, but are not limited
to, the cost of permit administration and review and inspections prior to
construction, during construction and within the permanent cover establishment
period following construction.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-3: PROFESSIONAL SEALS AND CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   The design of stormwater facilities, calculations for the determination
of the regulatory floodplain, or calculations of the impacts of development
shall meet the standards of this title and shall be prepared, signed, and
sealed by a professional engineer. The professional engineer shall provide an
opinion that the technical submittal meets the criteria required by this title;
and
   B.   For structures (not including earth embankments) that are subject to a
differential water pressure greater than three feet (3'), the submittal shall
include evidence that the subject design has been reviewed by a qualified
professional who shall, as a minimum, have registration as a professional
engineer. Such reviews shall include stability of the structure under design
conditions considering the protection of downstream life and property in the
event of a failure. When directed by the Administrator, the calculations
submitted for such structures shall be reviewed, signed and sealed by a
registered structural engineer.
   C.   For projects which include earth embankments which are subjected to
differential water pressure, the submittal shall include evidence that the
embankment design and construction specifications are adequate for the design
conditions. This review shall include consideration of the existing foundation
soils for the embankment, the materials from which the embankment is to be
constructed, compaction requirements for the embankment and protection of the
embankment from failure due to overtopping. Construction and materials
specifications for all such embankments shall be included with the plan set
submittal. When directed by the Administrator, or when the impounded water
pressure differential exceeds three feet (3'), or when appropriate, considering
the volume impounded and water surface elevation differential to which the
embankment is subjected, these calculations may be required to be reviewed,
signed and sealed by a qualified geotechnical or structural engineer.
   D.   A topographical map of the site, record drawings, and other required
drawings shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional land surveyor
or professional engineer and tied to National Geodetic Vertical Datum, 1929
adjustment and any FEMA benchmarks.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-4: DURATION AND REVISION TO PERMITS:
   A.   Expiration Of Permit: Permits expire December 31 of the third year
following the date of permit issuance or upon expiration of State or Federal
permits required for stormwater management.
   B.   Extension Of Expiration Date: If the permitted activity has been
started but is not completed by the expiration date of the permit and the
permittee intends to pursue the permitted activity, then the permittee may
submit a written request that the expiration date be extended. Upon receipt of
such request, the Administrator may extend the expiration date in one-year
increments a maximum of three (3) times for permitted activities outside
regulatory floodplains and floodways. Expiration dates for permitted activities
in regulatory floodplains and floodways may be extended in one-year increments
a maximum of three (3) times, provided the activity is in compliance with the
then current requirements of this title.
   C.   Revision Of Permit: If, after permit issuance, the permittee decides to
revise the approved plans, the permittee shall submit revised plans to the
Administrator, along with a written request for approval. If the Administrator
determines that the revised plans are in compliance with the then current
requirements of this title, an approval of the revised plans may be issued.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-5: REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
   A.   Contents: All permit submittals shall include the material listed in
the sections noted in Table 3, which table is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk. Permit Submittal Requirements, for the applicable type of development,
unless the submittal requirements are specifically modified by the procedure in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Modification To Requirements: The Administrator may, at his discretion,
modify the submittal requirements on a case-by-case basis considering the size,
complexity and likelihood that a development will affect the discharge of
stormwater. Such modifications shall be requested and answered in writing. The
Administrator's response shall note the relevant findings and be specific as to
what submittal requirements are changed. The Administrator may not modify
submittal requirements for any aspect of the development requiring State or
Federal permits or approvals when requested.
   C.   Minimum Required Information: The applicant shall provide the following
information as a minimum, on forms or in a format approved by the
Administrator:
      1.   The name and legal address of the owner(s) of the site and the
permit applicant; and
      2.   The common address, legal description, and property identification
number (PIN) of the site; and
      3.   The name of the project, area of the site in acres, and type of
development; and
      4.   A general narrative description of the development, existing and
proposed conditions, and project planning principles considered, including best
management practices used; and
      5.   Affidavits signed by the owner or the applicant's authorized
representative attesting to their understanding of the requirements of this
title and their intent to comply therewith; and
      6.   A statement of opinion by a qualified person either denying or
acknowledging the presence of a floodplain on the development site; and
      7.   Copies of other stormwater related permits or permit applications as
required; and
      8.   A subsurface drainage investigation report; and
      9.   An engineer's estimate of probable construction cost of the
stormwater facilities.
   D.   Plan Exhibits: All applicants for a stormwater permit shall provide the
following basic plan exhibits: site topographic map, general plan view drawing,
sediment/erosion control plan, and a vicinity topographic map. Each exhibit may
be on more than one drawing for clarity. The specific information to be
included on each exhibit shall be as follows:
      1.   Site topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
         a.   Map scale as one inch equals one hundred feet (1"=100') (or less)
and accurate to ±0.5 foot; and
         b.   Existing and proposed contours on-site and within one hundred
feet (100') of the site; and
         c.   Existing and proposed drainage patterns and watershed boundaries;
and
         d.   Delineation of pre-development regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits; and
         e.   Delineation of post-development regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits; and
         f.   Location of cross-sections and any other hydrologic/hydraulic
computer modeled features; and
         g.   Location of all on-site drain tiles; and
         h.   Boundary of all wetlands, lakes, ponds, etc., with normal water
elevation noted; and
         i.   Location of all existing buildings and those to remain on the
site noted; and
         j.   Nearest base flood elevations; and
         k.   FEMA and any site-specific benchmarks used; and
         l.   Highlight all contours used in the calculation of depressional
storage.
      2.   General plan view drawing meeting the following requirements shall
be submitted:
         a.   Drawing at the same scale as the site topographic map; and
         b.   Existing major and minor stormwater systems; and
         c.   Proposed major and minor stormwater systems; and
         d.   Design details for stormwater facilities (i.e., structure and
outlet work detail drawings, etc.); and
         e.   Scheduled maintenance program for permanent stormwater facilities
including BMP measures; and
         f.   Planned maintenance tasks and schedule; and
         g.   Identification of entities responsible for maintenance; and
         h.   Permanent public access maintenance easements granted or
dedicated to, and accepted by, a government entity; and
         i.   Proposed regulatory floodplain and floodway location (with the
base flood and flood protection elevations noted); and
         j.   Highlight all plan areas at elevations below the 100-year high
water elevation of site runoff storage facilities; and
         k.   For work in the floodplain, cross-section views of the project
and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including
principal dimensions of the work as shown in the plan view, existing and
proposed elevations, normal water elevation, existing and proposed 10-year and
100-year flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and
vertical).
      3.   Sediment and erosion control plan meeting the following requirements
shall be submitted:
         a.   Drawings at the same scale as the site topographic map; and
         b.   Sediment/erosion control installation measures, including
standard details, and schedule; and
         c.   Existing and proposed roadways, structures, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces; and
         d.   Limits of clearing and grading; and
         e.   Floodplain/floodway locations; and
         f.   Proposed buffer location, existing soil types, vegetation and
land cover conditions; and
         g.   List of maintenance tasks and schedule for sediment/erosion
control measures; and
         h.   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of
sediment or soil off-site, including construction entrance details as
appropriate; and
         i.   Description of dust and traffic-control measures; and
         j.   Locations of stockpiles to be in place more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
      4.   Vicinity topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
         a.   Vicinity topographic map identifying all off-site areas draining
to the development and downstream to the receiving intermittent or perennial
stream. (A 2 foot contour map is preferred at a scale readable by the reviewer
but a USGS quadrangle map is acceptable); and
         b.   Watershed boundaries for areas draining through or from the
development; and
         c.   Soil types related to hydrologic soils group, vegetation and land
cover affecting runoff upstream of the site for any area draining through the
site; and
         d.   Location of development site within the major watershed(s); and
         e.   Show the overland flow path from the downstream end of the
development to the receiving intermittent or perennial stream.
      5.   The submittal shall not be considered complete until the preliminary
plat and final engineering drawings have been determined to be complete by the
City.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-5-1: STORMWATER SUBMITTAL:
The stormwater submittal shall include narrative discussion and calculations to
support a finding that the proposed development complies with the technical
requirements of the this title. The submittal shall consist of, at a minimum,
the following material:
   A.   A narrative description of the existing and proposed site drainage
patterns and conditions. Include a description of off-site conditions which
help to identify stormwater issues considered in the design,
   B.   A schedule for implementation of the site stormwater plan.
   C.   On-site and off-site runoff calculations which address the following:
      1.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for sizing major and minor systems; and
      2.   Cross-section data for open channels; and
      3.   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under design flow
conditions; and
      4.   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under base flood
flow conditions.
   D.   Site runoff storage calculations which address the following:
      1.   Calculation of hydraulically connected impervious area and
corresponding retention volume.
      2.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the allowable release rate.
      3.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate on-
site depressional storage.
      4.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the storage volume.
      5.   Elevation area storage data and calculations for site runoff
storage.
      6.   Elevation discharge data and calculations specifically related to
the outlet control structure depicted in the plan exhibits.
      7.   The general plan view drawing of subsection
14-4-5D2 of this section
14-4-5 shall indicate the areas of directly connected impervious areas and any
off-setting landscaped areas as defined in subsection
14-6-4E of this title.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-5-2: FLOODPLAIN SUBMITTAL:
The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR and FEMA for all new base
flood and floodway determinations for those cases in which their permitting
authority applies or as noted in section
14-8-2 of this title. The stormwater management permit will not be issued until
such approval is received. Documentation supporting a finding that the proposed
development is in compliance with sections
14-8-1 and
14-8-2 of this title shall be submitted with the application. At a minimum, the
following material shall be submitted for approval with the application:
   A.   Regulatory floodplain boundary determination:
      1.   Provide source of flood profile information.
      2.   Provide all hydrologic and hydraulic study information for site-
specific floodplain studies, unnumbered Zone A area elevation determinations,
and floodplain map revisions.
   B.   Floodway hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for the following
conditions:
      1.   Existing conditions (land used and stream systems).
      2.   Proposed conditions (land used and stream systems).
      3.   Tabular summary of 100-year flood elevations and discharges for
existing and proposed conditions.
      4.   Calculations used for model development.
      5.   Hydraulic/hydrologic computer model input/output.
   C.   Floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations for below and
above the 10-year flood elevation up to the base flood elevation:
      1.   Tabular summary for below and above the 10-year flood elevation of
fill, compensatory storage, and compensatory storage ratios provided in the
proposed plan.
      2.   Cross-sections used for the above calculations.
   D.   Narrative discussion of floodproofing measures including material
specifications, calculations, and design details, and operation summary.
   E.   Flood easements when required by this title.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-5-3: ADDITIONAL SUBMITTALS:
   A.   The following additional submittals are required prior to issuance of
the stormwater permit:
      1.   Performance Security: Performance security in accordance with
chapter 5 of this title shall be required prior to permit issuance.
      2.   Maintenance Schedule And Funding: A completed maintenance schedule
for the stormwater management facilities and special management areas, in
accordance with chapter 9 of this title shall be submitted along with
identification of the entity responsible for maintenance and funding and backup
funding sources for maintenance in accordance with section
14-9-6 of this title.
   B.   Record Drawings: The developer is required to submit record drawings of
all permitted stormwater facilities. The record drawings shall be signed and
sealed by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor who shall state
that the project, as constructed, is substantially in conformance with the
project as permitted. The record drawings shall include calculations verifying
that the volumes of detention and compensatory storage required in the permit
have been provided.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-4-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEALS:
The Administrator shall either issue or deny a stormwater permit within thirty
(30) days of receiving a complete permit application and all required
submittals and fees, unless additional time is granted by both the
Administrator and the applicant. When a permit is denied, the applicant may
appeal the Administrator’s decision to the City Council; provided, such appeal
is made in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notification of
denial. The City Council shall render a decision to issue the stormwater
permit, issue the permit with conditions, or uphold the Administrator’s denial
of the permit. The City Council shall render its decision within thirty (30)
days of the appeal. Failure to take action shall be deemed action to uphold the
permit denial by the Administrator.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 5: PERFORMANCE SECURITY
Section
14-5-1: Security Required
14-5-2: Development Security
14-5-3: Sediment And Erosion Control Security
14-5-4: Letters Of Credit
14-5-1: SECURITY REQUIRED:
   A.   Should title 13 of this Code not be applicable to the development/
improvement, then it shall be required as security to the City for the
performance by the developer of the developer’s obligations to complete the
construction of any stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management
permit, to pay all costs, fees and charges due from the developer pursuant to
the permitting authorities of this title, and to otherwise faithfully perform
the developer’s undertakings pursuant to this title, the developer shall, prior
to issuance of a stormwater management permit:
      1.   Post a development security as provided in section
14-5-2 of this chapter; and
      2.   Post a sediment and erosion control security as provided in section
14-5-3 of this chapter, if a sediment and erosion control plan is required
pursuant to sections
14-4-5,
14-4-5-1 and
14-4-5-2 of this title.
   B.   The developer shall bear the full cost and responsibility of securing
and maintaining the securities required by this section.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-5-2: DEVELOPMENT SECURITY:
   A.   A development security shall be posted and shall include:
      1.   A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the Administrator, for
the completion of the construction of any stormwater facilities required by the
permit; and
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as
the Administrator may approve, in an amount equal to not less than one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated probable cost to complete the
construction of any stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management
permit, which estimated probable cost shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer and shall be approved by the Administrator; and
      3.   A statement signed by the applicant granting the Administrator the
right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to
complete required work in the event that work is not completed according to the
work schedule; and
      4.   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall
indemnify the City for any additional costs incurred attributable to the
concurrent activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and
the City’s remedial contractor at the site.
   B.   The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed
by the applicant and shall be held in escrow by the Administrator until the
conditions set forth in this section or other applicable provisions are
satisfied.
   C.   The Administrator may approve periodic reductions in the letter of
credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than ninety percent
(90%) of the security provided in this section may be released prior to
approval of record drawings and final inspection. A minimum of ten percent
(10%) of the security shall be retained for a period of time not less than one
year after completion of construction of all stormwater facilities required by
the permit.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-5-3: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL SECURITY:
   A.   If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to sections
14-4-5,
14-4-5-1 and
14-4-5-2 of this title, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be
required. Such a security shall include:
      1.   An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as
the Administrator shall approve, in an amount equal to not less than one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated probable cost to install
and maintain the sediment and erosion control measures, which estimated
probable cost shall be approved by the Administrator; and
      2.   A statement signed by the applicant granting the Administrator, as
applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete sediment and erosion control measures in the event
that such measures are not installed and/or maintained according to the
established schedule.
   B.   The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed
by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the Administrator, as
applicable, until the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied.
   C.   After completion of construction, establishment of vegetation, removal
of all sediment from stormwater facilities, and final inspection and approval
by the Administrator, as applicable, one hundred percent (100%) of the sediment
and erosion control security shall be released.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-5-4: LETTERS OF CREDIT:
   A.   Letters of credit posted pursuant to sections
14-5-1,
14-5-2 and
14-5-3 of this chapter shall be in a form satisfactory to the Administrator.
   B.   Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution:
      1.   Acceptable to the Administrator, as applicable;
      2.   Having capital resources of at least ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00), or such other amount acceptable to the Administrator; and
      3.   Insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
   C.   Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
      1.   It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the
Administrator; and shall not expire without written notification of the
Administrator at least forty five (45) days prior to expiration; and
      2.   It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw
on it by the Administrator; and
      3.   If at any time it will expire within forty five (45) or any lesser
number of days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the
Administrator, and if any applicable obligation of the developer for which its
security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the Administrator may,
without notice and without being required to take any further action of any
nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of credit and thereafter
either hold all proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of all
such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such obligations and
reimburse the City for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and
administrative costs, incurred by the City, as the Administrator shall
determine.
   D.   If at any time the Administrator determines that the funds remaining in
the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the
remaining unpaid cost of all stormwater facility construction or sediment and
erosion control measures, then, within ten (10) days following a demand by the
Administrator, the developer shall increase the amount of the letter of credit
to an amount determined by the Administrator to be sufficient to pay such
unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the amount of the security shall be
grounds for the Administrator to draw down the entire remaining balance of the
letter of credit.
   E.   If at any time the Administrator determines that the bank issuing the
letter of credit is without capital resources of at least ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00), is unable to meet any Federal or State requirement for
reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is
otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time
during its term, or if the Administrator otherwise reasonably deems the bank to
be insecure, then the Administrator shall have the right to demand that the
developer provide a replacement letter of credit from a bank satisfactory to
the Administrator. Such replacement letter of credit shall be deposited with
the Administrator not later than ten (10) days following such demand. Upon such
deposit, the Administrator shall surrender the original letter of credit to the
developer.
   F.   If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations
under this title, then the Administrator may, in his or her discretion, draw on
and retain all or any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit. The
Administrator thereafter shall have the right to take any action he or she
deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of such failure or
refusal, and to reimburse the Community from the proceeds of the letter of
credit for all of its costs and expenses, including legal fees and
administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result of the
developer's failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations under this title.
If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to repay fully
the Community for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash reserve
equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time such letter of
credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the developer shall,
upon demand of the Administrator therefor, immediately deposit with the
Administrator such additional funds as the Administrator determines are
necessary to fully repay such costs and expenses and to establish such cash
reserve.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 6: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Section
14-6-1: Compliance With Certain Provisions
14-6-2: General Requirements
14-6-3: Site Runoff Requirements
14-6-4: Site Runoff Storage Requirements (Detention/Extended Detention)
14-6-5: Requirements For Agricultural Land Uses
14-6-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CERTAIN PROVISIONS:
   A.   All developments shall meet the requirements specified for general
stormwater development (section
14-6-2 of this chapter), site runoff (section
14-6-2 of this chapter), sediment and erosion control (chapter 7 of this
title), and performance security and maintenance (chapter 9 of this title).
   B.   1. All developments shall comply with the site runoff storage
requirements provided in section
14-6-4 of this chapter in which:
         a.   More than two (2) single-family structures or one multi-family
structure is to be constructed on a parcel or site more than one acre in size;
         b.   Nonresidential land use is to be constructed on a parcel or site
more than one acre in size;
         c.   Existing multi-family or nonresidential land uses on a site one
acre or more in size on which new development after the effective date hereof
in the aggregate exceeds twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet;
         d.   Roadway developments in rights-of-way under the ownership or
control of a unit of local government when the contiguous area of new roadway
construction (excluding previously paved areas) exceeds two (2) acres;
         e.   The developer of a commercial or industrial redevelopment may
request that a fee-in-lieu of detention be approved; provided, that all of the
following are demonstrated to the sole satisfaction of the Administrator:
            (1)   The drainage plan will not increase existing flood damages;
and
            (2)   The drainage plan provides a net benefit in water quality
compared to the existing development.
      2.   The Administrator shall determine the appropriate fee to be
collected as defined in chapter 11 of this title, and his or her decision in
the matter shall be considered final.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-6-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements Applicable To All Developments: No development shall:
      1.   Result in any new or additional expense to any person other than the
developer for flood protection; nor
      2.   Increase flood elevations or decrease flood conveyance capacity
upstream or downstream of the area under the ownership or control of the
developer. This requirement shall not prohibit the removal or reduction of
built obstructions to flow, such as increasing culvert capacity or lowering
roadway elevations; nor
      3.   Increase runoff rates (from the 10-year event up to the 100-year
event) to any downstream properties unless the developer can demonstrate that
the increased runoff rates can be safely conveyed via storm sewers, ditches (if
allowed), or overland flow paths to the next downstream receiving stream, lake
or pond. If the developer is significantly raising runoff rates to downstream
properties and cannot demonstrate downstream conveyance capacity, some amount
of on-site stormwater management may be required in order to reduce the
proposed runoff rate down to existing runoff rates.
   B.   Requirements Applicable To All Subdivisions And Commercial
Developments: All subdivisions and commercial developments shall:
      1.   Extend the storm sewer system through the proposed development to
serve upstream properties in the natural drainage area. The storm sewer system
should reflect the ultimate development of the drainage area.
      2.   Provide a stormwater drainage system that consists of a minor
drainage system, a major drainage system and an emergency overland flow route.
      3.   The storm sewer drainage system is assumed to consist of such
components as sewers, channels, swales, natural drainageways, inlets, catch
basins, manholes, streets, detention/retention basins, and other necessary
facilities.
      4.   The engineering plans shall have a certification by a registered
professional engineer as follows:
To the best of our knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will
not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof or
that if such surface water drainage will change, adequate provision has been
made for the collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas
or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters
will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such
concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the
construction of the subdivision.
 
Dated at     , this     day of       , A.D. 20   .
                 (Seal)
Design Engineer
      5.   The storm sewer system shall be entirely separate from the sanitary
sewer system.
      6.   Storm sewers shall be designed to convey the peak flow from a 10-
year rainfall event with a hydraulic grade line that is entirely within the
pipe. Rainfall frequency data shall be obtained from the table which is found
in the Office of the City Clerk. Storm sewers and outfalls shall be designed to
function at their design capacity during flooding conditions on the receiving
stream or other body of water.
      7.   The storm sewers shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") in
diameter and shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe only unless
authorized by the Administrator.
      8.   No ditch system shall be permitted on any new site developments. The
minor drainage system shall be constructed so that the drainage from each lot
or parcel is conveyed entirely through storm sewer pipe.
      9.   The major drainage system may be permitted to flow over roadways,
rear yard and side yard swales, and other open conveyances as long as the
maximum depth of ponding or flow is no more than nine inches (9") on pavement
and one foot (1') at any other location, and the maximum water surface
elevation is at least one foot (1') below the lowest opening of any nearby
structure. The design of the major drainage system may account for the minor
drainage system (storm sewers) to be fully functional. No flow is allowed over
the road, perpendicular to the roadway.
      10.   Rear yard and side yard swales shall meet the following conditions:
         a.   The maximum side slopes shall be a four to one (4:1) ratio.
         b.   The appropriate easements are provided, a minimum of twenty feet
(20') wide.
      11.   Inlets/catch basins on roadways shall be located as necessary to
collect surface water, but spacing shall not exceed a maximum of four hundred
feet (400'). Inlets shall only be used for the first “run”, and catch basins
shall be placed before a storm sewer enters a manhole. Manholes shall be
located at the junction of two (2) or more storm sewer pipes or at any change
in grade alignment or size of pipe. Maximum spacing of manholes shall be per
the City subdivision and development regulations (see title 13 of this Code).
      12.   All storm sewers shall use materials and be installed in the manner
meeting or exceeding the requirements, standards, and specifications contained
in the “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois”, the most current edition, as amended, supplemented and amended by
the City or its engineer.
      13.   Where applicable, the developer shall install storm systems
sufficient in size and depth to carry the storm runoff from upstream properties
naturally tributary to the proposed subdivision. The City shall make special
provisions for the developer to recapture those additional costs incurred as a
result of oversizing and/or over-excavating the storm sewer system.
   C.   Functional Facilities Required:
      1.   Stormwater facilities shall be functional before building permits
are issued for residential and nonresidential subdivisions.
      2.   Stormwater facilities shall be functional where practicable for
single parcel developments before building construction begins.
   D.   Overland Flow Paths:
      1.   The development shall have an overland flow path at the downstream
limit of the property that will pass the base flood flow without increasing
damage to structures or property. Overland flow paths internal to the site
shall be considered as part of the major stormwater system and shall be
designed for conveyance of the base flood (critical duration) and shall be a
minimum of one cfs per tributary acre without damage to structures. If the
storm sewer pipe and inlet sized for the base flood can be constructed in lieu
of providing an overland flow path as a part of the major drainage system, then
the overland flow path shall be considered an emergency overland flow path, and
it shall not be considered a part of the major stormwater system but must still
meet the protection of buildings criteria in subsection E of this section.
      2.   For all overland flow routes, whether a part of the major drainage
system or an emergency overland flow route, the water surface elevation for
determining the FPE (flood protection elevation) shall be calculated assuming
that the storm sewers are inoperable.
      3.   Structures of any kind, including fences, shall not be permitted in
overland flow paths draining more than twenty (20) acres, unless the structures
are otherwise permissible and certified by a professional engineer or
professional landscape architect that the proposed structure will not cause any
adverse upstream impacts as a result of blocking or impeding the flow of
stormwater. A fence, if permitted, shall conform to the City’s fence ordinance
provisions for fences located in drainage easements as applicable (see title
11, chapter 8 of this Code).
   E.   Protection Of Buildings: All usable space in new buildings or added to
existing buildings hydraulically connected to a major stormwater system, site
runoff storage facility, or overland flow path shall be elevated, floodproofed,
or otherwise protected to at least the FPE.
   F.   Depressional Storage: The function of existing on-site depressional
storage shall be preserved for both on-site and off-site tributary flows in
addition to required detention. When depressional storage is removed, it must
be compensated for in the site runoff storage facility at a one to one (1:1)
ratio; provided, that off-site areas tributary to the existing depressional
storage are routed through the site runoff storage facility. This requirement
is in addition to the site runoff storage required in section
14-6-4 of this chapter. The Administrator may allow the function of
depressional storage to be preserved if the applicant performs detailed pre-
and post-project hydrologic and hydraulic modeling to identify the effect of
the depressional storage on discharges over a range of rainfall frequencies.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-6-3: SITE RUNOFF REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Stormwater Facility Discharges: Stormwater facilities shall be required
and designed so that runoff exits the site at a point where it exited prior to
the subject development and in a manner such that flows will not increase flood
damage to adjacent property except when otherwise approved by the
Administrator. Concentrated discharges from new developments must enter
conveyance systems capable of carrying the design flow rate without increasing
flood damages or maintenance costs downstream.
   B.   Minor Stormwater System Criteria: Minor stormwater systems shall be
sized to convey runoff from the tributary watershed under fully developed
conditions for the 10-year storm event. Minor stormwater systems shall be
enclosed systems (e.g., storm sewers) unless otherwise approved by the
Administrator. Storm sewers shall be designed to convey the peak flow from a
10-year rainfall event with a hydraulic grade line that is entirely within the
pipe.
   C.   Major Stormwater System Criteria: Major stormwater systems shall be
sized to carry the base flood without causing additional flood damage. Maximum
flow depths shall be nine inches (9") in streets, parking lots and driveways;
except, that parking lots and driveways intended for access only by commercial
trucks may permit maximum flow depths of twelve inches (12"). The maximum depth
of flow in nonpaved drainage easements shall be twelve inches (12"). The
tailwater used for the major drainage system shall be the 10-year water surface
elevation in the receiving system or, in the case of stormwater detention
facilities, the 2-year design water surface elevation, plus one foot (1').
   D.   Existing Subsurface And Surface Drainage Systems: Stormwater systems
shall properly incorporate and be compatible with existing subsurface and
surface drainage systems including agricultural systems. Designs shall not
cause damage to the existing drainage system(s) or the existing adjacent or
tributary land including those with agricultural uses. The following principles
and requirements shall be observed in the design:
      1.   Off-Site Agricultural Drainage: Agricultural subsurface and surface
drainage systems shall be evaluated with regard to their capacity and
capability to properly convey low flow groundwater and site runoff storage
facility release without damage to downstream structure and land use on the
adjacent property. If the outfall drain tile and surface drainage systems prove
to be inadequate, it will be necessary to modify the existing systems or
construct new systems which will not conflict with the existing systems and
will not impact the existing agricultural land use. Existing subsurface systems
shall only be used with extended detention design and at the discretion of the
Administrator.
      2.   On-Site Agricultural Drainage: Agricultural drainage systems shall
be located and evaluated on-site. All existing on-site agricultural drain tiles
not serving a beneficial use shall be abandoned by trench removal prior to
other development and recorded on record plans. If any existing drain tiles
continue to upland watersheds, the developer must maintain drainage service
during construction until new sewers can be installed for a permanent
connection.
      3.   Off-Site Tributary Drainage: Existing drainage systems shall be
evaluated with regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion
capacities. All existing tributary drain tiles shall be incorporated into the
new conduits including observation structures located at the property limits,
shall provide a free flow discharge and shall not allow surface runoff to enter
the system.
      4.   New Roadway Construction: New roadway construction shall preserve
existing subsurface systems within the right-of-way. Inspection wells shall be
placed at the right-of-way (ROW), and tiles found to not be flowing between
inspection wells at the end of the construction shall be replaced.
   E.   Design Runoff Rate:
      1.   Design runoff rates for conveyance (i.e., pipe design) may be
calculated using the Rational Method for drainage areas of less than twenty
(20) acres. For drainage areas greater than twenty (20) acres, the
Administrator may require the use of hydrograph routing.
      2.   Any design runoff rate calculation method for conveyance shall use
the data presented in Table 1: Watseka Rainfall Depths and Intensities, which
is on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
   F.   Stormwater System Easements:
      1.   For subdivision projects, the minor, major and emergency stormwater
systems shall be located within easements or rights-of-way explicitly providing
for public access for maintenance of such facilities. For all other projects
requiring a permit, easements are required for public access for maintenance of
stormwater facilities only for new construction or modifications involving
components of a drainage system that conveys runoff from off-site properties.
      2.   Easements and rights-of-way shall be of sufficient width. Storm
sewers shall be installed at such locations therein as to permit open cut
installation, maintenance and repair within the confines of the easement or
right-of-way without relocation or other unreasonable interference with other
public utilities located therein, and so as to meet the following minimum
standards: Fifteen feet (15') in width, plus for storm sewers in excess of
twenty four inches (24") in diameter, two (2) additional feet for each twelve
inches (12") or portion thereof of additional storm sewer diameter rounded up
to the next multiple of five feet (5'). Sewers with depths of greater than
fifteen feet (15') may require additional width as determined by the
Administrator.
   G.   Flow Depths: Maximum flow depths for new transverse stream crossings
shall not exceed the crown of the road during the base flood condition. The
maximum flow depth on a roadway shall not exceed nine inches (9") at the curb
line for flow parallel to the roadway. For flow parallel to a new roadway, the
product of the flow depth (in feet) and velocity (in feet per second) shall not
exceed four (4) for the base flood condition.
   H.   Diversion Of Flow To Another Watershed: Transfers of waters between
watersheds (diversions) shall be prohibited except when such transfers will not
violate the provisions of subsection
14-6-2A of this chapter and are otherwise lawful. "Watersheds", for purpose of
regulation under this subsection, shall be the major watershed divides as
determined by the Administrator.
   I.   Best Management Practices Requirements:
      1.   The City strongly encourages stormwater quality management within
the City. The developments are encouraged to incorporate the following:
         a.   All best management practices as may be required pursuant to the
United States Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended.
         b.   Manage parcels as unified sites by incorporating watershed-based
planning.
         c.   Create designs that promote a healthy aquatic ecology, and
provide for sustainability, minimize maintenance, and human intervention.
         d.   Treat stormwater as a multiple use resource.
      2.   The City does reserve the right to require stormwater quality best
management practices at a particular site if the Administrator deems that the
discharge is to a sensitive ecological area or that the intended use of the
property produces a particularly detrimental water quality of the discharge.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-6-4: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE REQUIREMENTS (DETENTION/EXTENDED DETENTION):
   A.   Release Rate:
      1.   Sufficient flood storage shall be provided so that the site will not
discharge at a rate greater than 0.15 cfs/acre of development during and after
a rainfall event with a 100-year frequency except for sites exempted in 200.3.
Unless exempted in 200.3, sites shall not discharge at a rate greater than 0.04
cfs/acre of development during and after a rainfall event with a 2-year
frequency.
      2.   This area of hydrologic disturbance on the site shall be used to
calculate the required site runoff storage volume. The on-site watershed area
tributary to the point of discharge shall be used to calculate the allowable
release rate for the site runoff storage facility, which shall be the maximum
release rate allowed considering only the on-site watershed area runoff.
   B.   Design Methods:
      1.   Event hydrograph routing methods shall be used to calculate design
runoff volumes for site runoff facilities. The methods must be HEC-1, (SCS
methodology), HEC-HMS, TR-20, or TR-55 tabular method, as appropriate, based
upon the rounding limitations of the model used. Proprietary models that use
the approved methods may be accepted at the sole discretion of the
Administrator. Digital copies of the model input files shall be provided. For
sites of forty (40) acres or more, the methods used must be acceptable to FEMA.
Event methods shall incorporate the following assumptions:
         a.   Antecedent moisture condition=2; and
         b.   Appropriate Huff rainfall distribution; and
         c.   24-hour duration storm with a one percent (1%) probability (100-
year frequency) of occurrence in any one year as specified by Illinois State
Water Survey Bulletin 70 Northeast Sectional rainfall statistics.
      2.   Figure 1, a copy which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk,
based upon generic hydrograph curves developed by the Northeastern Illinois
Planning Commission, may be used for sites of twenty (20) acres or less when
acceptable to the Administrator. The Rational Method is not acceptable.
   C.   Existing Release Rate Less Than Allowable: For sites where the
undeveloped release rate is less than the maximum release rate in subsection A
of this section, the developed release rate and corresponding site runoff
storage volume shall be based on the existing undeveloped release rate for the
development.
   D.   Downstream Water Surface Elevations: All hydrologic and hydraulic
computations must utilize appropriate assumptions for downstream water surface
elevations, from low flow through the base flood elevation, considering the
likelihood of concurrent flood events.
   E.   Extended Detention Requirement:
      1.   The requirements of this subsection will apply only when an existing
agricultural land use is downstream of and adjacent to a site runoff storage
facility outlet. The runoff from a 0.75 inch rainfall event over the
hydraulically connected impervious area of the new development shall be stored
below the elevation of the primary gravity outlet (extended detention) of the
site runoff storage facility. The facility may be designed to allow for
evapotransporation or infiltration of this volume into a subsurface drainage
system and shall not be conveyed through a direct positive connection to
downstream areas.
      2.   The hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation
of required extended detention volume may be reduced by the Administrator if
the soils are prepared to maximize infiltration, and deep rooted grasses or
other plants selected for their ability to promote infiltration or water
absorption are planted in areas appropriately dedicated. The reduction in
hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal
to the area of the development meeting the soils/native planting requirement in
this subsection E2.
      3.   Subsurface drainage systems may be designed as a component of the
extended detention portion of the detention basin to assist in infiltration in
accordance with the following criteria:
         a.   The extended detention volume shall be discharged at a rate no
greater than that required to empty the calculated extended detention volume
within five (5) days of the storm event.
         b.   No subsurface drainage pipe shall be located within ten feet
(10') of drainage pipes directly connected to the detention basin.
         c.   For purposes of meeting the maximum subsurface drainage discharge
requirements, flow control orifices and weirs may be used.
         d.   All design-extended detention volume shall be provided above the
seasonal high groundwater table or the invert elevation of the groundwater
control system.
         e.   Farm field tile shall not be considered a subsurface drainage
system.
   F.   Site Runoff Storage Facility Design Requirements: Storage facilities
shall be designed and constructed with the following characteristics:
      1.   The site runoff storage facility shall provide one foot (1') of
freeboard above the design high water elevation.
      2.   The storage facilities shall be accessible and easily maintained.
Side slopes above the NWL shall not exceed four to one (4:1) (horizontal to
vertical) under any circumstances. For storage facilities with a bounce of
greater than four feet (4'), the maximum side slope shall not exceed five to
one (5:1) (horizontal to vertical). For industrial or commercial areas that do
not adjoin schools, residential, or planned residential areas, the
Administrator may approve four to one (4:1) side slopes for bounces up to six
feet (6'). The Administrator may require that access roads or paths on the top
of berms be provided with an H10 design load rating and meeting other City
design criteria.
      3.   Storage facilities shall facilitate sedimentation and catchment of
floating material. Unless specifically approved by the Administrator, concrete
lined low-flow ditches shall not be used in detention basins.
      4.   Storage facilities shall minimize impacts of stormwater runoff on
water quality by incorporating best management practices.
      5.   Storage facilities shall maximize the normal flow distance between
detention inlets and outlets, to the extent possible.
      6.   Storage facilities shall be designed such that the existing
conditions pre-development peak runoff rate from the 100-year, critical
duration rainfall will not be exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is
blocked.
      7.   Storage facilities with single pipe outlets shall have a minimum
inside diameter of twelve inches (12"). If design release rates necessitate a
smaller outlet, structures such as perforated risers or flow- control orifices
shall be used.
   G.   Special Rules For Iroquois River And Sugar Creek: In addition to the
requirements of subsection F of this section, the following special rules apply
to the Iroquois River and Sugar Creek:
      1.   The creeks shall be maintained, or restored, to their natural
condition. This shall include the restoration of the streambed and stream banks
where it has been channelized or tiled.
      2.   Surface or buried creeks existing in the development property or
adjacent rights-of-way shall be restored. This shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, daylighting piped creeks and historic creek
corridors, removing fish barriers, establishing buffers and planting native
vegetation including native trees. The restoration shall emphasize water
quality, fish habitat, aquatic biodiversity, vegetation, and appropriate land
use. To the extent practicable, natural drainage patterns shall be restored
based on historical research; examination of soils; and identification of
channel, floodplain, and vegetation characteristics both upstream and
downstream for current and projected land uses.
      3.   Proposed detention ponds discharging directly to the creek shall be
required to be:
         a.   A naturalized detention pond; or
         b.   A wet bottom pond with an average depth of not less than ten feet
(10') over twenty five percent (25%) of the surface area during normal pool
conditions, and discharge pipes not less than six feet (6') the below normal
water surface of the pond.
      4.   The stream may not be modified except in accordance with a
restoration project designed by and supervised by a qualified stream channel
restoration specialist under the following circumstances:
         a.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification. No significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
         b.   A natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, and substrate shall be
created;
         c.   Gentle side slopes (no steeper than 4 feet horizontally to 1 foot
vertically), including the installation of erosion control features, shall be
constructed;
         d.   Natural materials shall be used wherever possible; and
         e.   The planting and maintenance of vegetation normally associated
with streams, including primarily native riparian vegetation and upland prairie
plants, shall be required.
         f.   Individual ownership of the floodplain, detention ponds and
within thirty five feet (35') of the stream banks shall be prohibited unless
otherwise approved by the Administrator.
         g.   A minimum of thirty five feet (35') of appropriate native
vegetation shall be planted and maintained along the banks of the stream.
         h.   Provisions shall be made for passive public use of the area
through the construction of trails outside of the native vegetation area
whenever practicable.
         i.   The following criteria are proposed as moderately conservative
standards for design of stormwater basins within the City. If a developer
wishes to exceed the standards, we recommend that they (via their landscape
contractor/designer) bear the burden of proof that the landscape will be
successful. The following limits of acceptable fluctuation and drawdown times
are based on best professional judgment for landscape treatments typical to wet
and dry stormwater basin designs:
            (1)   Wet Bottom Pond:
               (A)   Minimum area: 1.0 acre at NWL.
               (B)   Maximum area: No maximum.
               (C)   Depth: Over 25 percent of the bottom area at least 10 ft.
deep.
               (D)   Maximum bounce:
                  (i)   100-year: 5.0 ft. - residential (industrial/commercial
may be greater based on approval by Administrator).
                  (ii)   2-year: 1.0 ft.
               (E)   Maximum drawdown time:
                  (i)   100-year: Above NWL by 0.5 ft. for 72 hrs.
                  (ii)   2-year: Above NWL by 0.5 ft. for 36 hrs.
               (F)   Maximum slopes:
                  (i)   Freeboard elevation to 2-yr water level: 4:1.
                  (ii)   2-yr water level to NWL: 8:1.
                  (iii)   NWL to 1.5 ft. below NWL: 20:1 (safety shelf).
                  (iv)   >1.5 ft. below NWL: 2:1.
                  (v)   Freeboard to 1.5 ft. below NWL: 5:1 avg. max.
               (G)   Safety shelf: 0.5 to 1.5 ft. inundation at NWL, 10.0 ft.
avg. width (variable 8.0 to 12.0 ft.), with 25 percent of the shoreline 2.0 ft.
shorter than maximum width.
               (H)   Shoreline protection: Natural vegetation (shall be used
unless otherwise approved); armoring (conditioned upon City review and
approval); biotechnical stabilization (depending on site-specific conditions);
erosion control measures.
               (I)   Water quality enhancements: Maximize distance between
inlets and outlets; no low- flow channel to be provided; energy dissipation
measures at outlets; measures such as aerators, cascading streams, waterfalls,
etc., are recommended for aesthetic appeal and to promote water circulation and
aeration.
               (J)   Landscape options: Natural, ornamental hybrid, low
maintenance turf, and turfgrass (depending on site conditions and adjacent/
adjoining land uses); public access via stone outcroppings, groomed areas,
etc., are recommended.
            (2)   Naturalized Detention Basin:
               (A)   Minimum area: 8,000 s.f. at NWL.
               (B)   Maximum area: No maximum.
               (C)   Depth: Ranging from 0.5 to 5.0 ft. (average 3.0 ft); at
least 5 percent of the area below NWL having pockets up to 5.0 ft. deep.
               (D)   Maximum bounce:
                  (i)   100-year: 5.0 ft. residential (industrial/commercial
may be greater based on approval by the Administrator).
                  (ii)   2-year: 1.0 ft.
               (E)   Maximum drawdown time:
                  (i)   100-year: Above NWL by 0.5 ft. for 72 hrs.
                  (ii)   2-yr: Above NWL by 0.5 ft. for 36 hours.
               (F)   Maximum slopes:
                  (i)   Freeboard elevation to 2-yr water level: 4:1.
                  (ii)   2-yr water level to 0.5 ft. below NWL: 8:1.
                  (iii)   0.5 to 1.5 ft. below NWL: variable 8:1 to 12:1
(safety ledge).
                  (iv)   >1.5 ft. below NWL: 2:1.
                  (v)   Freeboard to 1.5 ft. below NWL: 5:1 avg. max.
               (G)   Shoreline protection: Natural vegetation; biotechnical
stabilization (depending on site- specific conditions); erosion control
measures.
               (H)   Water quality enhancements: Maximize distance between
inlets and outlets; no low- flow channel to be provided; energy dissipation
measures at outlets; measures such as aerators, cascading streams, waterfalls,
etc., are strongly recommended to maintain cooler water temperatures, promote
water circulation and aeration, and provide aesthetic appeal.
               (I)   Landscape options: Natural, ornamental hybrid, and low
maintenance turf; public access via stone outcroppings, groomed areas, etc.,
are recommended. A planting and maintenance report, provided by a recognized
wetlands firm, must be submitted and approved.
            (3)   Dry Basin Design:
               (A)   Minimum area: No minimum.
               (B)   Maximum area: 8,000 s.f., unless approved by the
Administrator.
               (C)   Safety shelf: Not applicable.
               (D)   Maximum bounce: 5.0 ft. residential (industrial/commercial
may be greater based on approval by the Administrator).
   H.   Site Runoff Storage Facility Requirements Within The Regulatory
Floodplain: Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain shall:
      1.   Conform to all applicable requirements specified in chapter 8 of
this title; and
      2.   Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the release rate
requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in the receiving
stream up to the 10-year flood elevation; and
      3.   Detention volume provided by enlarging existing regulatory
floodplain storage without providing a structure controlling discharge (on-
stream detention) will be allowed only as a variance. The applicant must
demonstrate that flood damages are not increased and the development will not
increase flood flows for both the 2-year and 100-year floods on the stream with
developed conditions on the site; and
      4.   The Administrator may approve designs which can be shown by detailed
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to provide a net watershed benefit not
otherwise realized by strict application of the requirements in subsections H1,
H2 and H3 of this section.
   I.   Site Runoff Storage Facility Requirements Within The Regulatory
Floodway: Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodway shall:
      1.   Meet the requirements for locating storage facilities in the
regulatory floodplain; and
      2.   Be evaluated by performing hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
consistent with the standards and requirements for any adopted watershed plans;
and
      3.   Provide a net watershed benefit.
   J.   Off-Site Facilities: Site runoff storage facilities may be located off-
site if the following conditions are met:
      1.   The off-site storage facility meets all of the requirements of this
chapter; and
      2.   Adequate storage capacity in the off-site facility is dedicated to
the development; and
      3.   The development includes means to convey stormwater to the off-site
storage K. Cross-Stream Structures For Site Runoff Storage Facilities:
Structures constructed across the channel to impound water to meet detention
requirements shall be prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a
public flood control project with a net watershed benefit. Those streams
appearing as blue on a USGS quadrangle map shall be assumed perennial unless
better data is obtained. All cross-stream structures for the purpose of
impounding water to provide detention in all cases on perennial and
intermittent streams must demonstrate that they will not cause short-term or
long-term stream channel instability.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-6-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND USES:
   A.   Applicability Of Provisions: Regulations under this section apply only
to croplands, pasturelands, farmsteads and outbuildings associated with those
agricultural practices. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall
be construed as compliance with the this title for the above land uses, and no
further regulation under this title will apply. Any other land use, including
greenhouses, nurseries, container grown plants, equestrian facilities, the sale
of agricultural products to the public or where commercial activities involving
the new construction of gravel or paved parking facilities or buildings whose
aggregate area is twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or more are
required to comply with all applicable sections of this title.
   B.   Conservation Planning And Performance Standards:
      1.   To comply with this section, landowners shall practice conservation
planning whose product shall be a management system which addresses site
runoff, soil erosion and sediment control, and surface and subsurface drainage.
Any acreage with a signed and approved NRCS conservation plan is exempt from
the requirements of this section and this title.
      2.   Applicable approved practices include:
         a.   Vegetated grass waterways.
         b.   Contour buffer strips.
         c.   Critical area planting and cover crops.
         d.   Terrace ridges and diversions.
         e.   Contour strip cropping.
         f.   Contour farming.
         g.   Crop rotation.
         h.   Conservation tillage and crop residue management.
         i.   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance
with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the Iroquois County NRCS District Conservationist or the Iroquois
County Agricultural Administrator.
      3.   The performance standard for conservation planning shall be a
management system which will develop a set of field practices which will reduce
the calculated actual soil loss to the "tolerable soil loss" (T) as calculated
by the revised Universal Soil Loss Equation for the actual site conditions.
Cropland tillage and resource management methods shall be consistent with the
Technical Guide Notice IL-108 and shall be considered evidence of compliance
with the T performance standard.
   C.   Drainage Practices, Requirements And Design Criteria: Drainage for
agricultural purposes shall be consistent with those practices identified as
appropriate for “good husbandry” given the soil types, slopes and crops. An
agricultural drainage system may consist of both subsurface drainage systems
and surface drainage systems. Where active drainage districts maintain drainage
systems, they shall be consulted on surface and subsurface drainage within the
district boundaries. Requirements applying to subsurface and surface drainage
systems shall be as follows:
      1.   Subsurface Drainage Systems: Drain tile systems shall be maintained
and constructed in accordance with subsurface drainage recommendations for the
appropriate soil drainage group as specified by The Illinois Drainage Guide,
University of Illinois Extension Service Circular No. 1226. Surface inlets into
the subsurface drainage system shall be allowed only to maintain good
husbandry. Where their use cannot be practicably avoided due to topography,
they shall be installed using flow controls such as orifices and perforated
risers with gravel filters and/or vegetative filters.
      2.   Surface Drainage Systems: Surface drainage systems shall be
maintained and constructed in accordance with surface drainage recommendations
for the appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the Illinois Drainage
Guide, University of Illinois Extension Service No. 1226. Surface drainage
systems shall be built with geotechnically stable slopes, and the surface, when
applicable, shall be further stabilized utilizing the establishment of cool and
warm season grass mixes as identified in Field Office Technical Guide (Illinois
108).
      3.   Buffer Strips: Open channels with a definable bed and banks shall
use buffer strips in order to reduce the amount of erosion occurring from the
conveyed flows as well as to help filter the runoff from the site into the
waterway. Buffer strips shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') wide from the
top of the bank except where smaller widths are necessary due to site
limitations and when approved by the Administrator.
      4.   Compliance With Other Regulations: Agricultural drainage systems
shall also comply with all regulations regarding wetlands as enforced by
Federal, State, and local agencies.
   D.   Sediment Control For Open Channels: All open channel drainage systems
shall maintain practices adjacent to the open outlet channel that will reduce
the transportation of sediment off-site. Runoff from agricultural fields must
pass through a sediment control system prior to discharge into the open channel
conveyance system. Approved sediment control systems may consist of the
following:
      1.   Vegetated buffer zones planted with permanent grasses appropriate
for soil stabilization and filtering.
      2.   Grade control structures for over fall stabilization.
      3.   Sediment traps adjacent to the stream channel.
      4.   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance
with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the Iroquois County NRCS District Conservationist or the
Administrator.
   E.   Maintenance And Construction Of Drainage Systems: Agricultural drainage
systems shall be maintained so as to convey the expected flows for good
drainage practices. The existing agricultural surface drainage systems shall
not be enlarged unless such enlargement is consistent with all other provisions
of this section. Maintenance and construction of subsurface drainage systems
will not be subject to the requirements of other sections of this title except
as they are regulated by other agencies. Maintenance projects by legally
functioning drainage districts on existing agricultural drainage systems will
not be subject to further permitting requirements under this title except as
they relate to the jurisdiction of other agencies.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 7: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
Section
14-7-1: Site Planning
14-7-2: Standards And Specifications
14-7-3: General Requirements
14-7-4: Extended Construction Shutdown Periods
14-7-5: Hydraulic And Hydrologic Design Requirements
14-7-6: “As-Needed” Practices On Plans
14-7-7: Plan Requirements
14-7-8: Conveyance Of Off-Site Flow
14-7-9: Stockpiles
14-7-10: Storm Sewer Inlets
14-7-11: Construction Dewatering
14-7-12: Protection Of Roadways
14-7-13: Temporary Stream Crossings
14-7-14: Inspections
14-7-1: SITE PLANNING:
Sediment and erosion control planning shall be part of the initial site
planning process. In planning the development of the site, the applicant shall
consider the susceptibility of existing soils to erosion and topographic
features such as steep slopes and stream corridors which must be protected to
reduce the amount of sediment and erosion which occurs. Where appropriate,
existing vegetation shall be protected from disturbance during construction by
fencing or other means. In the planning process, the applicant shall also
address the following:
   A.   For projects that involve phased construction, existing land cover for
those areas not under current development shall be addressed. If existing land
cover does not consist of an appropriate ground cover, then these phases shall
be planted temporarily to reduce erosion from idle land.
   B.   In planning the sediment and erosion control strategy, preference shall
be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling sediment. In order to
accomplish this, the plan must carefully consider the construction sequence of
the phases so that the amount of land area exposed to erosive forces is the
minimum consistent with completing construction. In no case shall more than
twenty (20) acres of ground cover be disturbed at one time without permanent or
temporary stabilization at one time unless authorized by the Administrator.
   C.   Stormwater detention basins shall be constructed as early in the
construction process as practicable.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-2: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance with
the “Illinois Urban Manual” (1995) or latest edition. Sediment and erosion
control planning shall be in accordance with “Procedures and Standards for
Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois” (revised July, 1988)
by the Urban Committee of the Association of Illinois Soil and Water
Conservation Districts (The “Green Book”) chapters 1-5. Where the Illinois
Urban Manual supersedes sections of The Green Book, the Illinois Urban Manual
shall prevail.
   B.   All projects that will result in the development of one acre or more,
except for agricultural projects regulated solely under section
14-6-5 of this title, shall be required to obtain coverage under an appropriate
NPDES permit. The permittee shall certify to the City that all required
permits, plans and inspections have been prepared and maintained in accordance
with the NPDES permit. Specifically, the permittee shall prepare and adhere to
a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared for the development
project that shall meet the conditions in the permit for SWPPPs. A copy of such
plan shall be maintained on the construction site at all times that workers are
present, and a copy of the permit, SWPPP and/or inspection logs shall be
provided to the City upon request. Failure to obtain an NPDES permit or to
comply with the conditions of an NPDES permit for the construction activity
shall constitute a violation of this title.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The runoff from disturbed areas shall not leave the development site
without first passing through sediment control facilities. This requirement
shall apply to all phases of construction and shall include an ongoing process
of implementation of measures and maintenance of those measures during both the
construction season and any construction shutdown periods.
   B.   The smallest practical area shall be exposed for the shortest practical
time during development. However, in no case shall more than twenty (20) acres
be exposed at one time on a development unless a larger area is approved by the
Administrator.
   C.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected whenever possible.
Areas within twenty five feet (25') of natural watercourses, lakes, ponds and
wetlands should be left undisturbed whenever possible.
   D.   All applicants for developments of one acre or more shall submit an
application for an NPDES permit or a notice of intent (NOI) to be covered under
a general NPDES permit. A copy of any stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) required by such permit shall be provided to the City prior to
commencement of development activities, and a copy shall be kept on the
development site at all times.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-4: EXTENDED CONSTRUCTION SHUTDOWN PERIODS:
The condition of the construction site for the winter shutdown period shall
address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall growing season so
that slopes and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or
permanent vegetative cover. All open areas that are to remain idle throughout
the winter shall receive temporary erosion control measures including temporary
seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanketing prior to the end of the
fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of the growing
season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do not rely on
vegetative cover such as erosion control blankets and heavy mulching. In no
case shall requirements less than those required by IEPA NPDES Permit ILR10
apply to projects disturbing more than one acre.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-5: HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
In the hydraulic and hydrologic design of major erosion control measures (those
of which the tributary drainage area is greater than 3 acres) such as sediment
basins and traps, diversions, and the like, the design frequency shall be
commensurate with the risk of the design event being exceeded. The following
design frequencies shall be regarded as minimum design frequencies for the
construction period:
   A.   For those projects whose construction period is less than six (6)
months, the storm event having a fifty percent (50%) chance (2-year event) of
being exceeded in any year shall be used for design purposes;
   B.   For those projects whose construction period is greater than six (6)
months but less than one year, the design frequency for major sediment basins
shall be a rainfall event with a twenty percent (20%) (5-year event) chance of
being exceeded in any one year; and
   C.   For those construction projects expected to last more than one year,
major sediment basins shall be designed for a rainfall event with a ten percent
(10%) (10-year event) chance of being exceeded in any one year.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-6: “AS-NEEDED” PRACTICES ON PLANS:
The sediment and erosion control plan shall designate a series of practices
which shall be implemented, either at the direction of the permittee or the
permittee's representative, on-site or at the direction of the Administrator
should an inspection of the site indicate a deficiency in soil and sediment
erosion control measures. As a minimum, these measures shall include the
following:
   A.   Sedimentation basins.
   B.   Sediment traps.
   C.   Diversion swales.
   D.   Silt fences.
   E.   Temporary seeding.
   F.   Mulching.
   G.   Dust control.
   H.   Erosion control blankets.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-7: PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Sediment and erosion control plans shall be in accordance with chapter 4 of
this title but shall include the following:
   A.   Detailed construction phasing plan identifying sediment and erosion
control measures to be in place for each phase shall be submitted prior to
stripping the site of existing vegetation or cover.
   B.   Sediment and erosion control measures to be installed initially prior
to stripping existing vegetation or mass grading shall be indicated on the
plans.
   C.   Permanent stabilization measures shall be indicated on a separate plan.
   D.   The expected 2-year and 10-year runoff rates from all off-site areas
draining into the site shall be identified on the plan.
   E.   Methods for conveying flows through the site during construction shall
be indicated. These methods must include the temporary and permanent
stabilization measures to be used to reduce velocity and erosion from flow
through the construction zone.
   F.   A maintenance schedule of each measure used shall be indicated on the
plan. As a minimum, all sediment and erosion control measures on-site shall be
inspected weekly and also by the applicant's designee or after a one-half inch
(½") or greater rainfall event, and any required repairs shall be made to keep
these measures functional as designed. All repairs and modifications shall be
reviewed by the Administrator or his/her designee.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-8: CONVEYANCE OF OFF-SITE FLOW:
To the extent practicable, proposed ditches and waterways which are to convey
off-site flows through the site shall be stabilized upon construction. Where
new waterways are constructed, they shall be stabilized to the extent
practicable prior to their use to convey flood flows.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-9: STOCKPILES:
Stockpiles of soil and other erodible or floatable building materials (sand,
limestone, etc.) shall not be located in floodplains, overflow routes or areas
subject to frequent inundation. If a stockpile is to remain in place for more
than three (3) days, then sediment and erosion control shall be provided for
the stockpile.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-10: STORM SEWER INLETS:
Storm sewer inlets, catch basins, and manholes with open lid grates shall be
protected with manufactured filtration devices developed to prevent sediments
from entering the drainage system. Silt screens, hay bales, and filter fabrics
under storm grates are not allowed.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-11: CONSTRUCTION DEWATERING:
Water pumped or which is otherwise discharged from the site during construction
dewatering shall be filtered and a means provided to reduce erosion.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-12: PROTECTION OF ROADWAYS:
Graveled roads, access drives, parking areas of sufficient width and length,
and vehicle wash down facilities, if necessary, shall be provided to prevent
soils from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any soil tracked onto
a public or private roadway shall be removed before the end of each workday or
sooner as directed by the authority maintaining the roadway.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-13: TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSINGS:
   A.   Temporary stream crossings of intermittent and perennial streams used
only for and during construction shall be designed to convey a 2-year flood
(minimum) or other flood event approved by the Administrator without
overtopping unless a more frequent design event is allowed by the
Administrator.
   B.   The entire crossing shall be designed to withstand hydrodynamic forces
and erosive forces up to the base flood event without washing out.
   C.   Ephemeral streams may be crossed at temporary at-grade crossings;
provided, that the crossing point is stabilized with materials resistive to the
erosive forces produced by runoff from the upstream drainage area, and the
design is approved by the Administrator.
   D.   Temporary stream crossings shall be removed upon completion of
construction activities. All temporary stream crossing shall be completely
removed and the stream restored to its preconstruction condition upon
completion of construction.
   E.   Restoration shall incorporate appropriate vegetation consistent with
the adjacent existing vegetation prior to construction or in accordance with a
restoration plan approved by the Administrator.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-7-14: INSPECTIONS:
The Administrator or persons designated by the Administrator shall be permitted
on the site to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures and records
related to the NPDES permit at any time.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 8: PROTECTION OF SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS
Section
14-8-1: Application And Interpretation
14-8-2: Floodplain, Regulatory Floodplain, Base Flood Elevation (BFE) And
Regulatory Floodway Locations
14-8-3: General Performance Standards
14-8-4: Public Health And Safety Protection Standards
14-8-5: Building Protection Standards
14-8-6: Nonconforming Structures
14-8-7: Compensatory Storage Volume Standards
14-8-8: Floodway Standards
14-8-9: Riverine Floodplains
14-8-10: Bridge And Culvert Standards
14-8-1: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   This chapter, including article A, sets forth requirements for
developments within floodplains and floodways. In addition, developments in the
SFHA draining more than one square mile with no designated floodway must meet
IDNR-OWR 17 Illinois Administrative Code Part 3700 Rules. Projects which meet
all the requirements and conditions to be considered permitted under IDNR-OWR
Statewide, regional and general permits, and are not in designated floodways,
shall be considered to have met the technical requirements of this section.
References to IDNR/OWR permits or approvals in this section shall be construed
as “their designee” where a portion or all of their authority has been
delegated.
   B.   All developments shall meet the requirements set forth in Table 2 -
Summary of Applicable Title Section for Development in Floodplains, a copy of
which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The table is intended only as
a guide to indicate the applicable sections of this title for development in
floodplains.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-2: FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) AND
REGULATORY FLOODWAY LOCATIONS:
   A.   The BFE shall be delineated onto the site topography to establish the
regulatory floodplain area limits for regulation under this title. Regulatory
floodplains shall be delineated onto the site map from the current FEMA, FIRM,
FBFM or LOMR and include those areas of the SFHA which are not regulatory
floodplains. The Community remains responsible for maintaining the effective
FIS and a list of FIRM panels.
   B.   The BFE shall be:
      1.   The elevation of the 100-year profile corresponding to the location
of the development as indicated in the flood profiles in the FEMA flood
insurance studies listed in appendix B of this title (which may be updated from
time to time), a copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk; or
      2.   In the case of FEMA delineated “AH Zones”, the elevation noted on
the map shall be the BFE. In the case of FEMA delineated “AO Zones”, the BFE
shall be the depth number shown on the map added to the highest adjacent grade,
or at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is provided; or
      3.   When no BFE information exists and the upstream tributary drainage
area is six hundred forty (640) acres or greater, the BFE shall be determined
using a site-specific floodplain study by a professional engineer using
appropriate hydrologic and hydraulic models acceptable to FEMA and IDNR/OWR, as
follows:
         a.   Where a channel has a tributary drainage area of six hundred
forty (640) acres or more, the above analyses shall be submitted to the IDNR/
OWR for concurrent approval.
         b.   For a nonriverine regulatory floodplain, the historic flood of
record, plus three feet (3'), may be used for the BFE instead of performing a
detailed hydrologic and hydraulic study for developments of less than forty
(40) acres, at the discretion of the Administrator.
      4.   For floodplains that are not regulatory, are not draining more than
six hundred forty (640) acres, and with no BFE determined, the Administrator
may require a site-specific floodplain study for the purpose of establishing an
FPE for the development. A site-specific study is required for all developments
of forty (40) acres or more that have a regulatory floodplain on any portion of
the site.
   C.   1.   The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on
the current effective regulatory maps maintained by the City. The location of
the regulatory floodway boundary shall be scaled onto the site plan using
references common to both the map and the plan (typically the centerlines of
adjacent roadways). Where an interpretation is needed to determine the exact
location of the regulatory floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted.
Note: If an area of the site is located in the regulatory floodway that is
higher than the BFE, that area is subject to the floodway standards of section
14-8-8 of this chapter, including the appropriate use criteria, until such time
as an LOMR is received from the IDNR/OWR and FEMA.
      2.   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory
floodway are as follows:
         a.   The flood profiles, flows, and data in the current effective FIS
must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to
be in error or conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall be contacted
for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
The Administrator shall be copied on all related correspondence.
         b.   If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the
proposed development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section
with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.
         c.   If the applicant is informed by IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is
scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, or modified, or a regional flood
control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified
within the next five (5) years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and
shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions
and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood
control project is built, removed or modified as applicable.
         d.   If the appropriate use will result in a change in the regulatory
floodway location or a change in the BFE, the applicant shall submit the
information required to be issued a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. A public notice inviting public comment on the proposed
change in the BFE or location of the regulatory floodway will be issued by
IDNR/OWR or its designee before a CLOMR is issued. Filling, grading, dredging
or excavating may take place upon issuance of a conditional approval from IDNR/
OWR and the Administrator. No further development activities shall take place
in the existing or proposed floodplain until a letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA unless such activities meet all the requirements of section
14-8-3 of this chapter. The Administrator shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
         e.   For those circumstances listed below and located in a regulatory
floodway, the following information shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their
review and concurrence:
            (1)   Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge,
culvert crossings and roadway approaches.
            (2)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge, culvert
crossing or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile.
            (3)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage.
            (4)   Stormwater management permits to local units of government
for regulatory floodway and floodplain development.
            (5)   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams,
etc., and all other State, Federal or Community projects.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-3: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following general performance standards are applicable to all development
in a regulatory floodplain. The standards of this section apply except when
superseded by more stringent requirements in the subsequent sections.
   A.   No development except as allowed in section
14-8-10 of this chapter shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain that
singularly or cumulatively creates an increase in flood stage or velocity off-
site, or a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity on-site or threat to public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   For all projects involving a channel modification, fill, stream
maintenance or a levee, the flood conveyance and storage capacity of the
regulatory floodplain shall not be reduced.
   C.   If the proposed development would result in a change in the regulatory
floodplain or BFE, the applicant shall obtain an LOMA/LOMR from FEMA. If the
development will result in an increase in the BFE of more than one foot (1') at
any location, a CLOMR must be obtained before any work is performed in the
regulatory floodplain. No buildings may be built in the existing or proposed
regulatory floodplain until the LOMA/LOMR receives concurrence from IDNR/OWR
and is issued by FEMA unless the building meets all the building protection
standards of section
14-8-5 of this chapter. Proposed changes to the regulatory floodway delineation
and the BFE must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence.
   D.   If the development is located in a public body of water, as defined by
IDNR/OWR, a permit must also be received from IDNR/OWR.
   E.   Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or removal
of a dam, the developer shall obtain an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required.
   F.   1. For public flood control projects, the floodplain management
standards will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR
that each of the following conditions are met:
         a.   Demonstrate by hydraulic and hydrologic modeling that the
proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood
heights outside the project site or demonstrate that any increases will be
contained in easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event.
         b.   Demonstrate that the project will be operated and maintained by a
public agency.
         c.   Demonstrate that the project will reduce flood damage to an
existing building or structure.
      2.   These standards do not preclude the design, engineering,
construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a public flood control
project by persons who are not public agencies.
   G.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and planned
unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions
to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
data and floodway delineations.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-4: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY PROTECTION STANDARDS:
   A.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted if all manholes or other aboveground openings located
below the FPE are watertight.
   B.   New or replacement on-site waste disposal systems are not allowed in
the regulatory floodplain within the City limits.
   C.   New, substantially improved or replacement wastewater treatment plants
shall have watertight openings for those openings located below the FPE. Such
facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the facility or
contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.
   D.   No developments in the SFHA shall include the locating or storing of
hazardous materials, buoyant materials, solid wastes, fertilizers, pesticides
or other toxic materials or potential pollutants.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-5: BUILDING PROTECTION STANDARDS:
These building protection standards apply to all buildings located in the
regulatory floodplain; however, it should be noted that most new and
replacement buildings are not appropriate uses of the regulatory floodway.
   A.   The lowest floor, including basements, of all new residential
structures, substantially improved structures and additions shall be elevated
up to at least the FPE. An attached garage for a structure must be elevated up
to at least 0.1 foot above the BFE.
      1.   If placed on fill, the top of the fill for the residential structure
shall be above the FPE. The top of the fill for an attached garage shall be at
least 0.1 foot above the BFE. The fill shall be placed at that elevation for a
distance of twenty feet (20') out from the building unless the building design
is certified by a registered structural engineer to be protected from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill shall not settle below the
FPE for the residential structure and not below 0.1 foot above the base flood
for an attached garage, and shall be adequately protected against erosion,
scour and differential settlement. The building shall meet all of the
requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01.
      2.   If elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation, the
building's supporting structure must be permanently open to floodwaters and not
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The permanent
openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and consist
of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the BFE. The lowest inside grade must match the
lowest existing outside grade adjacent to the structure. The foundation and
supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and
adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces
such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall
be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor
(including basement) for the residential structure and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall
be located at or above the FPE. An attached garage must be elevated to at least
0.1 foot above the BFE. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the FPE. No area below the FPE shall be used for storage,
   B.   The lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially
improved nonresidential buildings shall be elevated at least to the FPE as
described in subsection A of this section or be structurally dry floodproofed
to at least the FPE. A nonresidential building may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided, that a professional engineer or
registered structural engineer shall certify that the building has been
structurally dry floodproofed below the FPE, and the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity. (Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.)
   C.   Manufactured Homes and recreational vehicles to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be at or above the FPE and
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement in
accordance with the Illinois Manufactured Home Installation Code (77 Illinois
Administrative Code 870 1999), as amended.
   D   1. Accessory structures, such as toolsheds and detached garages, which
are not substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be
constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with the
following criteria:
         a.   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
         b.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof
material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet the floodway
standards in section
14-8-8 of this chapter.
         c.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and
movement.
         d.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.
         e.   The building shall be no greater than six hundred (600) square
feet in floor size, and be valued at less than seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($7,500.00). The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
subsection A2 of this section.
         f.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain basements or other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or
similar uses.
      2.   Accessory structures that do not meet all of the criteria in this
subsection may be constructed if they are dry floodproofed or elevated at least
one-half foot (0.5') above the BFE.
   E.   Garages, sheds other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary
to an existing use may be permitted provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a lot and be accessory to an existing
principle structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening
for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than
five hundred and seventy six (576') square feet (24' x 24').
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014; amd. Ord. 2566, 4-28-2020)
14-8-6: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other disaster may be
restored unless the damage meets or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market
value before it was damaged, in which case, it shall conform to the building
protection standards of this title.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-7: COMPENSATORY STORAGE VOLUME STANDARDS:
The following standards apply within the regulatory floodplain or, for sites
draining more than six hundred forty (640) acres, the limits of the delineated
floodplain as accepted by the Administrator:
   A.   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage volume will be required
for development in a riverine regulatory floodplain and shall be at least equal
to the regulatory floodplain flood storage volume displaced. The storage volume
displaced below the existing 10-year frequency flood elevation must be replaced
below the proposed 10-year frequency flood elevation. The storage volume
displaced above the 10-year existing frequency flood elevation must be replaced
above the proposed 10-year frequency flood elevation. Additional storage of not
less than fifty percent (50%) of the net volume displaced shall be provided
based upon the total volume filled below the BFE. The additional fifty percent
(50%) need not be hydraulically equivalent. The volume of storage lost shall be
calculated based on the existing BFE, and the volume of compensatory storage
shall be calculated based upon the final project BFE.
   B.   Compensatory storage volume for development in a nonriverine regulatory
floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be equal to the storage
volume displaced. Additional storage of not less than fifty percent (50%) of
the net volume displaced shall be provided. The volume of storage lost shall be
calculated based on the existing BFF, and the volume of compensatory shall be
calculated based upon the final project BFE.
   C.   Compensatory storage volume requirements for development in a
nonriverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a lake shall be
replaced in accordance with the requirements for the loss of depressional
storage in subsection
14-6-2F of this title.
   D.   The hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage areas shall be
designed to drain freely and openly to the channel and shall be located
adjacent to the development. This standard does not apply to nonriverine
regulatory floodplain.
   E.   A recorded covenant running with the land is required to maintain the
compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide compensatory storage
volume.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-8: FLOODWAY STANDARDS:
The only development in a regulatory floodway which will be allowed is
appropriate uses which will not cause an increase in flood heights or
velocities for all flood events up to and including the base flood. Only those
appropriate uses listed in subsection A of this section will be allowed in the
regulatory floodway. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or
placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and
storage of materials except as specifically defined in said subsection A as an
appropriate use. If the development is proposed for the regulatory floodway
portion of the regulatory floodplain, the following standards apply in addition
to the standards for the regulatory floodplain:
   A.   Only the construction, modification, repair or replacement of the
following appropriate uses will be allowed in the regulatory floodway:
      Boathouses or other nonhabitable structures without sanitary facilities
that are accessory to existing buildings and will not block flood flows nor
reduce regulatory floodway storage.
      Bridges, culverts and associated roadways, sidewalks and railways
required for crossing the regulatory floodway or for access to other
appropriate uses in the regulatory floodway and any modification thereto.
      Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures
including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or
the construction of floodwalls or berms around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall or berm
shall be no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the
existing structure, and which are not considered to be substantial improvements
to the structure.
      Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the BFE and which will not block
flood flows. These modifications include fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios
and second story additions. No enclosed floor areas may be built on stilts. The
modifications may not singularly or cumulatively equal fifty percent (50%) or
more of the building's market value.
      Public flood control structures and private improvements relating to the
control of drainage and flooding of existing buildings, erosion, water quality
or habitat for fish and wildlife.
      Recreational facilities such as playing fields, open pavilions, gazebos
and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when
viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows.
      Regulatory floodway grading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a channel.
      Repair, replacement or reconstruction of a damaged building; provided,
that none of the outside dimensions of the building are increased; and
provided, that the cost of repair is less than fifty percent (50%) of the
building's value before it was damaged. When damage is fifty percent (50%) or
more (a substantial improvement), the activity shall conform to section
14-8-5 of this chapter.
      Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
      Structures or facilities relating to functionally water dependent uses
such as additions, modifications, and improvements to existing wastewater
treatment plants (except for additions to habitable structures on the site) and
facilities and improvements relating to recreational boating (this does not
include new wastewater treatment plants).
      Underground and overhead utilities.
   B.   Additions or changes to the list of appropriate uses in subsection A of
this section must be approved by the Administrator prior to the adoption by
IDNR/OWR.
   C.   All development in the regulatory floodway shall require a permit from
IDNR/OWR and must be in accordance with all provisions of this title.
   D.   Construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible;
provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and
mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data prepared and signed by a professional engineer:
      1.   All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the
development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on-
stream structures or dams, shall be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the base flood.
      2.   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used to
determine transition sections in calculations of effective regulatory floodway
conveyance:
         a.   Flowing water will expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
         b.   Flowing water will contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
         c.   Flowing water will not expand or contract faster than one foot
(1') vertical for every ten feet (10') of flooded stream length.
         d.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
         e.   Transition sections must be used to determine the effective
conveyance areas on adjacent properties.
      3.   Development of an appropriate use will not result in an increase in
the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage. However, in the
case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be
increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
   E.   In the case of on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water during normal or flood flows, the increase in flood stage when compared
to existing conditions for all storm events up to and including the base flood
event shall be contained within recorded easements or the channel banks. A dam
safety permit or letter indicating a dam safety permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for such structures.
   F.   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for all floodway projects including IDNR/
OWR projects, dams, etc., and for all other State or Community projects.
   G.   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be
demonstrated that:
      1.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body
of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization,
floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a
stream side buffer strip of greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat;
      2.   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification, and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
      3.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed
in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of
the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match
as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified,
restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into
channel modification design, where practical.
         b.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the
upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
         c.   One-sided construction off a channel shall be used when feasible.
Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of
the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects
of the vegetation.
         d.   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for construction of the channel.
         e.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper
than three to one (3:1), horizontal to vertical, wherever practical. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
         f.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to the establishment of the vegetative
cover.
         g.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity
such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established where
appropriate.
         h.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the
modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
         i.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry, and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
         j.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel
enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as
part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
         k.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control project,
there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
      4.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-9: RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS:
These standards apply to riverine regulatory floodplains without a regulatory
floodway. The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR for all development
any portion of which is located partially or completely within the regulatory
floodplain (without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a tributary drainage
area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more.
   A.   The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in an
obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due to
an increase in flood heights, velocities, or loss of floodplain area storage.
   B.   A professional engineer shall submit a study that demonstrates one of
the following:
      1.   Determine a floodway which meets the definition of a REGULATORY
FLOODWAY in section
14-2-1 of this title and demonstrate that the proposed development meets the
floodway standards in section
14-8-8 of this chapter; or
      2.   Determine a BFE and demonstrate that the proposed development will
maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase flood
velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will compensate for any lost
floodplain storage.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8-10: BRIDGE AND CULVERT STANDARDS:
These standards are for the reconstruction, modification or new construction of
bridges, culvert crossings and roadway approaches located in the regulatory
floodplain.
   A.   A proposed new structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for
all flood events up to and including the base flood event unless contained
within the channel banks or recorded easements. The evaluation must be
submitted to the IDNR/OWR for review and a permit obtained.
   B.   If the proposed new structure will increase upstream flood stages
greater than 0.1 foot, the applicant must contact IDNR/OWR for a dam safety
permit or waiver. The Administrator shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
   C.   Lost regulatory floodplain storage must be replaced as required in
section
14-8-7 of this chapter; except, that artificially created storage lost due to a
reduction in head loss behind an existing bridge or culvert crossing shall not
be required to be replaced, provided no flood damage will be incurred
downstream.
   D.   Velocity increases must be mitigated by use of appropriate measures to
avoid scour, erosion and sedimentation at the structure.
   E.   For modification or replacement of existing structures, the existing
structure must first be evaluated in accordance with IDNR/OWR Rules (17
Illinois Administrative Code Part 3708) to determine if the existing structure
is a source of flood damage. If the structure is a source of flood damage, the
applicant’s engineer shall submit justification to allow the damage to continue
and evaluate the feasibility of relieving the structure's impact. Modifications
or replacement structures shall not increase flood stages (0.0 feet) compared
to the existing condition for all flood events up to and including the base
flood event. The evaluation must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued. The Administrator shall be copied on all
related correspondence.
   F.   If any work is proposed in, near or over a public body of water, a
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR.
   G.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing
the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
   H.   Construction vehicles shall cross streams by the means of existing
bridges or culverts. Where an existing crossing is not available, a temporary
crossing that has been issued a permit or waiver by IDNR/OWR shall be
constructed in which:
      1.   The approach roads will be 0.5 foot or less above existing grade.
      2.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the
water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall.
      3.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet
(2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
      4.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one
year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Administrator.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
ARTICLE A: STREAM AND WETLANDS PROTECTION
Section
14-8A-1: Title
14-8A-2: Statute Authority
14-8A-3: Jurisdiction
14-8A-4: Purpose And Intent
14-8A-5: Site Development Permit
14-8A-6: General Provisions For Area Affected
14-8A-7: Watercourse Relocation And Minor Modifications
14-8A-8: Impact Assessment
14-8A-9: Stream Maintenance Easement
14-8A-10: Threatened And Endangered Species
14-8A-11: Security And Indemnification
14-8A-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as THE CITY OF WATSEKA
CONSERVATION PLAN ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The Conservation Plan is adopted by the Mayor and City Council under the
authority of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-3: JURISDICTION:
   A.   The City asserts its jurisdiction over all isolated wetlands within the
City corporate limits and facilities planning areas that were formerly under
the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers prior to January 9, 2000.
   B.   The requirements of this article apply to all platted and unplatted
lands within the jurisdiction of the City.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-4: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   It is the purpose and intent of this article to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the present and future residents of the City and
downstream drainage areas by providing for the protection, preservation, proper
maintenance, and use of City watercourses, lakes, ponds, floodplain and wetland
areas. All work to be done in a conservation area will require a permit from
the Army Corps of Engineers. The responsibility for obtaining the permit is by
the applicant. If requested by the City, a sign-off from the Army Corps of
Engineers will be required if the site appears to be near a wetland area.
Absolutely no work shall be undertaken until the Administrator has received an
approved permit by the Army Corps of Engineers.
   B.   This article is more specifically adopted:
      1.   To prevent flood damage by preserving stormwater and floodwater
storage capacity (including depressional storage);
      2.   To maintain the normal hydrologic balance of streams, floodplains,
ponds, lakes, wetlands, and groundwater by storing and providing for
infiltration of wet-period runoff in floodplains and wetlands, and releasing it
slowly to the stream to maintain in-stream flow;
      3.   To manage stormwater runoff and maintain natural runoff conveyance
systems, and minimize the need for major storm sewer construction and
drainageway modification;
      4.   To improve water quality, both by filtering and storing sediments
and attached pollutants, nutrients, and organic compounds before they drain
into streams or wetlands, and by maintaining the natural pollutant-assimilating
capabilities of streams, floodplains and wetlands;
      5.   To protect shorelines and stream banks from soil erosion, using
natural means and materials wherever possible;
      6.   To protect fish spawning, breeding, nursery and feeding grounds;
      7.   To protect wildlife habitat;
      8.   To preserve areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific
interest, including natural areas and habitats of endangered species;
      9.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic qualities of developing areas;
and
      10.   To encourage the continued economic growth and high quality of life
of the City which depends in part on an adequate quality of water, a pleasing
natural environment, and recreational opportunities in proximity to the City.
   C.   In order to achieve the purpose and intent of this article, the City
hereby designates the Conservation Plan that shall be considered as an overlay
to the zoning districts created by City zoning ordinances, as amended (see
title 12 of this Code). Any proposed development activity within the district
must obtain a site development permit as approved by the Governing Body of
City. See section
14-8A-5 of this article.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: To ensure that proposed development activity can be
carried out in a manner which is compatible and harmonious with the natural
amenities of the Conservation Plan and with surrounding land uses, a request
for a site development permit for such development activity must be submitted
for approval by the Administrator.
   B.   Conditions Of Permit Issuance:
      1.   No site development permit shall be issued unless the City finds
that:
         a.   The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural
features such as ponds, streams, wetlands, and forested areas, nor impair their
natural functions, but will preserve and incorporate such features into the
development’s site;
         b.   The location of natural features and the site's topography have
been considered in the designing and siting of all physical improvements;
         c.   Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the
site of topsoil, trees, and other natural features will not occur before the
commencement of building operations. Only those areas approved for the
placement of physical improvements may be cleared;
         d.   The development will not reduce the natural retention storage
capacity of any watercourse, nor increase the magnitude and volume of flooding
at other locations; and that, in addition, the development will not increase
stream velocities; and
         e.   The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and
site preparation, and the drainage is designed to prevent erosion and
environmentally deleterious surface runoff.
      2.   There shall be no development, including the immediate or future
clearing or removal of natural ground cover and/or trees, within the
conservation areas for any purpose, unless a site development permit is granted
subject to the provisions of this article or the provisions of the City zoning
ordinance.
      3.   Dumping, filling, mining, excavating, dredging, or transferring of
any earth material within the district is prohibited unless a site development
permit is granted.
      4.   No ponds or impoundments shall be created nor other alterations or
improvements shall be allowed in the district for recreational uses, stormwater
management, flood control, agricultural uses or as scenic features unless a
site development permit is granted.
   C.   Application For Permit: Application for a site development permit shall
be made by the owner of the property, or his/her authorized agent, to the City,
on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s)
and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting
firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant’s
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) unless the application is part of a subdivision
review where other fees take priority. The applicant further agrees to
reimburse the City for any outside review engineering fees incurred by the City
in addition to the filing fees. Each application shall include certification
that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of
earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the
permit.
   D.   Submissions: Each application for a site development permit shall be
accompanied by the following information: general provisions, site development
plan, geologic and soil report, drainage control plan, site grading and
excavation plan, landscape plan, justification for watercourse relocation and
minor modifications, stream modification/relocation plan, channel and bank
armoring, culverts, on-stream impoundments, and an impact assessment.
   E.   Review And Approval: Each application for a site development permit
shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
      1.   The City will review each application for a site development permit
to determine its conformance with the provisions of this article. The City may
also refer any application to any other local government or public agency
within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comments. Within
thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the City shall, in writing: a)
approve the permit application, if it is found to be in conformance with the
provisions of this article, and issue the permit; b) approve the permit
application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this article, and issue the permit subject to
these conditions; or c) disapprove the permit application, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
      2.   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended
development site unless:
         a.   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the City where applicable; or
         b.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the City; or
         c.   The proposed development is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the City for the area in which the
site is situated.
   F.   Exemptions From Permit:
      1.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
         a.   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. When
emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall
report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the Administrator within ten
(10) days after commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain a site
development permit and shall perform such work as may be determined by the
agency to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment to the watercourse,
lake, pond, floodplain or wetland;
         b.   Work consisting of the operation, repair, or maintenance of any
lawful use of land existing on the effective date hereof;
         c.   Lands adjacent to farm ditches if:
            (1)   Such lands are not adjacent to a natural stream or river; or
            (2)   Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were not streams before ditching; or
            (3)   Such lands are maintained in agricultural uses without
buildings and structures.
      2.   Where farm ditches are found to contribute to adverse environmental
impacts or hazards to persons or property, the City may include designated farm
ditches in the district. The City may also require that linings, bulkheads,
dikes and culverts be removed to mitigate hazards, or that other mitigative
measures be taken, such as the maintenance of a natural vegetation buffer
strip.
   G.   Effect On Other Permits: The granting of a site development permit
under the provisions of this section shall in no way affect the owner’s
responsibility to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance,
or regulation of any State agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other City
ordinances and regulations. Where State and/or Federal permits are required, a
site development permit will not be issued until they are obtained.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR AREA AFFECTED:
   A.   Application Of Certain Provisions:
      1.   This article applies to development in or near streams, lakes, ponds
and wetlands within City. Streams, lakes, and ponds (including intermittent
streams) are those which are shown on the United States Department of the
Interior Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute quadrangle National Wetlands
Inventory Maps and those additional streams, lakes, and ponds as identified by
the Administrator. Those are hereby made a part of this article, and two (2)
copies thereof shall remain on file at the City administrative building for
public inspection.
      2.   Wetlands are those designated by the most recent version of the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers Manual of Wetland Delineation.
      3.   If new drainagecourses, lakes, ponds or wetlands are created as part
of a development, the requirements for setbacks and uses within setbacks, and
the criteria for watercourse relocation and minor modification shall apply. The
district shall be amended as appropriate to include these areas.
   B.   Conservation Areas: The conservation areas shall be considered as an
overlay to the zoning districts created by the City zoning ordinance, as
amended (see title 12 of this Code). In addition to the requirements of this
article, applicants for a site development permit within the district shall
meet all requirements of the underlying zoning districts. In the event of a
conflict between the overlay district requirements and the underlying zoning
district requirements, the most restrictive requirements prevail.
   C.   District Boundary: The procedures, standards and requirements contained
in this article shall apply to all lots within wetlands and streams, and all
lots lying wholly or in part:
      1.   Within the special flood hazard area (SFHA) designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); or
      2.   Within one hundred feet (100') of the ordinary high water mark
(OHWM) of a perennial stream or intermittent stream, the ordinary high water
mark of a lake or pond, or the edge of a wetland; or
      3.   Within depressional areas serving as floodplain or stormwater
storage areas, as designated on the conservation areas.
   D.   Minimum Setback Of Development Activity From Streams, Lakes,
Depressional Storage, Ponds And Wetlands:
      1.   Absolutely no development activity (except as provided below) may
occur within the minimum setback. The minimum setback should be a vegetated
buffer strip, preferably planted with native plant species, which shall be
maintained or restored around the periphery of the area in question. The width
of the buffer strip shall be as follows:
         a.   Twenty five feet (25') for a tributary length of two hundred
fifty feet (250') or less.
         b.   Fifty feet (50') for a tributary length greater than two hundred
fifty feet (250') and less than five hundred feet (500').
         c.   Seventy five feet (75') for a tributary length over five hundred
feet (500').
Note: The tributary length is the maximum length of the project limits to the
sensitive area or the length from a drainage divide to the sensitive area.
      2.   The minimum setback shall be measured between the ordinary high
water mark of streams, lakes and ponds, or the edge of wetlands, or within
designated depressional areas. In no case shall the setback be less than the
boundary of the 100-year floodway as defined by FEMA. These setback
requirements do not apply to a stream in a culvert unless the stream is taken
out of the culvert as part of the development activity. If a culvert functions
as a low-flow culvert, where water is intended to periodically flow over it,
the setback requirements apply.
      3.   The following development activities may be permitted, subject to
issuance of a site development permit, within the minimum setback areas only
if, as a practical matter, they cannot be located outside the setback area.
Such development activities will only be approved based upon a report, prepared
by a qualified professional, which demonstrates that they will not adversely
affect water quality; destroy, damage or disrupt significant habitat area;
adversely affect drainage and/or stormwater retention capabilities; adversely
affect flood conveyance and storage; lead to unstable earth conditions; create
erosion hazards; or be materially detrimental to any other property in the area
of the subject property or to the City as a whole, including the loss of open
space or scenic vistas:
         a.   Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations,
informational displays, directional signs, footbridges, observation decks, and
docks;
         b.   The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of
existing utilities, highways and bridges and electrical transmission and
telecommunication lines, poles, and towers; and
         c.   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic natural and scientific
areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps.
      4.   Review of the proposed development activity within the minimum
setback area will consider the following:
         a.   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development
of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the development of park
shelters or similar structures is allowed. The development and maintenance of
roads, parking lots and other impervious surfaces necessary for permitted uses
are allowed only on a very limited basis, and where no alternate location
outside of the setback area is available.
         b.   Land surface modification within the minimum setback shall be
permitted for the development of stormwater drainage swales between the
developed area of the site (including a stormwater detention facility on the
site) and a stream, lake or pond, or wetland. Detention basins within the
setback are generally discouraged unless it can be shown that resultant
modifications will not impair water quality, habitat, or flood storage
functions.
         c.   No filling or excavating within wetlands is permitted except to
install piers for the limited development of walkways and observation decks.
Walkways and observation decks should avoid high quality wetland areas, and
should not adversely affect natural areas designated in the Illinois Natural
Areas Inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species.
         d.   Wetland areas occupied by the development of decks and walkways
must be mitigated by an equal area of wetland habitat improvement.
         e.   (1)   Modification of degraded wetlands for purposes of
stormwater management is permitted where the quality of the wetland is improved
and total wetland acreage is preserved. Where such modification is permitted,
wetlands shall be protected from the effects of increased stormwater runoff by
measures such as detention or sedimentation basins, vegetated swales and buffer
strips, and sediment and erosion control measures on adjacent developments. The
direct entry of storm sewers into wetlands shall be avoided. Environmental
impact analysis of wetland modification may be required in accordance with
section
14-8A-8 of this article.
            (2)   An applicant for a site development permit (see section
14-8A-5 of this article) must stabilize areas left exposed after land surface
modification with vegetation normally associated with that stream or wetland.
The planting of native riparian vegetation is recommended as the preferred
stabilization measure. Other techniques should be used only when and where
vegetation fails to control erosion. The preferred alternative is riprap, using
natural rock materials where practicable, installed on eroding bank areas in a
manner that provides interstitial space for vegetative growth and habitat for
macro invertebrates and other stream organisms. Lining of the stream channel
bottom is not permitted.
            (3)   The applicant shall minimize access to the applicant’s
proposed development activity within all or part of the conservation areas
where such access could adversely affect the stream, lake, pond, wetland, or
related environmentally sensitive areas.
   E.   Site Development Plan:
      1.   A site development plan must be prepared for any proposed
development within, or partly within, the conservation areas and must indicate:
         a.   Dimension and area of the parcel, showing also the vicinity of
the site in sufficient detail to enable easy location, in the field, of the
site for which the site development permit is sought, and including the
boundary line, underlying zoning, a legend, a scale, and a north arrow. This
requirement may be satisfied by the submission of a separate vicinity map;
         b.   Location of any existing and proposed structures;
         c.   Location of existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
         d.   Location of any perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond,
and its ordinary high water mark;
         e.   Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
         f.   Location of setback lines as defined in this article;
         g.   Location of the 100-year floodway and floodplain limits;
         h.   Location of existing or future access roads;
         i.   Specifications and dimensions of streams, wetlands or other water
areas proposed for alterations;
         j.   Cross-sections and calculations indicating any changes in flood
storage volumes; and
         k.   Such other information as reasonably requested by City.
      2.   The applicant shall present evidence, prepared by a qualified
professional engineer, that demonstrates that the proposed development activity
will not endanger health and safety, including danger from the obstruction or
diversion of flood flow. The developer shall also show, by submitting
appropriate calculations and resource inventories, that the proposed
development activity will not substantially reduce natural floodwater storage
capacity, destroy valuable habitat for aquatic or other flora and fauna,
adversely affect water quality or groundwater resources, increase stormwater
runoff velocity so that water levels on other lands are substantially raised or
the danger from flooding increased, or adversely impact any other natural
stream, floodplain, or wetland functions, and is otherwise consistent with the
intent of this article.
   F.   Geologic And Soil Report: The site proposed for development shall be
investigated to determine the soil and geologic characteristics, including soil
erosion potential. A report, prepared by a licensed professional engineer,
geoscientist, or soil scientist experienced in the practice of geologic and
soil mechanics, shall be submitted with every application for land development
within the conservation areas. This report shall include a description of soil
type and stability of surface and subsurface conditions. Any area that the
investigation indicates as being subject to geologic or soil hazards shall not
be subjected to development, unless the engineer or soil scientist can
demonstrate conclusively that these hazards can be overcome.
   G.   Hydrologic Controls/Drainage Control Plan:
      1.   A drainage control plan that describes the hydraulic characteristics
of on-site and nearby watercourses as well as the proposed drainage plan,
prepared by a registered professional engineer experienced in hydrology and
hydraulics, shall be submitted with each application for land development
within the conservation areas. Unless otherwise noted, the following
restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to all development within
the conservation areas:
         a.   Natural open-channel drainageways shall be preserved; and
         b.   Runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover (e.g., roofs,
driveways, streets, patios. etc.) shall be collected and transported to a
drainageway (preferably a natural drainageway) with sufficient capacity to
accept the discharge without undue erosion or detrimental impact. Vegetated
drainage swales are preferred over conveyances constructed of concrete or other
manufactured materials.
      2.   The drainage control plan shall identify appropriate measures, such
as recharge basins and detention/retention basins, which will limit the
quantitative and qualitative effects of stormwater runoff to pre-development
conditions.
   H.   Site Grading And Excavation Plan: This subsection applies to the extent
that grading and excavation and erosion control plans which satisfy the
following requirements are not already required by a jurisdiction.
      1.   A site grading and excavation plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, trained and experienced in civil engineering, shall be
submitted with each application for a site development permit and shall include
the following:
         a.   Details of the existing terrain and drainage pattern with one
foot (1') contours;
         b.   Proposed site contours at one foot (1') intervals;
         c.   Dimensions, elevation and contours of grading, excavation and
fill. Slopes of all drainage swales shall be a minimum of two percent (2%)
through the side and rear yard drainage easements;
         d.   A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and
other material that is removed from allowable grading and excavation sites,
including location of the disposal site if on the property;
         e.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be
completed, including the total area of soil surface to be disturbed during each
stage, and estimated starting and completion dates. The schedule shall be
prepared so as to limit, to the shortest possible period, the time soil is
exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to initiation
of the improvements; and
         f.   A detailed description of the revegetation and stabilization
methods to be employed, to be prepared in conjunction with the landscape plan
per subsection I of this section. This description should include locations of
erosion control measures such as sedimentation basins, straw bales, diversion
swales, etc.
      2.   The grading and excavation plan must be consistent with all the
provisions of this article.
      3.   Unless otherwise provided in this article, the following
restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to all development within
the district:
         a.   Every effort shall be made to develop the site in such a manner
so as to minimize the alteration of the natural topography;
         b.   No grading, filling, cleaning, clearing, terracing or excavation
of any kind shall be initiated until final engineering plans are approved and
the site development permit is granted by the City; and
         c.   The depositing of any excavation, grading or clearing material
within a stream, lake, pond or wetland area shall be prohibited.
      4.   In addition to locating all site improvements on the subject
property to minimize adverse impacts on the stream, lake, pond, or wetland, the
applicant shall install a berm, curb, or other physical barrier during
construction and following completion of the project, where necessary, to
prevent direct runoff and erosion from any modified land surface into a stream,
lake, pond, or wetland. All parking and vehicle circulation areas should be
located as far as possible from a stream, lake, pond, or wetland.
      5.   The City may limit development activity in or near a stream, lake,
pond, or wetland to specific months and to a maximum number of continuous days
or hours in order to minimize adverse impacts. Also, the City may require that
equipment be operated from only one side of a stream, lake, or pond in order to
minimize bank disruption. Other development techniques, conditions, and
restrictions may be required in order to minimize adverse impacts on streams,
lakes, ponds or wetlands, and on any related areas not subject to development
activity.
   I.   Natural Vegetation Buffer Strip Required; Vegetation And Revegetation/
Landscape Plan:
      1.   To minimize erosion, stabilize the stream bank, protect water
quality, maintain water temperature at natural levels, preserve fish and
wildlife habitat, screen manmade structures, and preserve aesthetic values of
the natural watercourse and wetland areas, a natural vegetation strip shall be
maintained along the edge of the stream, lake, pond or wetland. The natural
vegetation strip shall be as described in subsection D of this section and
shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, lake or pond and the edge of the wetland.
      2.   Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be
selectively pruned or removed for harvest of merchantable timber, to achieve a
filtered view of the water body from the principal structure and for reasonable
private access to the stream, lake, pond, or wetland. Said pruning and removal
activities shall ensure that a live root system stays intact to provide for
stream bank stabilization and erosion control.
      3.   A landscape plan, prepared by a professional, shall be submitted
with each site development permit application for development activity within
the conservation areas and contain the following:
         a.   A plan describing the existing vegetative cover of the property
and showing those areas where the vegetation will be removed as part of the
proposed construction; and
         b.   A plan describing the proposed revegetation of disturbed areas
specifying the materials to be used.
      4.   The vegetation must be planned in such a way that access for stream
maintenance purposes shall not be prevented.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-7: WATERCOURSE RELOCATION AND MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   When Permitted:
      1.   Watercourse relocation or modification is generally not permitted
because these activities are not usually consistent with the purposes of this
article. Under certain circumstances, relocation and minor modification may be
permitted through a site development permit where certain problems can be
mitigated by relocation and/or minor modification, specifically when:
         a.   Off-site hydrologic conditions are causing erosion, flooding and
related problems; or
         b.   On-site soil and geologic conditions are resulting in unstable
conditions that pose hazards to life, health, and existing structures or
property; or
         c.   The quality of previously modified or relocated streams can be
improved through restoration; or
         d.   Officially adopted stormwater management plans call for placement
of detention or retention facilities in a stream; or
         e.   Public utilities, including sanitary sewers, pipelines, and
roadways, require stream crossing or relocation where there are not practical
alternatives.
      2.   Modification of watercourses as a convenience for site design
purposes is not permitted.
   B.   Conditions And Restrictions For Permitting Stream Modification: Stream
modification, when permitted, is subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
      1.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification. No significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
      2.   The amount of flow and velocity of a stream is not to be increased
or decreased as the stream enters or leaves a subject property, unless this
reflects an improvement over previous conditions in terms of reduced flooding,
reduced erosion, or enhanced low-flow conditions;
      3.   Prior to diverting water into a new channel, a qualified
professional approved by the Administrator shall inspect the stream
modification and issue a written report to the City that the modified stream
complies with the requirements of subsection C of this section; and
      4.   Stream channel enlargement, or other modifications that would
increase conveyance, shall not be permitted if the intended purpose is to
accommodate development activities in the floodplain.
   C.   Required Contents Of Plan: Stream relocation may be permitted in
accordance with a stream relocation plan that provides for:
      1.   The creation of a natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, and
substrate;
      2.   The formation of gentle side slopes (at least 3 feet horizontally
per 1 foot vertically), including installation of erosion control features;
      3.   The utilization of natural materials wherever possible;
      4.   The planting of vegetation normally associated with streams,
including primarily native riparian vegetation;
      5.   The creation of spawning and nesting areas wherever appropriate;
      6.   The re-establishment of the fish population wherever appropriate;
      7.   The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with fish
habitat areas, wherever appropriate;
      8.   The filling and revegetation of the prior channel;
      9.   A proposed phasing plan, specifying time of year for all project
phases;
      10.   Plans for sediment and erosion control; and
   11    Establishment of a low-flow channel that reflects the conditions of a
natural stream,
   D.   Criteria For Permitting Armoring Of Channels And Banks: Armoring in the
form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or devices is not permitted except
in accordance with the following:
      1.   Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way, and the
use of vegetation and gradual bank slopes has not sufficiently stabilized the
shoreline or bank;
      2.   The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland, or
between a wetland and a lake or pond;
      3.   The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the transmittal
of wave energy or currents to other properties; and
      4.   The change in the horizontal or vertical configuration of the land
must be kept to a minimum. Where permission to install bulkheads or other
armoring devices is requested as part of the site development permit
application, documentation and certification pertaining to the items above must
be submitted.
   E.   Criteria For Permitting The Use Of Culverts: Culverts are not permitted
in streams except in accordance with the following:
      1.   Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property. Use
of culverts as a convenience, in order to facilitate general site design, is
not to be considered;
      2.   The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream and
accommodate the 100-year flood event without increasing upstream flooding,
except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an overall
stormwater and floodwater management plan;
      3.   The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to allow
free passage of water, and if applicable, fish; and
      4.   The stream bottom should not be significantly widened for the
placement of a culvert as this increases siltation. If multiple culverts must
be installed, one culvert should be at the level of the bottom of the stream
and the others at or above normal water elevation.
   F.   Criteria For Permitting On-Stream Impoundments: Impoundment of streams
is not permitted except in accordance with the following:
      1.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing regional stormwater detention, flood control, or public recreation;
      2.   The impoundment will not prevent the upstream migration of
indigenous fish species;
      3.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants;
      4.   Impoundments without permanent low-flow pools are preferred, except
where a permanent pool is necessary to achieve the intended benefits of the
impoundment (e.g., recreation or water quality mitigation); and
      5.   Impoundment design shall include gradual bank slopes, appropriate
bank stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-8: IMPACT ASSESSMENT:
The City may ask an applicant to submit a report prepared by a qualified
professional, and approved by the Administrator, in order to assess the
potential impact of proposed development on a lake, stream or wetland and
associated environmentally sensitive areas, including loss of flood storage
potential, loss of habitat, changes in species diversity and quantity, impacts
on water quality, increases in human intrusion, and impacts on associated
streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands or downstream areas.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-9: STREAM MAINTENANCE EASEMENT:
The applicant shall grant an access easement for stream maintenance purposes to
the City over twenty five feet (25') parallel to the stream bank.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-10: THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES:
All developments shall conform to the requirements set forth in 520 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 10/11, which states that a consultation with the department
shall be undertaken to evaluate whether actions proposed by the development are
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of listed endangered or threatened
species or are likely to result in the destruction or adverse modification of
the designated essential habitat of such species. Final disposition of any
disagreement not resolved by nonlocal laws, ordinances, etc., will be made by
the City Council.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-8A-11: SECURITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Security: The applicant may be required to file with the City a letter
of credit or other improvement security satisfactory to the City and in an
amount deemed sufficient by the Administrator to ensure compliance with any
aspect of this article; to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, or
maintenance of improvements and landscaping, for such period as specified by
the City, and engineering and inspection costs; and to cover the cost of
failure of repair of improvements installed on the site.
   B.   Indemnification: Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the
applicant shall enter into an agreement with the City which runs with the
property, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, indemnifying the City for
any damage resulting from development activity on the subject property which is
related to the physical condition of the stream or wetland.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 9: LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE
Section
14-9-1: Responsibility Generally
14-9-2: Transfer To Permitting Authority Or Other Public Entity
14-9-3: Transfer To Homeowners' Or Similar Association
14-9-4: Conveyance To Persons
14-9-5: Incorporation Of Obligations Into Stormwater Management Permit
14-9-6: Funding Of Facilities
14-9-1: RESPONSIBILITY GENERALLY:
   A.   Unless maintenance responsibility has been delegated to and accepted by
another qualified entity under this section, the owner shall maintain that
portion of a stormwater drainage system located upon his land. With the
approval of the Administrator, the stormwater drainage system, or specified
portions thereof, may be:
      1.   Dedicated or otherwise transferred to and accepted by the permitting
community or other public entity; or
      2.   Conveyed or otherwise transferred to and accepted by a homeowners’
association, or similar entity, the members of which are to be the owners of
all of the lots or parcels comprising the development; or
      3.   Conveyed to one or more persons or in one or more undivided
interests to one or more persons.
   B.   Except for those portions of a stormwater drainage system to be
dedicated or otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public
entity, included in the application for a stormwater permit shall be a plan for
the long-term management, operation and maintenance of the stormwater drainage
system and a description of the sources of funding therefor. Amendments to the
plan must be approved by the Administrator.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-9-2: TRANSFER TO PERMITTING AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY:
If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be dedicated or
otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity under
subsection
14-9-1A1 of this chapter, appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and
maintenance of such portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such entity
on the final plat.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-9-3: TRANSFER TO HOMEOWNERS’ OR SIMILAR ASSOCIATION:
If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed or otherwise
transferred to a homeowners’ or similar association under subsection
14-9-1A2 of this chapter, then:
   A.   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of such
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such association and the
permitting authority on the final plat.
   B.   The association shall be duly incorporated and a copy of the
certificate of incorporation, duly recorded, and bylaws, and any amendment to
either of them, shall be delivered to the Administrator.
   C.   The bylaws of the association shall, at a minimum, contain:
      1.   A provision acknowledging and accepting the association's obligation
to maintain certain portions of the stormwater drainage system as required by
this title;
      2.   A mechanism for imposing an assessment upon the owners of all of the
lots or parcels comprising the development sufficient, at a minimum, to provide
for the maintenance of those portions of the stormwater drainage system as
required by this title and the payment of all taxes levied thereon;
      3.   A provision adopting the plan of long-term maintenance set forth in
the application for a stormwater management permit, with approved amendments;
      4.   A provision identifying the officer of the association responsible
for carrying out the obligations imposed upon the association under this title,
and an obligation to inform the Administrator of the name, address and phone
number of this officer and any changes thereto;
      5.   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to any
amendment of the bylaws changing any of the provisions of the bylaws required
by this title; and
      6.   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to the
dissolution of the association.
   D.   Any conveyance or other instrument of transfer delivered under
subsection
14-9-1A2 of this chapter shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon
the association the obligations set forth in this section and the association’s
affirmative acceptance thereof.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-9-4: CONVEYANCE TO PERSONS:
If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed to one or
more persons under subsection
14-9-1A3 of this chapter, then:
   A.   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of such
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the permitting authority on the
final plat;
   B.   The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance
obligations of this section upon the grantee and his successors in interest as
a covenant running with the land and incorporating by reference the plan of
long-term maintenance set forth in the application for a stormwater management
permit, with approved amendments;
   C.   The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the
permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required
in this section if the owner does not do so and to place a lien against the
land for the cost thereof;
   D.   Any conveyance delivered under subsection
14-9-1A3 of this chapter, and any subsequent conveyance, shall include a
covenant affirmatively imposing upon the grantee the obligations, restrictions
and provisions set forth in this section and the grantee's affirmative
acceptance thereof.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-9-5: INCORPORATION OF OBLIGATIONS INTO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be incorporated by reference in the
stormwater management permit, and the applicant’s acceptance of the permit
shall be deemed to be the applicant’s acceptance and assumption of the
obligations imposed under this chapter. At the option of the Administrator, the
stormwater management permit may be recorded.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-9-6: FUNDING OF FACILITIES:
   A.   As a condition of approval of any application for a stormwater
management permit, unless the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater
drainage system to be constructed or installed in connection therewith has been
accepted by a public entity, the Administrator will require assurance of long-
term funding in a form found acceptable to the permitting authority. A
corporation with a bond rating of “A” or higher from a major investment firm
(i.e., Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent) will be considered to have met
the long-term maintenance funding requirement. Absent some other form of
agreement, the Administrator shall require the establishment of a special
service area pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/27-5 et seq., either
as the primary means of providing for the long-term maintenance of the
facilities, or as a backup vehicle in the event the entity designated by the
applicant as having primary maintenance responsibility fails to adequately
carry out its duties.
   B.   If the establishment of a special service area is required, the
Administrator shall consider and approve a good faith estimate by the applicant
of the tax rate required to produce a tax to be levied upon all taxable
property within the area sufficient for the long-term maintenance of the
facilities and submit the same to the permitting authority which shall
incorporate such rate into its enactment of the ordinances necessary for the
establishment of the area.
   C.   On or before August 1 of each year thereafter, the Administrator shall
submit to the permitting authority a good faith estimate of the amount of tax
required to be levied upon all taxable property within the area for the next
fiscal year for the continued maintenance of the stormwater drainage system.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 10: VARIANCES
Section
14-10-1:   Purpose
14-10-2:   Application For Variance
14-10-3:   Application Fee
14-10-4:   Public Hearing
14-10-5:   Standards For Granting Variances
14-10-6:   Administrator Recommendations
14-10-7:   Council Decision
14-10-8:   Conditions Of Variance
14-10-1: PURPOSE:
In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be
granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this title is
impossible or impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this
title may be granted according to the standards set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-2: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
It is the responsibility of the owner or developer and/or their engineer to
review this title and identify any and all variances. An application for a
variance, prepared by the owner or developer’s licensed professional engineer
and signed by the owner or developer of the development to which it relates,
shall be filed with the Administrator. No application for a variance will be
accepted for filing unless it relates to a previously or contemporaneously
filed application for a stormwater management permit. Applications for a
variance shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Administrator
may designate by administrative order. No action will be taken on an
application for a variance unless it and the corresponding application for a
stormwater management permit to which it relates are complete as determined by
the Administrator. Applications for a variance need not be made upon any
specific form, but shall contain the following information:
   A.   The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands comprising the
development.
   B.   The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal title of
all lands comprising the development.
   C.   If title to any of the land comprising the development is held in
trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust.
   D.   The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if different
from the owner.
   E.   The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the developer in
connection with the application for a variance.
   F.   The names and addresses of all property owners within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the development.
   G.   The specific feature or features of the development that require a
variance.
   H.   The specific provision of this title from which a variance is sought
and the precise extent of the variance therefrom.
   I.   A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent
compliance with the provisions of this title.
   J.   A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance
necessary to permit the development.
   K.   A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the standards
set forth in section
14-10-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-3:   APPLICATION FEE:
With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay the
fee prescribed by the City.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-4:   PUBLIC HEARING:
When the application is complete, the Administrator will so notify the
applicant and will schedule a public hearing on the application before the City
Council. Not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the applicant and to all property owners within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the development as disclosed in the application. Within the same
time period, notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a
newspaper published or of general circulation within the City. The notices
given under the section shall set forth the common name, address and legal
description of the development and a brief description of the variance
requested.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-5:   STANDARDS FOR GRANTING VARIANCES:
The City Council shall not grant a variance for a project from the provisions
of this title unless the variance is consistent with the purpose of this title
(section
14-1-1) and meets the following standards based upon substantial evidence
submitted at the hearing:
   A.   The variance will not increase measurably the probability of flood
damage to insurable structures.
   B.   The variance requested is the minimum required considering each of the
following statements of underlying intent of this title and there are no means
other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardships can be avoided
or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable continuation of the
development:
      1.   Detention of stormwater shall also contribute to the improvement of
the quality of stormwater runoff.
      2.   The volume of detention storage provided in open air vegetated
facilities is maximized, consistent with other land use site constraints
including zoning requirements essential for the proposed development.
      3.   Conveyance of stormwater from the project shall not increase peak
discharges from existing off- site conveyance facilities beyond design capacity
for any storm event from the 2-year to the 100-year flood frequency.
      4.   High quality natural areas shall be preserved on the site,
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, stands of native
trees, existing wetlands, natural floodplain storage or other valuable
environmental and biological resources.
   C.   The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of increasing the
density of the development nor impervious areas on the site.
   D.   The variance is not requested solely as a result of economic hardship.
   E.   If applicable, the variance is required due to unique, natural
topographical features of the site.
   F.   The applicant's circumstances are not self-imposed.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-6:   ADMINISTRATOR RECOMMENDATIONS:
The Administrator or his designee shall review the application for a variance
and present his written recommendations to the City Council at the public
hearing. The written recommendations shall be accompanied by written findings
of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth in section
14-10-5 of this chapter, with citations to the evidence taken at the public
hearing.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-7:   COUNCIL DECISION:
The City Council shall grant the variation, grant the variation with
modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within forty five
(45) days of the public hearing, but in the event the City Council does not act
as aforesaid, then the application is denied.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-10-8:   CONDITIONS OF VARIANCE:
   A.   A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted
when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief, but not to the
relief requested.
   B.   In granting a variance, the City Council may impose such specific
conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating to the purposes and
objectives of this title on the applicant as may be necessary or appropriate.
   C.   Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or limitation
to be met by the applicant, upon meeting such conditions, the applicant shall
file evidence to that effect with the Administrator.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 11: FEE-IN-LIEU OF ON-SITE DETENTION
Section
14-11-1: Fee Established; Restrictions
14-11-2: Cost Estimate
14-11-3: Discount For Older Properties
14-11-4: Common Regional Detention Basins
14-11-5: Procedures
14-11-1: FEE ESTABLISHED; RESTRICTIONS:
All single-family residential developments under five (5) acres in size and all
other development under one acre in size may pay a fee of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for each acre-foot of detention which would be required
under this title rather than installing detention facilities on the property,
unless specifically directed to do otherwise by the Administrator or his
designee. The City also shall have the option, for larger properties, of
requiring a fee of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each acre-
foot of detention needed in lieu of the applicant building a basin on-site,
provided the property will discharge stormwater to the City’s storm sewer
system, and the applicant can demonstrate that the redevelopment will not
increase the risk to downstream properties of flooding. Fee- in-lieu solely due
to financial constraints is not allowed. In addition, a redevelopment project
requesting fee-in-lieu of detention must demonstrate a net benefit in water
quality will be realized. The one hundred thousand dollar ($100,000.00) fee may
be adjusted yearly by the Construction Cost Index (CCI).
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-11-2: COST ESTIMATE:
The applicant may provide the City with a detailed, verifiable cost estimate
for actually providing the required storage. If the Administrator or his
designee concurs with the cost estimate, the fee set for fee in-lieu of
detention will be determined by the lesser of the one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per acre-foot or part thereof or the verifiable cost of providing
the required storage.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-11-3: DISCOUNT FOR OLDER PROPERTIES:
To encourage redevelopment of properties that have been within the City limits
for a minimum of fifteen (15) years, the City Council may allow a discount of
up to ninety percent (90%) for projects if there is no increase in impervious
area between the existing development and the proposed redevelopment.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-11-4: COMMON REGIONAL DETENTION BASINS:
In instances where regional benefits and economics of scale can be achieved, it
is encouraged for adjacent property owners to utilize a common regional
detention basin. Special fee districts may be established for areas where a
regional stormwater management plan has been approved by the City Council. Fee-
in-lieu of detention for the detention volume required for the 2-year 24-hour
storm shall require a variance for sites with aggregate development or re-
development greater than twenty (20) acres subsequent to the effective date
hereof unless tributary to a regional stormwater management system approved by
the City Council.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
14-11-5: PROCEDURES:
The following are fee-in-lieu of detention procedures:
   A.   Request For Fee-In-Lieu: The Administrator may require, or the
applicant may submit, a written request for the payment of a fee-in-lieu of on-
site detention to fulfill all or part of the on-site detention requirement. In
accordance with subsection
4-6-1B of this title, a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be
either rejected or approved within forty five (45) days of the written request
unless additional engineering studies are required.
   B.   Approval Of Request: Approval of a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site
detention on a development site shall be determined by the Administrator.
   C.   Disposition Of Revenues:
      1.   A fund will be maintained by the City for each of the major
watersheds for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues and
expenses related to stormwater drainage services resulting from fee-in-lieu of
on-site detention approvals. All monies collected for fee-in-lieu of on-site
detention shall be deposited in these funds and may only be used for purposes
related to stormwater management.
      2.   Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention revenues from a development site
may be used to plan, design or construct an upgrade to existing or future
stormwater management systems if the upgrade is consistent with a basin plan,
floodplain study or stormwater system improvement that has been approved by the
City Council.
(Ord. 2421, 6-24-2014, eff. 6-24-2014)
