CITY CODE
of
WENONA
ILLINOIS
1994
Code current through:
Ord. 051925, passed 5-19-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Wenona, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 051925, passed May 19, 2025, and resolution 2017-
04-17A, passed April 17, 2017. Ordinances of the City adopted after said
ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that they are in
conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to
ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 111725
 
AN ORDINANCE FURTHER AMENDING TITLE 2 CHAPTER 15 OF THE WENONA CITY CODE TO
AMEND THE CITY’S MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL
GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
FOR THE CITY OF WENONA, MARSHALL AND LASALLE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS
                                                               
 
Recitals
 
A.    The City of Wenona, Marshall and LaSalle Counties, Illinois (the “City”)
is a non-home rule municipality, having all of the powers and authority granted
to such municipalities pursuant to Article VII, Section 7 of the Illinois
Constitution of 1970.
 
B.    The City Council passed Ordinance No. 102025 which amended the City’s
grocery tax ordinance per a request from the Illinois Department of Revenue.
 
C.    In accordance with further direction from the Illinois Department of
Revenue, the City Council finds it appropriate, necessary, and in the best
interests of the City and its residents further amend the City’s municipal
grocery tax ordinance as set forth in Title 2 Chapter 15 of the Wenona City
Code.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WENONA,
MARSHALL AND LASALLE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS BELOW.
 
SECTION 1: Recitals. The City Council hereby finds the Recitals stated above
are true and correct and incorporate them into this Ordinance by this
reference.
 
SECTION 2. Amendment of Grocery Tax Ordinance. Title 2 of the Wenona City Code
shall be amended as follows herein ( additions are shown in bold, italics,
underline font ; deletions are shown in strikeout font).
 
CHAPTER 15
 
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
AND GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
 
SECTION:
 
2-15-1:         Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax
2-15-2:         Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
2-15-3:         Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes
2-15-4:      Effective Date
2-15-1:   MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the City of Wenona, at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts collected therefrom after the effective date of this section. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24(a) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
 
2-15-2:   MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the City of Wenona in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax is 1% of the selling price of all groceries transferred by such
servicemen as an incident to a sale of servicecollected therefrom after the
effective date of this section. The imposition of this tax is in accordance
with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24(b) of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
 
2-15-3:   ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
 
The taxes hereby imposed in this Chapter, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance.
 
2-15-4:   EFFECTIVE DATE:
 
The taxes imposed by this Chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2026.
 
SECTION 3. Filing with the Illinois Department of Revenue. As required by
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24), the City
Clerk is directed to file a certified copy of this Ordinance with the Illinois
Department of Revenue before December 1, 2025.
 
SECTION 4: Provisions In Effect. Except as to the amendments heretofore
mentioned, all titles, chapters, articles, and sections of the Wenona City Code
shall remain in full force and effect.
 
SECTION 5: Repealer. All ordinances, resolutions, or policies or parts thereof
in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of the
conflict, expressly repealed.
 
SECTION 6:  Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance or application
thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
this Ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid application or
provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this Ordinance
is severable.
 
SECTION 7: Effective Date and Publication. This Ordinance shall be in full
force and effect upon its passage and approval and publication as required by
law.
 
PASSED  at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Wenona,
Illinois on November 17, 2025, by a roll call vote as follows:
 
 
RECORD OF THE VOTE AYE NAY ABSENT
Anderson
Flanigan
Healy
Simmons
Skaggs
Zulz
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED November 17, 2025                           ATTEST:
?                            ?                        
   Janie Bade, Mayor                                 Deborah Longbons, City Clerk
PUBLISHED  in pamphlet form on November 18, 2025
 
? _________________________________
   Deborah Longbons, City Clerk
 
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) ss      CERTIFICATE OF MUNICIPAL CLERK
COUNTY OF MARSHALL   )
 
   I, the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly qualified and
acting Clerk of the City of Wenona, the County and State aforesaid, and, as
such Clerk, I am the keeper of the records and files of the Mayor and City
Council of the City. I do further certify that the attached and foregoing is a
true and correct copy of ORDINANCE 111725: AN ORDINANCE FURTHER AMENDING TITLE
2 CHAPTER 15 OF THE WENONA CITY CODE TO AMEND THE CITY’S MUNICIPAL GROCERY
RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX as
passed by the City Council of the City of Wenona, Illinois, at its regular
meeting held on November 17, 2025 and as approved by the Mayor of said City on
November 17, 2025.
 
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto affixed my official signature and the
corporate seal of said City of Wenona, Illinois.
 
                                 ?
_________________________________                                       Deborah
Longbons, City Clerk
(SEAL)
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Wenona. This City Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the WENONA CITY CODE, and it is hereby
published by authority of the City Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the City Attorney, acting for said
City Council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by
title in any legal document. (1994 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent
effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1994 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
this City Code. (1994 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this City Code shall make
every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways and Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as
this City Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this City
Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to
such provisions only. (1994 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1994 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City by words importing the singular number only,
or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section of this City
Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where
the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed
in the content of this City Code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend the
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1994 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The City of Wenona, County of Marshall, State of Illinois.
CODE: The Municipal Code of Wenona, Illinois and amendments thereto.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City.
COUNTY: The County of Marshall, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the City of
Wenona".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City of Wenona shall commence on May 1 of
each year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: The Mayor of the City of Wenona.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
MUNICIPAL YEAR: The Municipal year of the City of Wenona shall commence on May
1 in each year.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Wenona".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right of interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood
to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to
write, by his proper mark. (1994 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application of Provisions
1-4-4: Liability of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of any
section or provision of this City Code shall be fined a sum not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense, and the person may be confined
in the County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or be both so
fined and imprisoned. (1994 Code)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this City Code any
license previously issued him by the City may be revoked by the court or by the
City Council. (1994 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this City Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this City Code
where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is
of a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this City Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this City Code the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this City Code and there shall be no fine
or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1994 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Qualifications
1-5-2: Oath; Bond
1-5-3: Duties
1-5-4: Vacancy
1-5-5: Appointment of Officers
1-5-6: Supervise Conduct of Officers
1-5-7: Removal of Officers; Disapproval
1-5-8: Ordinances; Approval, Veto
1-5-9: Signature; Licenses, Permits and Warrants
1-5-10: Examine Records
1-5-11: Release Prisoners
1-5-12: Compensation
1-5-13: President Pro Tempore
1-5-14: Emergency Powers
1-5-1: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City. He shall be a
citizen of the United States, a qualified elector, reside within the City
limits and shall hold his office for four (4) years, and until his successor is
elected and qualified. (1994 Code)
1-5-2: OATH; BOND:
The Mayor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and
subscribe the following oath or affirmation:
   I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of Mayor of the City of Wenona,
Illinois, according to the best of my ability.
Which oath or affirmation, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk; and he shall also execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with such sureties as the members of the City
Council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties
of the office. (1994 Code)
1-5-3: DUTIES:
The Mayor shall see that all ordinances of the City are duly enforced; shall
preside at all meetings of the City Council but shall not vote except in case
of a tie, when he shall cast the deciding vote; he shall preserve order and
decorum at all meetings of the City Council, and shall generally do and perform
all acts and things which are enjoined upon him by the laws of the State of
Illinois and the ordinances of the City. (1994 Code)
1-5-4: VACANCY:
When a vacancy shall occur in the office of the Mayor on account of death,
resignation, removal from the City, or other cause, it shall be filled by an
election, and the Clerk shall give notice of such election as required by law
and ordinance governing special elections. (1994 Code)
1-5-5: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The Mayor and City Council may appoint a Clerk Pro Tempore whenever necessary
to fill a vacancy; and may also appoint a Treasurer, a Superintendent of Water
and Sewer, a Superintendent of Streets and Alleys and such other officers as
may be necessary to carry into effect the powers conferred upon the City, and
may prescribe their duties and fees, and require such officers to execute bonds
as may be prescribed by ordinance. (1994 Code)
1-5-6: SUPERVISE CONDUCT OF OFFICERS:
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the City and see that
they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their respective
offices. He shall inquire into all reasonable complaints made against them, and
cause all their neglects or violations of duty to be promptly corrected. He
shall, in case he becomes satisfied that any officer wilfully neglects or
violates his duty, cause such officer to be prosecuted and punished. (1994
Code)
1-5-7: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS; DISAPPROVAL:
The Mayor shall have power to remove any officer appointed by him on any formal
charge whenever he shall be of the opinion that the interests of the City
demand such removal, and he shall report the reasons for such removal to the
City Council at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) days nor more than
ten (10) days after such removal. If the Mayor shall fail or refuse to file
with the City Clerk a statement of the reasons for such removal, or if the City
Council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be
elected, by yeas and nays to be entered upon its records, disapprove of such
removal, such officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from which
he was so removed; but he shall give new bonds and take a new oath of office.
No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense. (1994 Code)
1-5-8: ORDINANCES; APPROVAL, VETO:
The Mayor shall carefully inspect all ordinances passed by the City Council and
affix his official signature to such as he may approve, and return them to the
City Clerk within ten (10) days after their passage; and all ordinances passed
as aforesaid which do not meet his approval shall be returned to the City
Council with his objections thereto in writing at the next regular meeting of
the Council, occurring not less than five (5) days after the passage thereof.
Such veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations contained in
any ordinance or to the entire ordinance; and in case the veto extends only to
a part of such ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and be in
force; but in case the Mayor shall fail to return any ordinance with his
objections thereto by the time aforesaid, he shall be deemed to have approved
such ordinance and the same shall take effect accordingly. (1994 Code)
1-5-9: SIGNATURE; LICENSES, PERMITS AND WARRANTS:
The Mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants granted,
issued or drawn by the order of the City Council, or authorized by the
ordinances of the City. In all contracts where the City is a party, he shall
sign the same on behalf of the City, and it shall be his special duty to see
that the other contracting party faithfully complies with the contract, and in
all suits where the City is a party, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to
advise with and assist the City Attorney in prosecuting or defending the same,
as the case may be. (1994 Code)
1-5-10: EXAMINE RECORDS:
The Mayor shall at all times have the power to examine and inspect the books,
records and papers of any agent, employee or other officer of the City. (1994
Code)
1-5-11: RELEASE PRISONERS:
The Mayor may release any person imprisoned for violation of any City ordinance
and shall report such release with the cause thereof to the City Council at its
first session thereafter. (1994 Code)
1-5-12: COMPENSATION:
The Mayor shall receive the compensation established by the City Council. An
increase or decrease in the salary of the Mayor shall not take effect during
the term for which that Mayor is elected. The Mayor may receive reimbursement
from the Municipality for expenses incurred in attending meetings of the City
Council or for such other expenses as may be incurred when in the course of his
duties as Mayor. (1994 Code)
1-5-13: PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE:
During the temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the City Council shall
elect one of its number to act as President Pro Tempore, who, during such
absence or disability shall possess the powers and duties of the Mayor. (1994
Code)
1-5-14: EMERGENCY POWERS:
   A.   The Mayor and City Council of the City of Wenona (the "Corporate
Authorities") authorize the Mayor to render a declaration of a state of
emergency within the City based on the following findings and supporting facts:
      1.   Any type of emergency, natural disaster or catastrophe which will
likely cause damage, injury, losses, hardship or suffering to the community or
its residents, which can be construed broadly to include disease epidemics and
other public health emergencies, is imminent or has occurred; and
      2.   The emergency is severe enough to require the declaration of
emergency in order to supplement local resources in preventing loss of life or
injury, alleviating damages, loss, hardship or suffering or to necessitate
measures to be taken, including the identification of any applicable
procedures, rules or regulations that will be waived or suspended, during the
emergency.
   B.   The exercise of these powers shall be based upon a statement, signed
under oath by the Mayor, finding that the standards herein which form the basis
for such a declaration have been met, along with those facts which substantiate
such a finding and declaring that a state of emergency exists.
   C.   This written declaration shall be filed with the City Clerk as soon as
practicable.
   D.   Based on the nature of the danger to the public health or safety as set
forth in the Mayor's declaration of emergency, the Corporate Authorities
authorize:
      1.   The Mayor to exercise, by executive order, such powers of the
Corporate Authorities as may be reasonably necessary to respond to the
emergency; and
      2.   The Mayor to exercise, by executive order, the authority to let
contracts to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency upon declaration,
without public advertisement.
   E.   Any state of emergency declared pursuant to this authority shall expire
no later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the Corporate
Authorities after the state of emergency has been declared in accordance with
section 11-1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-1-6); however, if the state of emergency has not been resolved as of
commencement of the first regular meeting of the Corporate Authorities after
the state of emergency has been declared, the authorizations set forth above in
this section shall remain in full force and effect without further action by
the Mayor or Corporate Authorities until such state of emergency has been
resolved as declared in writing by the Mayor or until the authorizations are
withdrawn by passage of an ordinance by an affirmative majority vote the
Corporate Authorities at a public meeting.
   F.   A declaration of emergency pursuant to this authority may not suspend
in any way the rights of residents of the City under the Illinois Constitution
or the United States Constitution. (Ord. 03162020, 3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Members; Vacancies
1-6-2: Meetings
1-6-3: Rules Of Order And Business
1-6-4: Legislative Body
1-6-5: Quorum
1-6-6: Voting; Reconsideration
1-6-7: Powers
1-6-8: Compensation
1-6-9: Appointment Of Committees
1-6-10: Duties Of Standing Committees
1-6-11: Report Of Committee; Deferment
1-6-12: Territorial Jurisdiction
1-6-13: Ordinances
1-6-14: Municipal Year And Fiscal Year
1-6-15: Annual Appropriation Ordinance
1-6-16: Limitation Of Expenditures
1-6-17: Contract; Appropriation Required
1-6-18: Tax Levies
1-6-1: MEMBERS; VACANCIES:
The city council shall consist of six (6) members, two (2) from each of the
city's three (3) wards, three (3) of whom shall be elected every other year, to
hold office for a term of four (4) years and until their successors are elected
and qualified. If any vacancy shall occur in the office of city council by
death, resignation, removal or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled by
election. (1994 Code)
1-6-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council of the city
shall be held at the city hall on the third Monday of each month during the
year at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., except when Monday shall be a public
holiday, in which case the council shall meet on the day after. Adjourned
meetings may be held for the purpose of completing the unfinished business of
the regular meeting at such time or times within two (2) weeks immediately
following such regular meeting, as may be determined by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 021516A, 2-15-2016, eff. 3-1-2016)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the city council may be called by
the mayor or any three (3) members of the council whenever in their discretion
it is deemed necessary, in which event such meeting shall be called in the
following manner:
      1.   The mayor or any three (3) councilmen, as the case may be, shall
file in the office of the city clerk, a statement in writing, setting forth the
object and purpose of such special meeting and directing the clerk to give
notice of same.
      2.   The city clerk shall thereupon cause to be served personally upon
each member of the council or left at his residence or usual place of business,
a notice of the time, place and object of said special meeting, which notice
shall be served at least six (6) hours before the time of holding said special
meeting. No business other than that mentioned in such notice shall be
transacted at such special meeting.
      3.   Public notice of any special meeting or of any rescheduled regular
meeting, or of any reconvened meeting shall be given at least twenty four (24)
hours before such meeting.
      4.   This requirement of public notice of reconvened meetings does not
apply to any case where the meeting is to be reconvened within twenty four (24)
hours nor to any case where announcement of the time and place of the
reconvened meeting was made at the original meeting, and there is no change in
the agenda.
      5.   Public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice at the
principal office of the body holding the meeting, and the council shall supply
copies of notices of regular meetings and of special, rescheduled or reconvened
meetings to any local newspaper or radio station that has filed an annual
request for such notice.
      6.   No business shall be transacted in any such meeting except such as
the meeting was called for and notification given therefor, except by the vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council elected.
   C.   Open To The Public: All meetings, whether regular, special, rescheduled
or reconvened shall be open to the public as provided by the statutes of the
state of Illinois.
   D.   Speaking Before City Council: Any person wanting to speak before the
city council must contact the city clerk three (3) days before the meeting.
(1994 Code)
   E.   Public Comment:
      1.   "Public comment" shall be listed on the agenda for each regularly
and specially scheduled city council and committee meeting and persons shall be
allowed to address the public officials at a meeting as set forth in this
subsection E.
      2.   Public comment shall be limited to three (3) minutes per speaker on
any matter relevant to issues or matters relating to the city. The three (3)
minute time limit shall apply unless the public officials, by a majority vote,
sets a lower or higher time limit for comment on a particular subject which
shall apply to all speakers addressing the specified subject.
      3.   Speakers may address the public officials when recognized by the
mayor or presiding officer.
      4.   Speakers shall address the public officials from a speaking area
designated for use for public comment by the city council or committee.
      5.   Any speaker who engages in threatening or disorderly behavior when
addressing the public officials shall be deemed out of order by the mayor or
the presiding officer and his or her time to address the public officials at
the meeting shall end.
      6.   Outbursts from the audience, applause, or other types of
disturbances or disruptions will not be tolerated.
      7.   After verbal warnings, a person disturbing a meeting may be asked to
leave the meeting room or be physically removed if the person does not leave
voluntarily. In addition, a person disturbing a meeting is subject to the
issuance of a citation.
      8.   Public comment shall be allowed in a similar manner at all committee
meetings or meetings of subsidiary bodies of the city. (Res. 2016-02-15A, 2-15-
2016)
1-6-3: RULES OF ORDER AND BUSINESS:
    RULES OF BUSINESS
   1.   Roll call.
   2.   The reading of the minutes of the proceedings of the last meeting,
amendment and approval of the same.
   3.   Communications.
   4.   The presentation of petitions.
   5.   Reports of city officers.
   6.   Reports of standing committees.
   7.   Reports of special committees.
   8.   Unfinished business of preceding meeting.
   9.   Motions, resolutions and notices.
   10.   Miscellaneous business not otherwise provided for.
   RULES
   1.   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided
without debate.
   2.   The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and shall decide all
questions of order, subject to an appeal to the city council. He shall conduct
all business before the city council, with fairness and impartiality, to a
speedy and proper result.
   3.   While the mayor is putting the question or deciding a point of order,
the members shall be seated, and no member shall leave the chamber without
permission from the city council.
   4.   Every member, previous to his speaking, shall address himself to the
mayor, and shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the
chair.
   5.   When two (2) or more members address the mayor at once, then the mayor
shall name the member who speaks first.
   6.   No member shall speak more than twice to the same general question, nor
more than once to a "previous question" without leave of the city council, nor
more than once in any case until every member choosing to speak shall have
spoken.
   7.   A member called to order shall immediately be silent, unless permitted
to explain. If there be no appeal, the decision of the chair shall be
conclusive, but if the member appeals to the city council from the decision of
the chair, the city council shall decide the matter without debate, and the
question to be put shall be, "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?".
   8.   Every member present, when a question is stated by the chair, shall
vote thereon, unless excused by the city council or unless he be directly
interested in the question, in which case he shall not vote.
   9.   No motion shall be debated or put unless it be seconded, and when a
motion is so seconded it shall be stated by the chair before debate, and every
such motion shall be reduced to writing upon request of the mayor or any member
of the city council.
   10.   After a motion or resolution is stated by the chair, it shall be
deemed in possession of the city council, but may be withdrawn at any time
before a decision or amendment by the maker thereof, with the consent of the
member seconding the same.
   11.   If the question in debate contains several distinct propositions, any
member may upon request have the same divided.
   12.   When a question is under debate no motion shall be received unless for
the "previous question", "to lay it on the table", "to amend it", or "to
adjourn the City Council".
   13.   A motion for the "previous question", "to lay the question on the
table", or "to commit it", until it is decided, shall preclude all amendment
and debate on the main question; and a motion to postpone a question
indefinitely or to adjourn it to a certain day until it is decided, shall
preclude all amendments to the main question.
   14.   The "previous question" shall be as follows: "Shall the main question
be now put?"
   15.   A motion to adjourn the City Council shall always be in order and
shall be decided without debate, unless the motion shall be to adjourn to a
certain day, when the same may be debated.
   16.   In all cases when a resolution or motion shall be entered on the
minutes of the City Council, the name of the member moving the same shall be
entered upon the minutes.
   17.   If any member so requests, the ayes and noes shall be taken upon any
question and entered upon the minutes.
   18.   All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor unless otherwise
required by law.
   19.   All reports of committees shall be addressed to the "Mayor and City
Council of the City of Wenona".
   20.   When amendments are offered to any question, the vote shall be first
taken upon the last amendment proposed.
   21.   The election of any member of the City Council to the Chair during the
temporary absence of the Mayor shall not deprive such member of his vote as
chairman of the committee he represents. No vote shall be deemed carried unless
by a majority of the members present.
   22.   Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of the City
Council when not in conflict with the foregoing rules. (1994 Code)
1-6-4: LEGISLATIVE BODY:
The legislative and governing body of the City shall consist of the Mayor of
the City and six (6) Councilmen elected for four (4) year terms, two (2) from
each ward, according to the method provided by statute who shall possess the
qualifications for office, be elected by the legal voters of the Municipality,
take the oath of office, and perform the duties provided by the Illinois
Statutes. (1994 Code)
1-6-5: QUORUM:
A majority of the Council elected shall constitute a quorum to do business, but
a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel the attendance
of absentees, under penalty prescribed herein.
In case there be no quorum at any meeting of the City Council, it shall be the
duty of the Mayor, if a majority of the members present so direct, to order the
Chief of Police or any police officer to immediately arrest and bring in all
absent members that can be found in the City who are not unable through
sickness to attend. Any member who purposely absents himself from the City to
avoid attending any meeting of the Council, or who, being in the City, conceals
himself from such officer or refuses to be brought in when found, shall be
deemed guilty of disorderly conduct and be subjected to a fine of twenty
dollars ($20.00). The City Council may, with the concurrence of two-thirds (2/
3) of all the Councilmen elected, expel such member, in which event his seat
shall be deemed vacant and be filled by an election. (1994 Code)
1-6-6: VOTING; RECONSIDERATION:
Each member of the City Council shall vote on all questions in which he is not
personally interested, which may be brought before the Council for its action
in such manner as to require a vote to be taken thereon, unless such member be
excused by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all other members present.
No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special
meeting, unless at such special meeting there be present as large a number of
Councilmen as were present when such vote was taken. (1994 Code)
1-6-7: POWERS:
The City Council shall have the following powers:
To control the finances and property of the City.
To appropriate money for City purposes only, and provide for payment of debts
and expenses of the City.
To levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on real and personal
property.
To fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses.
To borrow money on the credit of the City for City purposes, and issue bonds
therefor, in such amounts and form, and on such conditions as it shall
prescribe, but shall not become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an
amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate to exceed five
percentum (5%) on the value of the taxable property therein, to be ascertained
by the last assessment for the State and County taxes previous to the incurring
of such indebtedness, and before or at the time of incurring any indebtedness,
shall provide for the collection of a    direct annual tax sufficient to pay
the interest on such debt as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the
principal thereof within twenty (20) years after contracting the same.
To issue bonds in place of or to supply means to meet maturing bonds or for the
consolidation of funding of the same.
To lay out, to establish, open, alter, widen, extend, grade, pave or otherwise
improve streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, parks and public grounds and
vacate the same.
To plant trees upon the streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, parks and public
grounds.
To regulate the use of streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, parks and public
grounds.
To prevent and remove encroachments or obstructions upon streets, alleys,
avenues, sidewalks, parks and public grounds.
To provide for the lighting of streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and public
grounds.
To provide for the cleaning of streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, parks and
public grounds.
To regulate the openings therein for the laying of gas or water mains and
pipes, and the building and repairing of sewers, tunnels and drains, and
erecting gas lights; provided, however, that any company heretofore organized
under the general laws of this State, or any association of persons organized
or which may be hereafter organized for the purpose of manufacturing
illuminating gas to supply the City, or the inhabitants thereof, with the same,
shall have the right, by consent of the City Council, (subject to existing
rights), to erect gas factories, and lay down pipes in the streets or alleys of
the City, subject to such regulations as the City may by ordinance impose.
To regulate the use of sidewalks and all structures thereunder, and to require
the owner or occupant of any premises to keep the sidewalks in front of, or
along the same, free from obstructions.
To regulate and prevent the throwing or depositing of ashes, offal, dirt,
garbage or any offensive matter in, and to prevent injury to any street,
avenue, alley or public ground.
To provide for and regulate crosswalks, curbs and gutters.
To regulate and prevent the use of streets, sidewalks and public grounds for
signs, signposts, awnings, awning posts, telegraph poles, and racks posting
handbills and advertisements.
To regulate and prohibit the exhibition or carrying of banners, placards,
advertisements or handbills in the streets or public grounds, or upon the
sidewalks.
To regulate and prevent the flying of flags, banners or signs across the
streets or from houses.
To regulate traffic and sales upon the streets, sidewalks and public places.
To regulate the speed of vehicles, cars and locomotives within the limits of
the City.
To regulate the numbering of houses and lots.
To name and change the name of any street, avenue, alley or other public place.
To provide for and change the location, grade and crossings of any railroad.
To require railroad companies to keep flagmen at railroad crossings of streets,
and provide protection against injury to persons and property in the use of
such railroads. To compel such railroads to raise or lower their railroad
tracks to conform to any grade which may, at any time be established by the
City, and where such tracks run lengthwise of any such street or highway, to
keep their railroad tracks on a level with the street surface, and so that such
tracks may be crossed at any place on such street, alley or highway. To compel
and require railroad companies to make and keep open and to keep in repair
ditches, drains, sewers and culverts along and under their railroad tracks, so
that filthy or stagnant pools of water cannot stand on their grounds or right
of way, and so that the natural drainage of adjacent property shall not be
impeded.
To construct and keep in repair bridges, viaducts and tunnels, and to regulate
the use thereof.
To construct and keep in repair culverts, drains, sewers and cesspools, and to
regulate the use thereof.
To deepen, widen, dock, cover, wall, alter or change the channel of
watercourses.
To provide for the cleansing and purification of waters, watercourses and
canals, and the draining or filling of ponds on private property, whenever
necessary to prevent or abate nuisances.
To license, tax, regulate, suppress and prohibit hawkers, peddlers and
pawnbrokers, keepers of ordinances, theatricals and other exhibitions, shows
and amusements, and to revoke such license at pleasure.
To license, tax and regulate hackmen, draymen, omnibus drivers, carters,
cabmen, porters, expressmen, and all others pursuing like occupations, and to
prescribe their compensation.
To adopt and enforce codes to regulate construction and reconstruction or
remodeling of buildings and other improvements to land; and further to adopt
codes which enforce the maintenance of improvements to land.
To license, regulate, tax or prohibit and suppress billiard, bagatelle,
pigeonhole or any other tables or implements kept or used for a similar purpose
in any place of public resort, pin alleys or ball alleys.
To suppress bawdy and disorderly houses, houses of ill-fame or assignation,
within the limits of the City, and within three (3) miles of the outer
boundaries of the City; and also to suppress gaming and gambling houses,
lotteries, and all fraudulent devices and practices for the purpose of gaming
or obtaining money or property; and to prohibit the sale or exhibition of
obscene or immoral publications, prints, pictures or illustrations.
To license, regulate and prohibit the selling or giving away of any
intoxicating, malt, vinous, mixed or fermented liquor, the license not to
extend beyond the Municipal year in which it shall be granted, and to determine
the amount to be paid for such license; provided, that the Mayor and City
Council may grant permits to druggists for the sale of liquors for medicinal,
mechanical, sacramental and chemical purposes only, subject to forfeiture, and
under such restrictions and regulations, as may be provided by ordinances;
provided further, that in granting licenses such City authorities shall comply
with whatever general law of the State may be in force relative to the granting
of licenses.
To forbid and punish the selling or giving away of any intoxicating, malt,
vinous, mixed or fermented liquor to any minor, apprentice or servant, or
insane, idiotic or distracted person, habitual drunkard, or person intoxicated.
To establish markets and market houses, and provide for the regulation and use
thereof.
To regulate the sale of meats, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables,
and all other provisions, and to provide for place and manner of selling the
same.
To provide for the inspection and sealing of weights and measures.
To enforce the keeping and use of proper weights and measures by vendors.
To regulate the construction, repairs and use of vaults, cisterns, areas,
hydrants, pumps, sewers and gutters.
To regulate places of amusement.
To prevent intoxication, fighting, quarreling, dogfights, cockfights, and all
disorderly conduct.
To regulate partition fences and party walls.
To prescribe the thickness, strength and manner of constructing stone, brick
and other buildings, and construction of fire escapes therein.
For the purposes of guarding against the calamities of fire, to prescribe the
limits within which wooden buildings shall not be erected or placed or
repaired, without permission, and to direct that all and any building within
the fire limits, when the same shall have been damaged by fire, decay or
otherwise, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of value, shall be torn down or
removed, and to prescribe the manner of ascertaining such danger.
To prevent the dangerous construction and condition of chimneys, fireplaces,
hearths, stoves, stovepipes, ovens, boilers and apparatus used in and about any
building or factory, and to cause the same to be removed or placed in a safe
condition, when considered dangerous; to regulate and prevent the carrying on
of factories dangerous in causing and promoting fires; to prevent the deposit
of ashes in unsafe places, and to cause all such buildings and enclosures as
may be in a dangerous state to be put in a safe condition.
To erect engine houses, and provide for engines, hose cart, hooks and ladders,
and other implements for prevention and extinguishment of fires, and provide
for the use and management of the same by voluntary fire companies or
otherwise.
To regulate and prevent storage of gunpowder, tar, pitch, resin, coal oil,
benzine, turpentine, hemp, cotton, nitroglycerine, petroleum, or any of the
products thereof, and other combustible or explosive material, and the use of
lights in stables, shops and other places, and the building of bonfires; also
to regulate and restrain the use of fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, Roman
candles, skyrockets and other pyrotechnic displays.
To regulate the police of the City, and pass and enforce all necessary police
ordinances.
To provide for the inspection of steam boilers.
To prescribe the duties and powers of a chief of police, policemen and
watchmen.
To use the County jail for the confinement or punishment of offenders, subject
to such conditions as are imposed by law, and with the consent of the County
Board.
To provide for ordinances in regard to the relation between all the officers
and employees of the City in respect to each other, the City and the people.
To prevent and suppress riots, routs, affrays, noises, disturbances, disorderly
assemblies in any public or private place.
To prohibit and punish cruelty to animals.
To restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants and prostitutes.
To declare what shall be a nuisance, and to abate the same, and to impose fines
upon parties who may create, continue or suffer nuisances to exist.
To appoint a Board of Health, and prescribe its powers and duties.
To direct and establish hospitals and medical dispensaries, and control and
regulate the same.
To do all acts, make all regulations which may be necessary or expedient for
the promotion of health or the suppression of disease.
To establish and regulate cemeteries within or without the City, and acquire
lands therefor, by purchase or otherwise, and cause cemeteries to be removed,
and prohibit their establishment within one mile of the City.
To regulate, restrain and prohibit the running at large of horses, cattle,
swine, sheep, goats, geese and dogs, and to impose a tax on dogs.
To direct the location and regulate the management and construction of packing
houses, renderies, tallow chandleries, bone factories, soap factories and
tanneries, within the limits of the City, and within the distance of one mile
without the City limits.
To direct the location and regulate the use and construction of breweries,
distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith shops and foundries within the limits
of the City.
To prohibit any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment within three
(3) miles of the limits of the City.
To compel the owner of any grocery, cellar, soap or tallow chandlery, tannery,
stable, pigsty, privy, sewer, or other unwholesome or nauseous house or place,
to cleanse, abate or remove the same, and to regulate the location thereof.
To provide for the taking of the city census, but no city census shall be taken
by authority of the city council more often than once in three (3) years.
To provide for the erection and care of public buildings necessary for the use
of the city.
To establish ferries, toll bridges, and license and regulate the same, and,
from time to time, fix tolls thereon.
To authorize the construction of mills, millraces and feeders on, through or
across the streets of the city, at such places and under such restrictions as
it shall deem proper.
By condemnation or otherwise, to extend any street, alley or highway over or
across, or to construct any sewer under or through any railroad track, right of
way, or land of any railroad company (within the city limits); but where no
compensation is made to such railroad company, the city shall restore such
railroad track, right of way or land to its former state, or in a sufficient
manner not to have impaired its usefulness.
The city council shall have no power to grant the use of or the right to lay
down any railroad tracks in any street of the city to any steam, dummy,
electric, cable, horse or other railroad company, whether the same shall be
incorporated under any general or special law of the state now or hereafter in
force, except upon the petition of the owners of the land representing more
than one-half (1/2) of the frontage of the street, or so much thereof as is
sought to be used for railroad purposes; and when the street or part thereof
sought to be used shall be more than one mile in extent, no petition of
landowners shall be valid unless the same shall be signed by the owners of the
land representing more than one-half (1/2) of the frontage of each mile and of
the fraction of a mile if any in excess of the whole miles measuring from the
initial point named in such petition, of such street or the part thereof sought
to be used for such railroad purposes.
To tax, license and regulate auctioneers, distillers, brewers, lumberyards,
livery stables, public scales, money changers or brokers.
To regulate and prohibit the keeping of any lumberyard, and the placing or
piling or selling any lumber, timber, wood or other combustible material,
within the free limits of the city.
To tax, license and regulate secondhand and junk stores, and to forbid their
purchasing or receiving from minors, without the written consent of their
parents or guardians, any article whatsoever.
To pass all ordinances, rules, and make all regulations, proper or necessary,
to carry into effect the powers granted to the city, with such fines or
penalties as the city council shall deem proper. (1994 Code)
1-6-8: COMPENSATION:
Each councilman shall receive six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year payable on
a quarterly basis in October, January, April and July. (Ord. 070505, 7-5-2005)
Each councilman may receive reimbursement from the municipality for expenses
incurred in attending meetings of the city council or for such other expenses
as may be incurred by the councilman when in the course of his duties as
councilman. (1994 Code)
1-6-9: APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of the mayor, at the first regular meeting of the council
in May of each year or as soon thereafter as practicable, to appoint six (6)
standing committees, each to consist of three (3) members of the council, which
committees shall be as follows:
   Committee on finance
   Committee on streets and alleys
   Committee on insurance and purchasing
   Committee on water and sewer
   Committee on parks and recreation
   Committee on health and public safety
(1994 Code)
1-6-10: DUTIES OF STANDING COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duties of the standing committees of the city council to
maintain close watch of the affairs of their respective departments of the city
government. They shall have the general management, control and supervision
over all works and things ordered by the council in their respective
departments. They shall report to the council such facts as they deem of
importance in connection therewith. Each committee shall promptly and
thoroughly investigate and report, in writing, upon all matters referred to it
by the council, and the chairman thereof shall promptly return to the city
clerk all petitions, communications and other papers which have been delivered
to him. The committees shall perform such other and further duties as the City
Council may from time to time direct. (1994 Code)
1-6-11: REPORT OF COMMITTEE; DEFERMENT:
Any report of a committee of the Council shall be deferred for final action
thereon, to the next regular meeting of the same, after the report is made,
upon the request of any two (2) members present. (1994 Code)
1-6-12: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
The City Council shall have jurisdiction in and over all places within one-half
(1/2) mile of the City limits for the purpose of enforcing health and
quarantine ordinances and the regulations thereof. It shall have the power to
suppress bawdy and disorderly houses, houses of ill-fame or assignation within
the limits of the City and within three (3) miles of the outer boundaries
thereof. (1994 Code)
1-6-13: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Publication, Effect: All ordinances of the City imposing any fine,
penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any appropriation, shall, within
one month after they are passed, be published by posting copies of the same in
three (3) public places in the City. No such ordinance shall take effect until
ten (10) days after it is so published. All other ordinances, orders and
resolutions shall take effect from and after their passage, unless otherwise
provided therein. Provided, that when such ordinances are printed in book or
pamphlet form by authority of the City Council, the same shall not be otherwise
published.
   B.   Passage Over Veto: In case the Mayor shall veto any ordinance or any
part of an ordinance and return the same to the Council, together with his
objections thereto, the vote by which the same was passed shall be reconsidered
by the Council. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the
members elected to the City Council shall agree to pass the same, it shall go
into effect, notwithstanding the Mayor may refuse to approve thereof. The vote
to pass the same over the Mayor's veto shall be taken by yeas and nays, and
entered on the journal.
   C.   Requirement of Yeas and Nays: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability
against the City, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in
all other cases at the request of any member, which shall be entered on the
journal of the proceedings. A concurrence of a majority of all the members
elected to the City Council shall be necessary to the passage of any such
ordinance or proposition; provided it shall require three-fourths (3/4) of all
Councilmen elected to sell City property. (1994 Code)
1-6-14: MUNICIPAL YEAR AND FISCAL YEAR:
The Municipal and fiscal year of the City shall commence on May 1 in each year.
(1994 Code)
1-6-15: ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE:
The City Council shall, within the first quarter of each fiscal year, pass an
ordinance to be termed the annual appropriation bill, in which such City
authorities may appropriate such sum or sums of money as may be deemed
necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the City, and any
such ordinance shall specify the object and purpose for which such
appropriations are made, and the amount appropriated for each object or
purpose. No further appropriations shall be made at any other time within such
fiscal year, unless the proposition to make such appropriation has been first
sanctioned by a majority of the legal voters of such City, either by a petition
signed by them, or at a general or special election duly called therefor. (1994
Code)
1-6-16: LIMITATION OF EXPENDITURES:
Neither the City Council, nor any department or officer of the City shall add
to the City expenditures in any one year anything over and above the amount
provided for in the annual appropriation of that year except as in the statute
otherwise expressly provided. No expenditure for improvement to be paid for out
of the General Fund of the City shall exceed, in one year, the amount provided
for such improvement in the annual appropriation bill; provided however, that
nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council from ordering, by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote, an improvement, the necessity for which is caused by any
casualty or accident happening after such annual appropriation is made. The
City Council may, by a like vote, order the Mayor and Finance Committee to
borrow a sufficient amount to provide for the expense necessary to be incurred
in making any improvements, the necessity for which has arisen as is last
abovementioned for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next fiscal
year, which sum, and the interest, shall be added to the amount authorized to
be raised in the next general tax levy, and embraced therein. Should any
judgment be obtained against the City, the Mayor and Finance Committee, under
the sanction of the City Council, may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the
same, for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next fiscal year,
which sum and interest shall in like manner be added to the amount authorized
to be raised in the general tax levy of the next year and embraced therein.
(1994 Code)
1-6-17: CONTRACT; APPROPRIATION REQUIRED:
No contract shall be hereafter made by the City Council, or any committee or
member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or
departments of the City, whether the objects of the expenditures shall have
been ordered by the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have
been previously made, concerning such expense, except as by statute otherwise
expressly provided. (1994 Code)
1-6-18: TAX LEVIES:
   A.   Annual Tax Levy: The City Council shall annually, on or before the
third Tuesday in September of each year, ascertain the total amount of
appropriation for all corporate purposes legally made, and to be collected from
the tax levy of that fiscal year, and by an ordinance specifying in detail the
purpose for which such appropriations are made, and the sum or amount
appropriated for each purpose, respectively, levy the amount so ascertained
upon all the property subject to taxation within the City as the same is
assessed and equalized for State and County purposes for the current year.
Provided, the aggregate amount of taxes levied for any one year, exclusive of
the amount levied for the payment of bonded indebtedness or the interest
thereon, shall not exceed the rate of two percent (2%) upon the aggregate
valuation of all the property within the City subject to taxation therein as
the same was equalized for State and County taxes for the current year. A
certified copy of such ordinance shall be filed with the County Clerk of
Marshall County.
   B.   Special Tax Levy: Whenever the City is required to levy a tax for the
payment of any particular debt, appropriation, or liability of the same, the
tax for such purpose shall be included in the total amount assessed by the City
Council, and certified to the County Clerk as aforesaid, but the City Council
shall determine, in the ordinance making such assessment, what proportion of
such total amount shall be applicable to the payment of such particular debt,
appropriation, or liability. The City Treasurer shall set apart such proportion
of the tax collected and paid to him for the payment of such particular debt,
appropriation or liability, and shall not disburse the same for any other
purpose until such debt, appropriation or liability shall have been discharged.
   C.   Uniformity of Taxes: All taxes levied or assessed by the City, except
special assessments for local improvements, shall be uniform upon all taxable
property and persons within the limits of the City, and no property shall be
exempt therefrom other than such property as may be exempt from taxation under
the Constitution and general laws of the State. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Records
1-7-2: Disposition Of Money
1-7-3: Oath Of Officers
1-7-4: Compensation
1-7-5: Conservators Of The Peace
1-7-6: Code Of Ethics
1-7-7: Paid Leave For All Workers Act
1-7-1: RECORDS:
All records kept by an appointive officer, agent or employee of the city shall
be open to inspection by the mayor or any member of the city council at all
times, even though such records are not required to be kept by statute or
ordinance. (1994 Code)
1-7-2: DISPOSITION OF MONEY:
Every officer or employee of the city shall, as directed by the city council,
transmit money received by him in his official capacity to the treasurer, with
a statement showing the source from which such money was received. (1994 Code)
1-7-3: OATH OF OFFICERS:
Every elective officer of the city shall, before entering upon his duties, take
the oath prescribed by statute. (1994 Code)
1-7-4: COMPENSATION:
Each officer, agent, or employee of the city shall receive the compensation
established by the city council. (1994 Code)
1-7-5: CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
The city mayor and members of the police department are hereby declared to be
conservators of the peace, with such powers to make arrests as are given to
conservators of the peace by statute. (1994 Code)
1-7-6: CODE OF ETHICS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be
given these definitions:
    CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      1.   elating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action,
      2.   elating to collective bargaining, or
      3.   hat are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1
.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2
.
   COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
section, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4
of the election code 3
.
   EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the city, whether on a full time or part time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER: The city.
   GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      1.   Compensation for employment,
      2.   Service credit towards pension benefits, and
      3.   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      1.   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action,
      2.   Relating to collective bargaining, or
      3.   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4
, but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the state
board of elections or a county clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
      1.   reparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      2.   oliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      3.   oliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      4.   lanning, conducting; or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      5.   urveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      6.   ssisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
in question.
      7.   oliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      8.   nitiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      9.   aking contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      10.   reparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      11.   istributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material, on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      12.   ampaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      13.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      14.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      15.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
      1.   Is seeking official action:
         a.   By an officer, or
         b.   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee;
      2.   Does business or seeks to do business:
         a.   With the officer, or
         b.   With an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee;
      3.   Conducts activities regulated:
         a.   By the officer, or
         b.   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee; or
      4.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
   B.   Prohibited Political Activities:
      1.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
      2.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
         a.   As part of that officer's or employee's duties,
         b.   As a condition of employment, or
         c.   During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
      3.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the
form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment
or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional
compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in
any prohibited political activity.
      4.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible
for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties,
or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary
basis which are not prohibited by this section.
      5.    No person either:
         a.   In a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of
public employment, or
         b.   In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by
federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system
of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid programs, shall be
denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member
or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political
organization or club.
   C.   Gift Ban: Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No "prohibited source" shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
      1.   Exceptions: This subsection C is not applicable to the following:
         a.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         b.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
         c.   Any:
            (1)   Contribution that is lawfully made under the election code,
or
            (2)   Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of
a political organization or candidate.
         d.   Educational materials and missions.
         e.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
         f.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
         g.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
            (1)   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            (2)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            (3)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
         h.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are:
            (1)   Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared, or
            (2)   Catered.
         For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments
that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
         i.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
         j.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
         k.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         l.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
      2.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or
an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not
violate this section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action' to
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now
or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
   D.   Penalties:
      1.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of subsection B of
this section may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty
four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      2.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of subsection C of
this section is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand
one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
      3.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this section to the local enforcement
authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
      4.   A violation of subsection B of this section shall be prosecuted as a
criminal offense by an attorney for the city by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall
be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
      A violation of subsection C of this section may be prosecuted as a quasi-
criminal offense by an attorney for the city, or, if an ethics commission has
been created, by the commission through the designated administrative
procedure.
      5.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of subsection B or C of this section is subject to discipline or
discharge. (Ord. 050304, 5-3-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 3. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-7-7: PAID LEAVE FOR ALL WORKERS ACT:
   A.   Pursuant to Section 12(p) of the Act, 820 ILCS l 92/12(p), the City
hereby adopts, as its current paid leave policy for all persons in its service
who may be considered employees, the City's existing paid leave policy in
whatever form currently provided (including, but not limited to vacation or
personal time off) as set forth in any policy, ordinance, collective bargaining
agreement, handbook, or existing practice of the City, provided, however, that
in no event shall the City, to the extent it is an employer under the Act,
provide less than one (1) day of paid leave per year to any such person in
service to the City, but only to the extent and in the event that the Act is
applicable to the City, and provided, further, the City may, by action of it
Corporate Authorities, expressly incorporate the provisions of paid leave
provided by this section into any existing policy, ordinance, collective
bargaining agreement, handbook, or practice to accomplish compliance with the
paid leave provided by this section.
   C.   To the extent the City does not have an existing paid leave policy, in
any form including a written policy, ordinance, resolution, handbook, or
existing practice, for persons in its service who may be considered employees,
the City shall comply with the requirements of the Act.
   D.   To the extent the City does not compensate persons in service to the
City, or compensates them in a manner which does not bring them within the
application of the Act, the provisions of Divisions A. and B., above, are not
applicable. (Ord. 121823A, 12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 8
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Qualifications
1-8-2: Oath; Bond
1-8-3: Corporate Seal; Records
1-8-4: Minutes; Notices
1-8-5: Ordinances; Record, Publish
1-8-6: Deliver Documents to Committees and Officers
1-8-7: Prepare Official Documents; Index
1-8-8: Charge of Documents
1-8-9: Local Registrar
1-8-10: Notice of Election or Appointment of Officers; Record
1-8-11: Report Estimates; Aggregate Income, Liabilities
1-8-12: Record of Licenses
1-8-13: Additional Duties
1-8-14: Compensation
1-8-1: QUALIFICATIONS:
The City Clerk shall be a citizen of the United States and shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the concurrence of the City Council, and shall hold office
for four (4) years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. (1994
Code; amd. Ord. 121619D, 12-16-19)
1-8-2: OATH; BOND:
The City Clerk, before entering upon the duties of this office, shall take the
oath as nearly as may be in the form prescribed as follows:
   I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of Clerk of the City of Wenona,
Illinois, according to the best of my ability.
The City Clerk shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with such sureties as may be approved by the
City Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his
office, which bond shall be filed with the City Treasurer. (1994 Code)
1-8-3: CORPORATE SEAL; RECORDS:
The Clerk shall keep the Corporate Seal, to be provided under the direction of
the City Council, all papers belonging to the City, and copies of all the
papers duly filed in his office, and transcripts from the records and files of
his office, certified by him under the Corporate Seal, shall be evidence in all
courts in like manner as if the originals were produced. (1994 Code)
1-8-4: MINUTES; NOTICES:
The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council and shall keep in
a suitable book, to be styled "The Record of the City Council", a full and
faithful record of its proceedings. He shall issue and cause to be served upon
the Mayor and all the Councilmen, notices of all the special meetings of the
Council. (1994 Code)
1-8-5: ORDINANCES; RECORD, PUBLISH:
   A.   Record Ordinances: The Clerk shall record and properly index in a book
kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the City Council, and at the
foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, he shall make a memorandum of
the date of the passage and of the publication of such ordinance, which record
and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of
the passage and legal publication of such ordinance for all purposes.
   B.   Publish Ordinances: The Clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the
City Council, imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture or making
any appropriation, to be published once, and within thirty (30) days after
their passage post copies thereof in three (3) public places within the City.
(1994 Code)
1-8-6: DELIVER DOCUMENTS TO COMMITTEES AND OFFICERS:
The Clerk shall, without delay, upon the adjournment of each meeting of the
City Council, notify the chairman of each committee of all matters referred to
his committee at such meeting, and shall deliver to each chairman all
petitions, communications, and other papers referred to his committee by the
council. He shall also, without delay, deliver to the mayor all ordinances and
resolutions in his charge, which require to be approved or otherwise acted upon
by the mayor. (1994 Code)
1-8-7: PREPARE OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS; INDEX:
The city clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits, and other
official documents required to be issued by him under the laws or ordinances of
the city, and shall attest the same with the corporate seal. He shall, in like
manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by the
city. He shall keep and maintain a proper index to all such documents and
records kept by him so that ready access and use thereof may be had. (1994
Code)
1-8-8: CHARGE OF DOCUMENTS:
The city clerk shall exercise a general supervision over all city officers
charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of city
revenues, and the collection and return of all such revenues into the city
treasury. He shall have the charge, custody and control of all deeds, leases,
warrants, contracts, books and papers of every kind, the custody of which is
not herein given to any other officer. (1994 Code)
1-8-9: LOCAL REGISTRAR:
The city clerk shall, in accordance with statute, act as a local registrar for
the state registrar of vital records as so directed from time to time. (1994
Code)
1-8-10: NOTICE OF ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS; RECORD:
It shall be the duty of the clerk, within five (5) days after the result of any
election is declared or appointment is made, to notify all persons elected or
appointed to office in the city of such election or appointment, and unless
such persons shall respectively qualify in ten (10) days after such notice, the
office shall become vacant.
The city clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment and
confirmation of all officers of the city, and said record shall be so ruled and
headed that the same shall exhibit the name of the officer, to what office
elected or appointed, date of election or confirmation, and the date of death,
resignation, removal or expiration of term of office. (1994 Code)
1-8-11: REPORT ESTIMATES; AGGREGATE INCOME, LIABILITIES:
The city clerk shall, at the first meeting of the city council in May of each
year, before the annual appropriation bill is passed, submit to the city
council, a report of his estimates, as nearly as may be, the monies necessary
to defray the expenses of the city during the current fiscal year. He shall, in
said report, class the different objects and branches of expenditures, giving
as nearly as may be, the amount required for each. He shall, in such report,
show the aggregate income of the city from all sources during the preceding
fiscal year, the amount of liabilities outstanding upon which interest is to be
paid, and bonds and debts to be paid during the current year, and in such
report he shall give such other information to the city council as he may deem
necessary to the end that the council may fully understand the various amounts
of money necessary to be appropriated for the current year. (1994 Code)
1-8-12: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The city clerk shall keep in his office in a book or books kept expressly for
that purpose, a complete list of all licenses and permits issued by the city,
with the names of the licensees, the purpose for which each license or permit
is issued, and the date of its issue and expiration, and where a bond is
required, the amount of the bond and the names of the sureties thereon. (1994
Code)
1-8-13: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk shall perform such other
duties and functions as may be required by the city council or by statute.
(1994 Code)
1-8-14: COMPENSATION:
Effective with the term beginning May 2017, the clerk shall receive two
thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) annually, payable on a quarterly
basis in October, January, April and July. The clerk may also receive
reimbursement from the municipality for expenses incurred in attending meetings
of the city council or for such other expenses as may be incurred when in the
course of performing duties as clerk. (Ord. 101716, 10-17-2016)
CHAPTER 9
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-9-1: Appointment; Qualifications
1-9-2: Oath; Bond
1-9-3: Monies; Received, Paid Out
1-9-4: Warrants
1-9-5: Special Assessment Fund
1-9-6: Deposit of Funds; Personal Use Prohibited
1-9-7: Report Delinquent Officers
1-9-8: Records; Inspection
1-9-9: Reports
1-9-10: Register of Warrants
1-9-11: Compensation
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
The Mayor and City Council may appoint a City Treasurer as soon as may be after
the commencement of each fiscal year. The Treasurer shall be a citizen of the
United States, a qualified elector, reside within the City limits, and shall
hold office for one year and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
(1994 Code)
1-9-2: OATH; BOND:
The City Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take
the oath as nearly as may be in the form prescribed as follows:
   I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of Treasurer of the City of
Wenona, Illinois, according to the best of my ability.
The City Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
execute and deliver to the City Clerk a bond signed by at least two (2)
sureties in the sum equal to three (3) times the latest Federal census
population or any subsequent census used for motor fuel tax purposes
conditioned upon the fact that he will faithfully, justly and fairly account
for and pay over all monies that may come into his hands by virtue of his
office, and duly perform all and every act and duty imposed upon him by virtue
of the laws of this State or by the provisions of this City Code. (1994 Code)
1-9-3: MONIES; RECEIVED, PAID OUT:
   A.   The City Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the City, and
shall keep a separate account of each fund and appropriation and debts and
credits belonging thereto. He shall give to every person paying money into the
City Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what
account paid.
   B.   The City Treasurer shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders when
signed by the proper City officials. The Mayor and Treasurer shall be
authorized to sign vouchers or orders, as follows:
   Working Cash Fund Both of the above officials
   Payroll Fund Both of the above officials
   All other funds of the City Both of the above officials
(1994 Code)
1-9-4: WARRANTS:
All warrants drawn upon the Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk, stating the particular fund and appropriation to
which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable. No money shall be
paid otherwise than upon such warrants so drawn, except as provided by law.
(1994 Code)
1-9-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND:
The monies received by the City Treasurer on any special assessment or special
tax shall be held by him as a special fund, to be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which such assessment or special tax was made, and said money
shall be used for no other purpose whatever, except to reimburse the City for
money expended for such improvement. (1994 Code)
1-9-6: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; PERSONAL USE PROHIBITED:
The City Treasurer shall deposit the City funds in such depositories as are
selected by the City Council. The Treasurer shall keep all monies in his hands
belonging to the City separate and distinct from his own monies, and he is
hereby expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the City
monies or warrants in his custody or keeping for his own use and benefit, or
that of any other person or persons whomsoever. Any violation of this provision
shall subject him to immediate removal from office by the City Council, in
which case his successor shall be appointed, who shall hold his office for the
remainder of the term unexpired of such officer so removed. (1994 Code)
1-9-7: REPORT DELINQUENT OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to report to the Mayor and City
Council of any officer authorized to receive money for the use of the City who
may fail to make a return of the monies received by him at the time required by
law or by the ordinances of the City. (1994 Code)
1-9-8: RECORDS; INSPECTION:
The City Treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in such manner as to
accurately show all monies received and disbursed by him for the City, from
whom and on what account received, and to whom and on what account paid out,
and in such way that such books and accounts shall exhibit at all times the
true financial condition of the City, and in such manner as may be readily
investigated and understood. The same, together with all files and papers of
his office shall at all times be open to examination by the Mayor, City Clerk
or any member of the City Council. (1994 Code)
1-9-9: REPORTS:
   A.   The City Treasurer shall, at the first regular meeting in each month,
render an account, showing the state of the Treasury at the date of such
account, the condition of each fund, and the balance of money in the Treasury.
He shall accompany such accounts with a statement of all monies received into
the Treasury, and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed or paid
by him. Said warrants, with any and all vouchers held by him, shall be
delivered to the Clerk, and filed with his said account in the Clerk's office
upon the day of such settlement. He shall return all warrants paid by him
stamped or marked "paid".
   B.   Prior to September 1 of each year, the Treasurer shall file with the
City Council, and with the County Collector of Taxes, a copy of an annual
account for the fiscal year which ends the twelve (12) month period ending on
the preceding April 30, which account shall show in detail all Municipal
receipts and disbursements, all of his transactions as Treasurer during the
preceding fiscal year, and the state of the Treasury at the close of the fiscal
year. (1994 Code)
1-9-10: REGISTER OF WARRANTS:
The City Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid,
which shall describe such warrants and show the date, amount, number, the fund
from which paid, the name of the person to whom and when paid. It shall be the
duty of the City Treasurer to notify the Mayor and City Council in writing as
soon as any fund appropriated for any purpose has been exhausted. (1994 Code)
1-9-11: COMPENSATION:
The Treasurer of the City shall receive the compensation that is established by
the City Council. He shall also receive reimbursement from the Municipality for
expenses incurred in attending meetings of the City Council or for such other
expenses as may be incurred when in the course of his duties as Treasurer.
(1994 Code)
CHAPTER 10
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Creation of Office; Appointment
1-10-2: Suits and Actions
1-10-3: Judgments
1-10-4: Advice
1-10-5: Special Assessments
1-10-6: Ordinances, Documents
1-10-7: Additional Duties
1-10-8: Compensation
1-10-1: CREATION OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT:
There is created the office of City Attorney, an executive office of the City.
The Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and
consent of the City Council. (1994 Code)
1-10-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law
or equity to which the City may be a party, or in which it may be interested,
or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the City on behalf of
the City, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the City. (1994
Code)
1-10-3: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the full enforcement of all
judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the City, and of all
similar interlocutory orders. (1994 Code)
1-10-4: ADVICE:
The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City, and shall render
advice on all legal questions affecting the City, whenever requested to do so
by any City official. Upon request by the Mayor or by the City Council, he
shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (1994 Code)
1-10-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the completion of all
special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. (1994 Code)
1-10-6: ORDINANCES, DOCUMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology
of any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments, to which the City
may be a party; and upon request by the City Council, to draft ordinances
covering any subjects within the power of the City. (1994 Code)
1-10-7: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
The City Attorney shall perform such other professional services incident to
his office as may be required by the City Council or any of its committees.
(1994 Code)
1-10-8: COMPENSATION:
The City Attorney shall receive the compensation established by the City
Council. He may also receive reimbursement from the Municipality for expenses
incurred in attending meetings of the City Council or for such other expenses
as may be incurred when in the course of his duties as Attorney. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 11
SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND SEWER
SECTION:
1-11-1: Supervise Water and Sewer Department
1-11-2: Supervise Sewer Connections
1-11-3: Implements; Materials
1-11-4: List of Sewers, Manholes
1-11-5: Employ Laborers
1-11-6: Expenditures
1-11-7: Report to Mayor; Orders
1-11-8: Reports
1-11-9: Compensation
1-11-1: SUPERVISE WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT:
The Superintendent of Water and Sewer shall be duly licensed by the State under
the rules of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. It shall be the duty
of the Superintendent of Water and Sewer to protect the Water and Sewer
Department from unnecessary damage or loss and keep the Water and Sewer
Department in good running order and repair, and he shall superintend and
direct all work pertaining to the future extension of the Water and Sewer
Department and all repairs upon the same of every kind and nature; subject,
however, to the advice and approval of the Mayor and the City Council. He shall
make a monthly report to the City Council of all his acts and doings in and
about the same. Such report shall show the kind and amount of materials used,
the cost thereof and all expenses attending the work. He shall keep a correct
map or profile of all the mains and lines now or hereinafter laid in the City
on file in his office with their dimensions, locations and connections,
hydrants and cut-offs and shall keep just, true and correct books of accounts
in such a manner as at all times to show the true condition and state of
business of his said office. Such books shall at all times be subject to
inspection by the City Council. He shall deliver such books of account, maps
and profiles to his successor in office, and he shall also perform such other
duties as shall be encumbered upon him. He shall, at all times, and in all
things, pertaining to the management and care of the Water and Sewer
Department, be subject to and work in conformity with instructions of the Mayor
and the City Council. (1994 Code)
1-11-2: SUPERVISE SEWER CONNECTIONS:
The Superintendent of Water and Sewer shall supervise all connections of
private drains or sewers with the public sewers, and shall see that the same
are made in such manner that no injury is done to such public sewers. (1994
Code)
1-11-3: IMPLEMENTS; MATERIALS:
   A.   The Superintendent of Water and Sewer shall procure the necessary
implements for performing street labor and such materials necessary for repairs
on bridges, culverts and crossings, but he shall purchase no implement or
material without making a written requisition to the chairman of the Committee
on Water and Sewer, and obtaining his order therefor. When he shall purchase
any implements or materials for the use of the City, he shall promptly report
the bill therefor to the City Council. He shall cause all implements or tools
belonging to the City to be legibly marked or branded with the word "City" and
shall cause them to be properly housed and protected from the weather when not
in use. The Superintendent of Water and Sewer is hereby forbidden from loaning
or hiring said tools or implements to any person, unless it shall be for the
purpose of working on any of the streets, avenues or alleys of the City.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water and Sewer to keep a
correct list of all implements, materials and other property of the City in his
charge and possession. Upon the expiration of his term of office, or his
resignation or removal therefrom, he shall deliver said property to his
successor in office, taking a receipt therefor, which he shall immediately file
with the City Clerk, who shall credit him with the same, and charge his
successor therewith. (1994 Code)
1-11-4: LIST OF SEWERS, MANHOLES:
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water and Sewer to prepare and
maintain, in a suitable book, a complete list of all the sewers in the City,
built or constructed during his term of office, giving the commencement and
termination of each, with its size, depth, fall, inlets and when and of what
material constructed, and accurately locating all manholes or entrances
thereto, and giving such other information in connection therewith as may be to
the interest of the City. Upon the expiration of his term of office, or his
resignation or removal therefrom, he shall turn such record over to his
successor, taking and filing his receipt therefor with the City Clerk. (1994
Code)
1-11-5: EMPLOY LABORERS:
The Superintendent of Water and Sewer may employ such number of laborers as
shall be necessary for cleaning and repairing the streets and alleys as herein
provided, and for doing such other work as may be ordered by the City Council,
and such laborers shall receive the reasonable and customary compensation for
such labor. The Superintendent shall oversee and direct the street laborers and
require them to work faithfully, and shall keep in a suitable book, the correct
amount of their time. (1994 Code)
1-11-6: EXPENDITURES:
The Superintendent of Water and Sewer shall keep in a suitable book and in such
manner as may be required by the Mayor and Committee on Finance, a plain and
accurate account of all expenditures made under his supervision, specifying to
whom and for what purpose made. He shall examine all accounts of contractors
and other persons for work pertaining to his Department, or for implements or
materials furnished therefor, and if correct, shall certify the same to the
City Council for payment. No monies shall be expended out of the general
treasury of the City for improvements or labor upon the streets, avenues and
alleys of the City unless by special order of the City Council directing the
improvements or expenditures for which such payment out of the said general
treasury is to be made, or by order of the Mayor in case of emergency. (1994
Code)
1-11-7: REPORT TO MAYOR; ORDERS:
The Superintendent of Water and Sewer shall promptly report to the chairman of
Streets and Alleys all violations of ordinances in relation to streets, alleys,
sidewalks, crossings and public grounds which may come to his notice. He shall
carry into effect all such orders, general or special, as he may receive from
the City Council. For any wilful neglect or refusal to perform any duty
required of him by the law or ordinances of the City, he shall be liable to
removal from office. (1994 Code)
1-11-8: REPORTS:
   A.   Monthly Report: It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water and
Sewer, at the City Council meeting each month, to give a written statement of
his transactions during the term stating the amount and the kind of work which
has been performed, the quality and price of all materials furnished, the names
of the streets or avenues on which the work has been performed, the names of
all persons who have performed labor and the number of days each has worked. No
account presented or certified by him shall be allowed, or warrant issued
thereon, unless it shall clearly appear thereon to what account or
appropriation each item is chargeable.
   B.   Annual Report: It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water and
Sewer, annually, at the commencement of the fiscal year, to prepare and present
to the City Council, a report summarizing the work done in his Department for
the year and giving a statement of the tools, implements, materials and
property in his Department belonging to the City, together with such other
information and suggestions as he may deem proper to embody in such report.
(1994 Code)
1-11-9: COMPENSATION:
Compensation for the Superintendent of Water and Sewer shall be at a rate
annually determined by the City Council and shall be payable out of the City
Treasury. For compensation to any employees of the Superintendent of Water and
Sewer who shall furnish labor or material to the City, said employees shall
make out and present a bill of the same to the City Council, which bill shall
be certified to by the Superintendent as correct before the same shall be
considered by said City Council. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 12
SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Authority to Repair Streets
1-12-2: Clean Streets; Examine Sewers
1-12-1: AUTHORITY TO REPAIR STREETS:
The Superintendent of Streets and Alleys shall have charge of the improvement,
repair and cleaning of all streets, avenues, alleys and public grounds in the
City, and shall supervise the construction and repair of all sidewalks and
crossings therein; but no improvements or repairs, except such as may be
actually necessary shall be made by him without the previous order of the City
Council. He shall, without delay, cause all breaks in any street, avenue,
alley, crossing, bridge, culvert or other unsafe place to be repaired, and
report the cost thereof to the City Council for payment, but when the probable
cost of such repairs shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), the same
shall be made only with the approval of the Committee on Streets and Alleys.
(1994 Code)
1-12-2: CLEAN STREETS; EXAMINE SEWERS:
The Superintendent of Streets and Alleys shall annually, in the spring of the
year, cause the streets, alleys, crossings and public grounds to be cleaned and
the gutters opened, and shall, as far as it is practicable, keep them in that
condition during the year. He shall, from time to time, examine the sewers,
culverts, bridges, sidewalks and crossings, and report the condition of the
same to the City Council, and recommend such improvements or repairs as he may
deem necessary. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 13
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-13-1: Form, Description, Custody
1-13-1: FORM, DESCRIPTION, CUSTODY:
The Seal, circular in form, heretofore provided and used by the City of Wenona,
with the inscription "Corporate Seal of the City of Wenona", around the outer
edge of said Seal and the words "Marshall County, Illinois" within the inner
circle, shall be and is hereby declared to be the Seal of the City of Wenona.
Said Seal shall be used in all cases where it shall be required by the laws of
the United States, the laws of any of the several states of the United States,
and the ordinances of the City of Wenona. Said Seal shall be and remain in the
custody of the City Clerk. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 14
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
SECTION:
1-14-1: Creation; Purpose
1-14-2: Members; Terms; Officers
1-14-3: Meetings
1-14-1: CREATION; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created a historic preservation committee. The purpose of this
advisory committee shall be to discover, preserve, and make available to the
public documents and other materials and sites illustrating the history of the
city of Wenona and its environs. The committee shall also make recommendations
to the city council concerning the preservation of the city's historic assets.
(Ord. 101716A, 10-17-2016)
1-14-2: MEMBERS; TERMS; OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointment And Qualifications: The historic preservation committee
shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. Committee members are to be appointed on the basis
of familiarity with or interest in preserving the history of the city.
Consideration is to be given to the appointment of current or former city
residents.
   B.   Term And Compensation: The initial committee members shall be appointed
as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed to serve a term ending on
April 30, 2017, and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term ending on
April 30, 2018, in order to create staggered terms for the various committee
members. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three (3) years and
until a successor has been appointed and qualified to serve. Any vacancy shall
be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by appointment of the mayor and
concurrence of the city council. All committee members shall serve without
compensation.
   C.   Chairperson And Vice Chairperson: The mayor shall designate one
committee member as chairperson to preside at all meetings and to fill the
customary functions of that position and another committee member as a vice
chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson or, in the
absence of the vice chairperson, a temporary chairperson selected by the
committee members, shall act as chairperson.
   D.   Secretary: The committee members shall select one of its members to
serve as secretary. Among other duties that the committee may assign, the
secretary shall take minutes of committee meetings and submit copies of minutes
approved by the committee to the city clerk. (Ord. 101716A, 10-17-2016)
1-14-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular And Special Meetings: Regular meetings of the committee shall
be held at the call of the chairperson or as may otherwise be provided by rules
of procedure established by the committee. Special meetings may be called at
the request of the mayor, the chairperson or any two (2) members of the
committee or of the city council upon two (2) days' written notice to each
committee member. If all members are present at any special meeting it shall be
deemed to have been properly called even when written notice was not timely
given to all members. The preferred location for committee meetings is the city
hall. A committee member may attend and fully participate in any meeting of the
committee from a remote location via telephone, video or internet connection.
   B.   Quorum: No business shall be transacted by the committee without a
quorum, consisting of three (3) members, being physically present.
   C.   Rules: The committee may adopt its own rules of procedure governing it
and regulating its business as it, from time to time, deems proper and
necessary. (Ord. 101716A, 10-17-2016)
CHAPTER 15
TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSE PAYMENT
AND REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
1-15-1: Definitions
1-15-2: Provisions
1-15-3: Exclusions
1-15-4: Approval Of Reimbursement
1-15-5: Expenses Exceeding Maximum Reimbursement
1-15-6: Entertainment
1-15-7: Reimbursement Requests
1-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
All definitions and terms in this chapter shall conform to those set out in the
Local Government Travel Expense Control Act, including, but not limited to the
following definitions.
EMPLOYEES, MEMBERS, VOLUNTEERS AND OFFICERS: All persons who are paid or unpaid
employees or officers of the City, including its Police Department, its
administrative personnel and its elected officials.
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events or any other place of public or private entertainment
or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or event.
PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose which
is required or useful for the benefit of the City to carry out the
responsibilities of City business.
TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees,
members, volunteers and officers of the City involving reimbursement to
travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing transportation or
related services. (Res. 2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
1-15-2: PROVISIONS:
The City shall pay and/or only reimburse travel, meal and lodging expenses
incurred by its employees, members, volunteers and officers as follows below.
   A.   When possible, advance payment for hotel rooms will be made directly by
the City.
   B.   Payment or reimbursement for meals will be based upon a rate of ten
dollars ($10.00) for breakfast, ten dollars ($10.00) for lunch, and twenty
dollars ($20.00) for dinner. The meal allowance will be prorated based upon the
time of departure from the City and the time of return. The allowance may be
paid to the person receiving reimbursement in advance of the approved activity.
   C.   There will be no mileage reimbursement for travel of twenty five (25)
miles or less. Payment to or reimbursement for private vehicle transportation
will be based upon the current Federal mileage rate and will be paid to the
person driving to attend the approved activity. Car pooling will generally be
required when more than one person is attending a particular approved activity.
Reimbursement for fuel usage will generally be based upon one vehicle for four
(4) attendees. When a City vehicle is used for transportation to an approved
activity, payment for fuel where the fuel cost is incurred by the person
operating the City vehicle will be based on the actual fuel cost. Persons who
choose not to car pool will not be reimbursed for the fuel expense incurred by
them in traveling to the approved activity separately unless otherwise approved
in advance by the City Council.
   D.   Persons using a City vehicle for transportation to and from authorized
activities are strictly prohibited from operating the vehicle while in an
impaired state. (Res. 2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
1-15-3: EXCLUSIONS:
Reimbursement or payment for expenditures for alcoholic beverages and personal
expenses (such as laundry, dry cleaning, personal phone calls, internet or
cable charges) are specifically excluded from payment or reimbursement. (Res.
2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
1-15-4: APPROVAL OF REIMBURSEMENT:
Expenses of twenty five dollars ($25.00) or less do not require prior approval
by the City Council; such expenses can be submitted to the Mayor or the City
Treasurer and are subject to final approval by the Trustees when monthly bills
are approved. No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by
a City employee, member, volunteer or officer shall be authorized unless a
Travel, Meal and Lodging Expense Payment or Reimbursement Request Form has been
submitted and approved prior to payment of the requested reimbursement. All
documents and information submitted with the form or related to the payment or
reimbursement of expenses subject to this chapter are subject to disclosure
under the Freedom of Information Act 1 . The Payment or Reimbursement Request
Form is on file with the City. (Res. 2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-15-5: EXPENSES EXCEEDING MAXIMUM REIMBURSEMENT:
Expenses for travel, meals and lodging of: a) any officer or employee that
exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under the foregoing requirements
adopted under the provisions of this chapter or b) any member of the City
Council of the City may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting
of the City Council. In the event of an emergency or other extraordinary
circumstances, the City Council may approve more than the maximum allowable
expenses set forth above. (Res. 2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
1-15-6: ENTERTAINMENT:
The City will not reimburse any employee, member, volunteer or officer for any
activities which would be considered entertainment. Activities which would
otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the
prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Res. 2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
1-15-7: REIMBURSEMENT REQUESTS:
Requests for reimbursement must be received within forty five (45) days from
the date expenses were incurred. Late reimbursement requests will be denied.
(Res. 2017-04-17A, 4-17-2017)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Application for License
2-1-2: Issuance of License
2-1-3: License Period; Nontransferable
2-1-4: Revocation of License
2-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license from the City shall pay to the City Treasurer the
amount required for such license and take his receipt therefor, which receipt,
together with his written application and bond, where bond is required, shall
be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Such application shall be personally
signed by the person desiring such license and shall state the purpose and time
for which such license is desired, and the place where the business for which
the license is sought is to be conducted. (1994 Code)
2-1-2: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon the filing of such application, receipt and bond, where a bond is
required, the City Clerk shall issue a license, which shall contain the name of
the person to whom granted, the kind of business authorized, the date of the
expiration thereof, and, where it is a local business, the street and number of
the place where such business is to be carried on. The license shall be signed
by the Mayor, countersigned by the Clerk and attested by the Corporate Seal.
All such licenses shall expressly state that they are issued subject to all
ordinances then in force or which may thereafter be passed. (1994 Code)
2-1-3: LICENSE PERIOD; NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license shall be granted for a longer period than one year, nor be
transferable without the express consent of the City Council, nor shall it
authorize any person other than the one named therein to conduct the business
therein specified, nor shall it authorize the carrying on of business at any
place except as therein specified, and when bond is required by ordinance the
same shall be subject to the approval of the City Clerk, except as otherwise
especially provided by ordinance. Every license shall expire not later than the
close of the fiscal year in which it is issued. Every licensee shall, upon
demand, exhibit his license to any City officer. (1994 Code)
2-1-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Every license shall be issued and held subject to all the ordinances and police
regulations then existing or afterward adopted, and subject to revocation at
the discretion of the City Council at any time on refunding the pro rata share
of the license fee for the unexpired term of such license. On conviction of any
licensee of a breach of any ordinance of the City regulating the business
therein licensed, the City Council may declare such license forfeited without
the repayment of any part of the license fee. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
2-2-1: Definition
2-2-2: License Required
2-2-3: Application for License
2-2-4: License Fees
2-2-5: Use of Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
2-2-1: DEFINITION:
"Coin-operated amusement device" means any mechanical amusement machine or
device, not a gambling device, the operation of which is governed or controlled
by the deposit of a coin or token, including, without being limited thereto,
any such coin- controlled instrument capable of producing or reproducing any
vocal or instrumental sounds, or operated as or for amusement, game, skill or
entertainment. (1994 Code)
2-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of keeping or
maintaining any coin- operated amusement device within the City without first
having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided. (1994 Code)
2-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk which shall
set forth the name and address of the applicant, the number and type of
machines or devices to be licensed, the proposed location, and such other
information as may be requested for the proper guidance of the officials in the
consideration thereof. (1994 Code)
2-2-4: LICENSE FEES:
Every owner of a coin-operated amusement device maintained in the City shall
pay an annual (May of each year) license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per device. Said license shall not be assignable, nor shall the fee be prorated
for periods less than one year. (1994 Code)
2-2-5: USE OF COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in charge of the premises
where a coin-operated amusement device is located, to permit any individual,
not eighteen (18) years of age, to use or operate said devices during school
hours. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
2-3-4: License Required
2-3-5: Application For License
2-3-6: Limitation On Licenses
2-3-7: Term; Prorating Fee
2-3-8: Change Of Location; Nonuse Of License
2-3-9: Nature Of License; Transfer
2-3-10: Restrictions
2-3-11: Bond Requirements
2-3-12: Investigations; Rejections; Approval Of Application
2-3-13: Renewal Of Licenses
2-3-14: Temporary Licenses
2-3-15: Disposition Of Fees
2-3-16: Record Of License
2-3-17: Posting Licenses
2-3-18: Opening And Closing Hours
2-3-19: Emergency Closing
2-3-20: Employment Of Minors
2-3-21: Sale To Minors, Drunkards, Spendthrifts
2-3-22: Drinking In Public; Transportation And Possession Of Liquor
2-3-23: Gambling Devices Prohibited
2-3-24: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
2-3-25: Hearings On Suspension Or Revocation
2-3-26: Penalties
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be construed to the end that the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the city shall be protected and temperance in the consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted. (1994 Code)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context shall otherwise require, the terms used in this chapter
shall have the definitions given in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time. Unless otherwise qualified, the terms
"license" or "licensee" whenever used in this chapter, shall mean "license" or
"licensee" of the city under this chapter. (1994 Code)
2-3-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   City Mayor To Hold Office: The mayor shall be the local liquor control
commissioner and the terms "mayor" and "local liquor control commissioner"
shall be used interchangeably in this chapter.
   B.   Compensation: The annual compensation for the services of the mayor as
the local liquor control commissioner shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00)
payable in semiannual installments in October and April. (1994 Code)
2-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell at retail, or have in his possession and offer for sale,
alcoholic liquor within the corporate limits of the city without having first
obtained a license so to do, as provided in this chapter, and having paid to
the city clerk the license fee for such license. (1994 Code)
2-3-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a liquor license shall be made to the mayor in writing upon
blanks prepared and furnished by the city, signed by the applicant, if an
individual; or by at least two (2) members of a partnership, if the applicant
is a partnership; or if the applicant is a corporation, then by the president
and secretary thereof, verified by oath or affidavit of the signers, and shall
contain the following information and statements:
   A.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club,
the date of the incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the
names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest
of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the
name and address of such person.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the date and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that
character.
   E.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   F.   The location and description of the premises or place of premises which
is to be operated under such license and written evidence of the applicant's
ownership of the property (deed) or written lease for the full period for which
a license is to be issued.
   G.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar or other license or premises other than described in this application.
   H.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and
is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or any ordinance or statute.
   I.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   J.   The date of incorporation, if an Illinois corporation; or the date of
becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporation act 1  to transact
business in Illinois, if a foreign corporation.
   K.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinance of the city in the
conduct of his business.
   L.   A statement that the applicant has not received or borrowed money or
anything else of value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or
anything else of value, except as permitted by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-1 et seq., and 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 720/1 et seq., directly or
indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor.
The application, addressed to the mayor, as aforesaid, shall be filed with the
city clerk for the appropriate fee, as set forth above.
The city clerk shall deposit the fee in the general corporate fund and present
the application to the mayor within seven (7) calendar days after the clerk
receives the application, except if the application is one for a full year's
license, then the filing procedure will be the same as used in section
2-3-13, "Renewal Of Licenses", of this chapter. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.
2-3-6: LIMITATION ON LICENSES:
The city council shall have the right and power to limit the number of licenses
within the corporate limits of the city and may also limit the locality or
section or portion of the city to which a licensee may operate, all in
accordance with the public interest.
Pursuant to the above limitations, the number of licenses to be issued shall be
not greater than eight (8) class A or class AA licenses; three (3) class B
licenses; two (2) class C licenses; four (4) class D (package sales) licenses;
and two (2) class E licenses. (Ord. 071816A, 7-18-2016)
2-3-7: TERM; PRORATING FEE:
Each such license issued hereunder shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on April 30, next following the date of issuance.
The annual fee for a class A, class B, class C and class D liquor license shall
be three hundred dollars ($300.00), except club license which shall be seventy
five dollars ($75.00), payable on the first business day of May of each year.
The annual fee for a class AA liquor license shall be three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00), payable on the first business day of May of each year. (Ord.
030397, 3-3-1997)
2-3-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION; NONUSE OF LICENSE:
A properly issued license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the
premises described in the application and license. Once a license has been
granted for a particular premises, the local liquor control commissioner, upon
application by the licensee, may endorse upon the license permission to abandon
the premises therein described and to remove the license to another premises
approved by the commissioner and described in the endorsement. The application
for transfer shall be in writing under oath and shall fully describe the
premises. The reasons for transfer shall be given and it shall be shown that
the new premises comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter
and the statutes of the state of Illinois. If the bond previously filed by the
licensee does not apply to the new location, a new bond will have to be filed
and approved pursuant to the terms herein.
In the event a licensee does not use his license to actively operate an
establishment for the sale of alcoholic liquor for a period of ninety (90)
consecutive days, the mayor shall revoke the license and require its immediate
surrender. The licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the
license fee paid. (1994 Code)
2-3-9: NATURE OF LICENSE; TRANSFER:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good until twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight on April 30 following its issuance, unless sooner revoked as
herein provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
the attachment, garnishment or execution, or subject to be encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee,
provided that the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise
the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the
death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration
of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy
or insolvency of such licensee. No refund shall be made of the license fee
paid.
A license may be transferred by a licensee to another party, but only if the
transferee files a proper application and bond and meets all requirements for a
license, as herein set forth. All requests for transfers must be in writing and
be approved by the mayor. The fee for such transfer shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) and shall accompany the request for transfer. (1994 Code)
2-3-10: RESTRICTIONS:
No liquor license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the city.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality.
   F.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   G.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for a license upon a first application.
   H.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   I.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
   J.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporation
act to transact business in Illinois.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required for the
licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or
shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for such
violation.
   M.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, the mayor or member of the council;
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   P.   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license. (1994 Code)
2-3-11: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every person desiring a license shall execute a penal bond with security to the
city, conditioned upon the faithful observance of the provisions of the laws of
the United States, the laws of the state of Illinois and of this chapter. Such
bond shall be in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and shall, on
approval of the mayor, be filed in the office of the city clerk. All sureties
on such bonds must be duly organized and responsible surety companies
authorized to do business in the state. (1994 Code)
2-3-12: INVESTIGATIONS; REJECTIONS; APPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
The mayor shall investigate the statements in each application, and within
thirty (30) days after such application has been made to the city clerk, the
mayor shall either approve or reject such application. In the event the mayor
approves such application and grants such license applied for, the clerk shall
issue such license to such applicants, upon the payment in advance of the
license fee required and the execution of such penal bond as aforesaid. (1994
Code)
2-3-13: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
Applications for renewal of liquor licenses shall be filed with the city clerk
on or before the last Monday in March of each year. The clerk shall report the
names of all applicants for renewals of licenses to the mayor at the first
regular April meeting of the city council of such year, together with the
location of the place of business of each applicant, and the amount of license
fees payable upon the renewal of such licenses, and whether or not any written
complaint has been filed as to the manner in which any applicant for such
renewal of a license has carried on the business authorized thereby.
All applications for renewals of licenses shall be referred by the clerk to the
mayor, as in the case of applications for original licenses, and procedure for
renewal thereof shall be as in the case of applications for original licenses.
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought is suitable for such purpose; and provided further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the city council from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. (1994 Code)
2-3-14: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
The mayor shall have power to issue temporary licenses for the sale at retail
of beer and wine only at any banquet, picnic, fair, game, bazaar or similar
assembly. Such temporary permits shall be only issued to the licensed holder or
a fraternal or benevolent, charitable or religious organization organized not
for pecuniary profit and shall be for a period not to exceed three (3)
successive calendar days. No more than two (2) such temporary permits shall be
granted to any such applicant in any one year. Such permits shall not permit
the sale of alcoholic liquor in any place where the same is otherwise
prohibited by law. The fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each day
of the temporary permit. (1994 Code)
2-3-15: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant. (1994 Code)
2-3-16: RECORD OF LICENSE:
The mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses
issued by him; and shall furnish the city clerk, city treasurer and chief of
police with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license or the
revocation of any existing license, the mayor shall notify each of the said
officers thereof within one week of such action. (1994 Code)
2-3-17: POSTING LICENSES:
Every person licensed under this chapter shall immediately post and keep posted
while in force, in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, the license so
issued. Whenever such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu
thereof shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of a fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00). (1994 Code)
2-3-18: OPENING AND CLOSING HOURS:
No holder of a license shall permit his establishment to be open for business
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
Sunday through Thursday, nor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. (Ord. 100713, 10-7-
2013)
2-3-19: EMERGENCY CLOSING:
In all cases where in the opinion of the mayor the public peace is likely to be
endangered by the keeping open of premises licensed hereunder, it shall be
lawful for the mayor to issue his proclamation, under the seal of the city,
commanding and enjoining all persons licensed by the city to sell any of said
liquors, and their servants and agents, to close their shops and places of
business for such time as the mayor shall deem necessary; and neither to sell,
give away nor suffer to be drawn, any of said liquors in or about their
premises during the time mentioned in said proclamation. (1994 Code)
2-3-20: EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS:
No person having a local license issued under this chapter shall employ any
minor to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor. (1994 Code)
2-3-21: SALE TO MINORS, DRUNKARDS, SPENDTHRIFTS:
   A.   Sales of alcoholic liquor are subject to all prohibitions and penalties
set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., and 815 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 720/1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   B.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who misrepresents his
age for the purpose of purchasing and receiving alcoholic liquors in any
tavern, or other place in the city where alcoholic liquors are sold, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   C.   Every place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold shall display in
a prominent place a printed card which shall read substantially as follows:
         WARNING
         Persons Under 21 Years of Age
You are subject to a fine up to $200.00 under the ordinances of the City of
Wenona if you purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(1994 Code)
2-3-22: DRINKING IN PUBLIC; TRANSPORTATION AND POSSESSION OF LIQUOR 1 :
No person shall, without prior written approval of the local liquor control
commissioner, within the city, drink any alcoholic liquor in any public street,
public alley, public park or other public place, in or upon any vehicle,
commonly used for the transportation of passengers or in or upon any depot,
platform or waiting room of any public place or in any passenger coach, bus or
at any public gathering. No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any
alcoholic liquor in or upon any public street, public alley, public park or
other public place except in the original package and with the seal unbroken,
without prior written approval of the local liquor control commissioner. (1994
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsections 5-1-3-8E, F and G of this code.
2-3-23: GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
No gambling device of any kind shall be kept or used for the purpose of
gambling in any such establishment, store or club, to barter, sell, exchange or
give away alcoholic liquors, as defined herein. (1994 Code)
2-3-24: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the mayor
for any one or more of the following reasons:
   A.   Violation of the laws of the state of Illinois or of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The wilful making of any false statements as to a material fact in the
application for a license.
   C.   Permitting any illegal, disorderly or immoral practices upon licensed
premises. (1994 Code)
2-3-25: HEARINGS ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The mayor may only suspend or revoke a liquor license or fine the licensee
after a hearing. The licensee shall have at least three (3) days' notice of the
hearing. The mayor shall have a court reporter present to make a record which
shall be typed by the reporter.
Any appeal of the mayor's decision shall be on the record of the hearing. (Ord.
020402, 2-4-2002)
2-3-26: PENALTIES:
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 020402, 2-4-2002)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Solicitors
2-4-1-1: Definitions
2-4-1-2: Registration Required
2-4-1-3: Fee
2-4-1-4: Certificate
2-4-1-5: Exceptions
2-4-1-6: Revocation of Registration
2-4-1-7: Consent of Occupant
2-4-1-8: Time Limit on Soliciting
2-4-2: Peddlers
2-4-2-1: License Required
2-4-2-2: Applications
2-4-2-3: Photograph; References
2-4-2-4: Unlawful Acts
2-4-1: SOLICITORS:
2-4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION: All solicitation by or on behalf of a charitable
organization within the meaning of section 501(a) and (c)3 of the Internal
Revenue Code, 1954, as amended.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one
or more persons, contained within all types of buildings or structures.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities conducted in person:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any
kind of consideration whatever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
   D.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a solicitor or
canvasser, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant
for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any
kind, or seeking for information or donations without first having registered
in the office of the City Clerk. The registrant shall give his complete
identification, his signature, the name of his employer, the nature of the
products or services in which he is interested, the name of the manufacturers
of such products, or of the organization which he is representing and the
proposed method of operation in the City. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-3: FEE:
Each registrant shall pay to the City Clerk a registration fee of five dollars
($5.00) per day. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-4: CERTIFICATE:
Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the fee
provided for herein shall be furnished a certificate indicating that he has
registered and showing the dates covered by such registration.
Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the City carry
upon his person the registration certificate and the same shall be exhibited by
such registrant whenever he is required to do so by any police officer or by
any person solicited. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to officers or employees of the
City, County, State or Federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on
official business. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-6: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
Any such registration may be revoked by the Mayor or any member of the City
Council because of any violation, by the registrant, of this Chapter or of any
other ordinance of the City, or of any State or Federal law, or whenever the
registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in
this Chapter for the original registration. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-7: CONSENT OF OCCUPANT:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the City by solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, not
having been requested or invited so to do by the owners or occupants of said
private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling
or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not,
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do
so by the occupant. (1994 Code)
2-4-1-8: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof,
and engage in soliciting as herein defined, except between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. each day other than Sunday or a
State or national holiday. (1994 Code)
2-4-2: PEDDLERS:
2-4-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddling,
hawking or vending merchandise, articles or things without first obtaining a
license therefor. (1994 Code)
2-4-2-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall state
thereon the number of vehicles, if any, intended to be operated, the kind of
article or merchandise to be peddled and the permanent address of the peddler.
(1994 Code)
2-4-2-3: PHOTOGRAPH; REFERENCES:
Upon an application for such license, the applicant must submit with said
application at least two inch by three and one-half inch (2" x 31/2")
photographs of the applicant, the names and addresses of not less than two (2)
references as to his moral character, honesty and integrity, and a statement
concerning whether he has ever been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor.
(1994 Code)
2-4-2-4: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
Any licensed peddler who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation whether through himself, or through an employee, while acting
as a peddler in the City, or who shall barter, sell or peddle any goods, wares
or merchandise other than those specified in the application for a license, or
who shall remain in a private residence or on the premises thereof after the
owner or occupant thereof shall request him to leave or any peddler who enters
into a private residence without the express invitation of the owner or
occupant shall be subject to a penalty as in this Code provided, and the Mayor
of the City shall revoke his license for such offense and such revocation shall
be in addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this Chapter. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
2-5-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
2-5-2: Service Occupation Tax
2-5-3: Municipal Use Tax
2-5-4: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
2-5-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the City at the maximum rate
established by Illinois legislature on the gross receipts from such sales made
in the course of such business while this Section is in effect, in accordance
with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the City shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by section three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons
Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for
Use or Consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended 1 .
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
Exclusion a-1 contained in section two of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act
approved June 28, 1933, as amended, shall not apply to persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail within the City. (1994
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2-5-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this Municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the maximum rate established by Illinois
legislature on the gross receipts received by such a serviceman transferring
tangible personal property, either in the form of tangible personal property or
in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance
with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this Municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by section nine of the Service Occupation Tax Act 1 .
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
The farm machinery and equipment exclusion contained in section three of the
Service Occupation Tax Act approved July 10, 1961, as amended, shall not apply
to all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service within the
City. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
2-5-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of
using in the Municipality any item of tangible personal property which is
purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or
registered with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at the
maximum rate established by Illinois legislature of the selling price of such
tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use
Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955 1 .
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue and shall be
paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property
is issued.
The farm machinery and equipment exclusion contained in section three of the
Use Tax Act approved July 14, 1955, as amended, shall not apply to the
privilege of using in such Municipality any item of tangible personal property
which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer and which is
titled or registered with an agency of this State's government. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
2-5-4: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical
   1   S.H.A. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
   2   S.H.A. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City of Wenona at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions
of Sections 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   A.   The tax imposed by this Section shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue (the "Department"). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The
Department shall have full-power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this Section. (Ord. 121619B, 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
2-6-1: Tax Imposed
2-6-2: Exceptions
2-6-3: Additional Taxes
2-6-4: Collection
2-6-5: Reports To Municipality
2-6-6: Credit Or Overpayment
2-6-7: Penalty
2-6-1: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Effective on and after November 1, 2013, a tax is imposed on all
persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0061 cents per kilowatt hour;
      2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0040 cents per kilowatt hour;
      3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0036 cents per kilowatt hour;
      4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0035 cents per kilowatt hour;
      5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0034 cents per kilowatt hour;
      6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0032 cents per kilowatt hour;
      7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.00315 cents per kilowatt hour;
      8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.0031 cents per kilowatt hour;
      9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month:
0.00305 cents per kilowatt hour; and
      10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month: 0.0030 cents per kilowatt hour. (Ord. 090313A, 9-3-
2013)
2-6-2: EXCEPTIONS:
None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this chapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "municipal retailers'
occupation tax act" authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/8-11-
1; nor shall any tax authorized by this chapter be imposed upon any person
engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like
manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same
class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or operated,
or exercising the same privilege within the municipality. (Ord. 070698A, 7-6-
1998)
2-6-3: ADDITIONAL TAXES:
Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business. (Ord. 070698A, 7-6-1998)
2-6-4: COLLECTION:
The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser by the
person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and, if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any
such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt
owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such
tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering
electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount
equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to
collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the municipality in the manner prescribed by the
municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this
section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the
amount of the tax collected pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 070698A, 7-6-1998)
2-6-5: REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY:
On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return to
the city for the preceding month stating:
   A.   His name.
   B.   His principal place of business.
   C.   His gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the month upon the
basis of which the tax is imposed.
   D.   Amount of tax.
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the city of Wenona, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects;
report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon
any difference between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord.
070698A, 7-6-1998)
2-6-6: CREDIT OR OVERPAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 070698A, 7-6-1998)
2-6-7: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). In
addition, the taxpayer shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax
due. (Ord. 070698A, 7-6-1998)
CHAPTER 7
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
2-7-1: Title
2-7-2: Definitions
2-7-3: Tax Imposed
2-7-4: Rules And Regulations
2-7-5: Books And Records
2-7-6: Transmittal Of Tax Revenue
2-7-7: Failure To Transmit Tax Revenue
2-7-8: Collection
2-7-9: Refunds
2-7-10: Proceeds Of Tax And Fines
2-7-11: Penalties
2-7-12: Purpose Of Penalties
2-7-13: Use Of Receipts
2-7-14: Severability
2-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and recited as the HOTEL/MOTEL TAX. (Ord. 060799A,
6-7-1999)
2-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
HOTEL ROOM; MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure kept, used or maintained as
or advertised or held out to the public to be in an inn, motel, hotel,
apartment hotel, lodging house, bed and breakfast, dormitory or place where
sleeping, rooming, office, conference or exhibition accommodations are
furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals. One room offered
for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single
hotel or motel room. The number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite shall be
computed on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
OPERATOR: Any person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity where the operator performs his functions through a managing
agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall
also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the
same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of
this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
OWNER: Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in
conducting the operation of a hotel or motel room or receiving the
consideration for the rental of such hotel or motel room so as to entitle such
person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof. This word
also includes a person who is the proprietor, whether in the capacity of owner,
lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution, agent, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or
other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator,
user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative
acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine,
feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstance.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a
period of seven (7) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel or
motel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of seven (7) days has
expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the owner and the
occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the occupant has paid
in advance for over seven (7) days occupancy. In determining whether a person
is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord.
060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of
renting a hotel or motel room within the City a tax of five percent (5%) of the
rental or leasing charge for each such hotel or motel room rented for each
twenty four (24) hour period or any portion thereof; provided, however, that
the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any person to rent a hotel or
motel room for more than seven (7) consecutive days or to a person who works
and lives in the same hotel or motel. (Ord. 080414, 8-4-2014)
   B.   The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of said tax shall be
borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying any such hotel or
motel room, said person hereinafter referred to as "renter".
   C.   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or operator of
every hotel or motel to act as trustee for and on account of the City, and to
secure said tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and pay over to the
City Collector said tax under procedures prescribed by the City Collector or as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   D.   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall
secure said tax from the renter at the time he collects the rental payment for
the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or
memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount
due under the tax provided in this chapter shall be stated separately on said
documents. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter concerning enforcement and application of this
chapter. The term "rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to, case
by case determination of whether or not the tax imposed by this chapter
applies. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The Mayor, or any person certified as the Mayor's Deputy or representative, may
enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of
books and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this
chapter and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It
shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the
Mayor or the Mayor's duly authorized Deputy or representative in the discharge
of the duties and the performance of this chapter. It shall be the duty of
every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the Mayor
or the Mayor's Deputy or authorized representative shall at all times have
access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
   A.   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four (24)
hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel rooms where such
shall occur, and
   B.   The actual Hotel or Motel Tax receipts collected for the date in
question. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-6: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE:
   A.   The owner or owners of each hotel or motel within the City shall file
tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel and motel
room for each quarter of the City's fiscal year, commencing on August 1, 1999,
and continuing on the first day of each of the City's quarters (i.e., August 1,
November 1, February 1) thereafter on forms prescribed by the City Council. The
returns shall be due on or before the thirtieth day following the end of the
quarterly filing period.
   B.   The first taxing period for the purpose of this chapter shall commence
August 1, 1999, and end October 31, 1999, and the tax return and payment for
such period shall be due on or before November 30, 1999. Thereafter, reporting
periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. At the time of filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the
city collector all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
   C.   It shall be the duty of every owner liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine
the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and
payment to the city, which records the mayor, or any person certified as the
mayor's deputy or representative, shall have the right to inspect at all
reasonable times. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-7: FAILURE TO TRANSMIT TAX REVENUE:
   A.   In case any person who is required under this chapter to file a tax
return city fails to file a return when and as required under this chapter,
said person shall pay to the city, in addition to the amount of tax required to
be transmitted, a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax that said person is
required to transmit to the city; provided, however, that a twenty percent
(20%) penalty shall be imposed for any fraudulent return.
In case any person who is required under this chapter to file a tax return to
the city files a return at the time required but fails to transmit the tax
proceeds, or any portion thereof, to the city when due, a penalty of five
percent (5%) of the amount of tax not transmitted to the city shall be added
thereto; provided, however, that the fraudulent failure to pay such tax shall
result in a twenty percent (20%) penalty.
   B.   In addition to any penalty for which provision is made in this chapter,
any amount of tax not transmitted when due shall bear interest at the rate of
two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until fully transmitted.
   C.   Any officer or employee of any corporation, which is an owner subject
to the provisions of this chapter, who has control, supervision or
responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and transmitting
collected tax proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter, and who wilfully
fails to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected to the
city, shall be personally liable for any such amounts collected, including
interest and penalties thereon, in the event that, after proper proceedings for
the collection of such amount, such corporation is unable to pay such amounts
to the city; and the personal liability of such officer or employees, as
provided herein, shall survive dissolution of the corporation. For purposes of
this subsection, a person wilfully fails to act if he takes any conscious and
voluntary action, intending not to perform any of his obligations hereunder,
including, but not limited to, the utilizing of tax proceeds collected for the
city to pay any other corporate obligations.
   D.   If any operator or owner shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and
to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of
said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the mayor, or any
person certified as the mayor's deputy or representative, shall proceed in such
manner as they may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base
an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the mayor, or any person certified as
the mayor's deputy or representative, has procured such facts and information
upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and
payable to any operator or owner who has failed or refused to collect the same
and to make such report and remittance, the mayor, or any person certified as
the mayor's deputy or representative, shall proceed to determine and assess
against such operator or owner the tax, interest and penalties provided for by
this chapter.
In case such determination is made, the mayor, or any person certified as the
mayor's deputy or representative, shall give a notice of the amount so assessed
by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the operator or owner so assessed at his last known
address.
Such operator or owner may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of
such notice make application in writing to the mayor for a hearing on the
amount assessed. If application by the operator or owner for a hearing is not
made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any,
determined by the mayor shall become final and conclusive and immediately due
and payable.
If such application is made, the mayor shall give not less than five (5) days'
written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator or owner to show
cause at a hearing at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount
specified there should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At
such hearing, the operator or owner may appear and offer evidence why such
specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such
hearing, the mayor shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall
thereafter give written notice to the operator or owner in the manner
prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest
and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen
(15) days unless an appeal is requested as provided in subsection E of this
section.
   E.   Any operator or owner aggrieved by any decision of the mayor with
respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the mayor by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen
(15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The mayor
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall
give notice in writing to such operator or owner at his last known address. The
findings of the mayor shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of notice. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-8: COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the city
counsel shall, upon the request of the mayor, cause to be brought any action to
enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-9: REFUNDS:
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in
subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with city clerk within three (3) years of the date of
payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the city clerk.
   B.   An owner may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected
and remitting the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or
illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed
by the city clerk that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not
a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be
allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to
the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the
owner.
   C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a
claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the
tax was paid by the transient directly to the city collector, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the owner, establishes to the satisfaction of
the city clerk that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the
owner who collected the tax.
   D.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the
claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-10: PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter,
including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be
credited to and deposited in the general corporate fund of the city. (Ord.
060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-11: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first
offense and not less then three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one
hundred eighty (180) day period. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-12: PURPOSE OF PENALTIES:
The purpose of imposing the above penalties is to ensure the integrity of the
collection process established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 060799A, 6-7-
1999)
2-7-13: USE OF RECEIPTS:
The amounts collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be expended by
the city solely to promote tourism, conventions, and other special events with
the city or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the city.
(Ord. 060799A, 6-7-1999)
2-7-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
in this chapter, or any part thereof or application thereof to any person,
firm, corporation public agency or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any,court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph section or part thereof not then been included. (Ord.
060799A, 6-7-1999)
CHAPTER 8
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
2-8-1: Definitions
2-8-2: Tax Imposed
2-8-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
2-8-4: Returns To Department
2-8-5: Resellers
2-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within this municipality and charges for that portion of the
interoffice channels provided within this municipality. Charges for that
portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional
boundary of this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by
multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice channel by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points
that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of this municipality and
the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points
connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include
any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act.
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality.
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement.
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic
opportunity.
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service.
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices.
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state.
The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 090313, 9-13-2013)
2-8-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Effective January 1, 2014, a tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the
following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six
percent (6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or
authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due
and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six
percent (6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate or multi-municipal
taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this
subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in
another state or municipality in this state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or
such tax property due and paid in a municipality in this state which was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this
state.
   C.   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege
to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality. (Ord. 090313, 9-3-2013)
2-8-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 090302, 9-9-2002)
2-8-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before the last day of February 2003, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required
by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the
act. (Ord. 090302, 9-9-2002)
2-8-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 090302, 9-9-2002)
CHAPTER 9
RAFFLES
SECTION:
2-9-1: Definitions
2-9-2: License Required
2-9-3: Application
2-9-4: Validity Of License
2-9-5: Ineligibility For License
2-9-6: Not For Profit Organizations
2-9-7: Limitations
2-9-8: Fees
2-9-9: Approval
2-9-10: Conduct Of Raffles
2-9-11: Records
2-9-12: Manager's Bond
2-9-13: Scope
2-9-14: Suspension/Revocation
2-9-15: Punishment
2-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
following meanings:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who
have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, license fees, and other reasonable operating expenses
incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the criminal code
of 1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2(b), conducted by an organization
licensed under this chapter, in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall conduct raffles or chances
without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter and
the "raffles act". (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   Applications shall be made in writing through the city clerk's office
at least thirty (30) days prior to the first day intended for sale of the
raffle chances. The application shall be on a form furnished by the city clerk.
   B.   Applications for licenses under this section must contain the following
information:
      1.   Name of applicant.
      2.   Address.
      3.   Purpose of raffle.
      4.   Area within the city where the raffle is to be conducted.
      5.   Time period during which chances will be sold or issued.
      6.   Sworn to or verified statement attesting to not for profit character
of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and
secretary of the organization.
      7.   Date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined.
      8.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be
awarded by a single raffle.
      9.   The maximum retail value of each prize or each specific type of
prize to be awarded by a licensee in a single raffle.
      10.   The maximum price to be charged for each raffle chance and the
number of chances to be issued for each raffle.
      11.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or
sold.
      12.   The name(s) and address(es) of the operator of the raffle if not an
officer or member of the applicant organization. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-4: VALIDITY OF LICENSE:
Each such license shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of
raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year, and
may be suspended or revoked by the city council in the event of violation of
the terms of this chapter or of any applicable state law. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-
2009)
2-9-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   D.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B,
or C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of
this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not;
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
defined in the "raffles act". (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-6: NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide "religious", "charitable", "labor",
"business", "fraternal", "educational" or veterans' organizations as defined in
section
2-9-1 of this chapter which operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license and which have had during that entire
five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the city council
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord.
110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-7: LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle under this chapter and in accordance with
applicable state law is limited to two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00).
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle is limited to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold is limited to one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
is limited to one hundred twenty (120) days.
   E.   Licenses issued shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number
of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year and
may be suspended or revoked for any violation of the "raffles act" of this
chapter. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-8: FEES:
The fee for such a license to conduct a raffle shall be five dollars ($5.00).
The fee may be waived at the discretion of the city council. (Ord. 110209, 11-
2-2009)
2-9-9: APPROVAL:
The city of Wenona shall, within thirty (30) days, evaluate and either approve
or disapprove of said application. The city's approval of an application for a
license shall constitute the license for the conduct of the raffle applied for
by the applicant. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-10: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Proceeds: The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.
   B.   Participation In Management: No person except a bona fide member of the
sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the
raffle.
   C.   Remuneration: No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   Premises: A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this chapter.
   E.   Locations: Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
   F.   Age Of Participants: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may
participate in the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of
a parent or guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his/her parent or guardian. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-11: RECORDS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and shall be placed in a separate account. Each organization shall
have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be
the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the city of
Wenona, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-12: MANAGER'S BOND:
All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of
a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager or
operator of the raffle must be a bona fide member of the organization holding
the license for such a raffle and may not receive any remuneration or profit
for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. The manager
shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of the total value of the prizes to be
awarded in the raffle conditioned upon his/her honesty in the performance of
his/her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the city not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation.
The city may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the
license issued to an organization under this section, provided that a license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the
members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-13: SCOPE:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or
operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
raffles as provided for herein. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-14: SUSPENSION/REVOCATION:
Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the city
council at any time it appears that the proposed or actual operation of the
raffle will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance or to endanger the
public peace, health, safety or welfare. Any license granted under this chapter
may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part at any time that the raffle is
conducted contrary to the license or to any state law or city ordinance, or
when such raffle or portion thereof is conducted so as to constitute a public
nuisance or to disturb the peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension or
revocation shall become effective immediately. It shall be a violation for any
person to operate, engage or participate in, except as a patron, any raffle
which license has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
2-9-15: PUNISHMENT:
Any raffle permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended if
the permit holder violates any terms of the license or any other provisions of
this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine up to
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation hereof exists
shall be considered a separate offense. Each raffle held in violation hereof
shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 110209, 11-2-2009)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL GAS TAX
SECTION:
2-10-1: Definitions
2-10-2: Tax Imposed
2-10-3: Exemptions
2-10-4: In Addition To Other Consideration
2-10-5: Returns
2-10-6: Credit For Erroneous Tax Paid
2-10-7: Limitations
2-10-8: Violations
2-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling natural gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of this service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. Gross receipts shall
not include receipts from the city of Wenona for the sale to that city of any
utility products or services.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any political subdivision of this state,
any state university created by statute or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling natural gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the city of Wenona and not for resale, at the rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-3: EXEMPTIONS:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
the state of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof; nor is any tax
imposed by this chapter on any person exempted by law. The city of Wenona is
exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-4: IN ADDITION TO OTHER CONSIDERATION:
The tax established by this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, of other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's
business. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-5: RETURNS:
Each taxpayer shall make a tax return as required by this chapter, to the city
treasurer on or before the last day of each month for the immediately preceding
month stating:
   A.   Taxpayer name.
   B.   Taxpayer's principal place of business.
   C.   Taxpayer's gross receipts during the prior month upon which the tax is
imposed.
   D.   Amount of tax.
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the city may require.
The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of making such return, pay to
the city treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed. In connection with any
return the taxpayer may, if the taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for
which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with
prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-6: CREDIT FOR ERRONEOUS TAX PAID:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
this, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such
amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment. However, no amounts
erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-7: LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
2-10-8: VIOLATIONS:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each violation, and in addition shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 100515A, 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 11
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
2-11-1: Adoption Of Definitions By Reference
2-11-2: Fee
2-11-1: ADOPTION OF DEFINITIONS BY REFERENCE:
The definitions of:
   A.   "Video gaming terminal",
   B.   "Licensed establishment",
   C.   "Licensed truck stop establishment",
   D.   "Licensed fraternal establishment", and
   E.   "Licensed veterans establishment"
as set forth in video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.,
as amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section. (Ord. 021516,
2-15-2016)
2-11-2: FEE:
Each licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment, and licensed veterans establishment shall complete an
application in the form provided by the city clerk and pay a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) annually to the city for each video gaming terminal located in
the licensed establishment. The fee shall be due on May 1 of each year
beginning May 1, 2016. (Ord. 021516, 2-15-2016)
CHAPTER 12
HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS
SECTION:
2-12-1: Definitions
2-12-2: Requirements
2-12-3: Inspections
2-12-4: Penalty And Enforcement
2-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following term shall have the following
meaning.
HOME KITCHEN OPERATION: Means a person who produces or packages non-potentially
hazardous food in a kitchen of that person's primary domestic residence for
direct sale by the owner or a family member, or for sale by a religious,
charitable, or nonprofit organization, stored in the residence where the food
is made. (Ord. 091718, 9-17-2018)
2-12-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The following conditions must be met in order to qualify as a home kitchen
operation:
   A.   Limited Sales: Monthly gross sales do not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   B.   No Potentially Hazardous Baked Foods: The food is not potentially
hazardous baked food, as defined in section 4 of the Food Handling Regulation
Enforcement Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/4.
   C.   Notice: A notice is provided to the purchaser of the baked goods that
the product was produced in a home kitchen. (Ord. 091718, 9-17-2018)
2-12-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Department of Public Health, the LaSalle County Health Department, the
Marshall County Health Department or the City of Wenona may inspect a home
kitchen operation in the event of a complaint or disease outbreak. (Ord.
091718, 9-17-2018)
2-12-4: PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), such fine being in
addition to attorneys' fees, court costs or any other costs that a court may
award and each day or part thereof upon which such offense continues, shall
constitute a separate offense hereunder.
The City's legal counsel is authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute, restrain, or correct
violations of this chapter. Such proceedings, including an action for
injunctive relief, shall be brought in the name of the City, provided, however,
that nothing in this chapter and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to
exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by any
of the laws of the City or State of Illinois or to exempt anyone violating this
chapter or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred.
(Ord. 091718, 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 13
OUTDOOR DINING AND SIDEWALK CAFES
SECTION:
2-13-1: Definitions
2-13-2: Eligibility Of Outdoor Dining Or Sidewalk Cafe License
2-13-3: License Applications
2-13-4: Fee
2-13-5: Regulations
2-13-6: Denial Of Applications; License Revocation
2-13-7: Violations
2-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
OUTDOOR DINING: An area used for the sale and service or consumption of food or
beverages that is located outdoors, on private property, of any type of eating
establishment and which is either partially or wholly outside the walls of a
building, with or without a solid roof cover.
SIDEWALK CAFE: The use of any part of any public sidewalk or public property
located in a commercial district by any eating establishment as a seating area
where the service of food or beverages is provided. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
2-13-2: ELIGIBILITY OF OUTDOOR DINING OR SIDEWALK CAFE LICENSE:
Licenses for sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining areas shall be required, in
addition to any other applicable annual business license or liquor license
required by the City, subject to the following:
   A.   If liquor service is to be offered, licenses shall be approved only for
businesses also providing dining service;
   B.   Shall be for businesses located in districts zoned as commercial;
   C.   Shall be neither transferable nor assignable; and
   D.   Shall be renewed annually and be valid for the period beginning April 1
through November 1 of each year. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
2-13-3: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   The City Clerk shall issue a license to an applicant if the applicant
meets the requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall complete an
application given under oath on a form approved by the City Clerk. The
applicant shall, at minimum, provide the following information:
      1.   The applicant's name and address. If the applicant is a corporation,
the applicant shall identify a manager and state the name and address of its
manager.
      2.   The address and contact information of the subject establishment.
      3.   A description of the types of food and/or beverages to be sold,
served, or consumed at the sidewalk cafe and/or outdoor dining area.
      4.   The proposed hours of operation of the sidewalk cafe and/or outdoor
dining area.
      5.   A site plan depicting the sidewalk cafe and/or outdoor dining area
which shall include:
         a.   A seating plan showing the locations of all seating, tables,
furnishings, barricades, and routes of passage through the dining area and
along any adjacent sidewalks or public ways;
         b.   Labels showing the setbacks for the zoning district where the use
is located;
         c.   Ingress and egress points to the building and through any
barricades or enclosures; and
         d.   A scale or distances between all features of the outdoor dining
area.
      6.   Evidence of insurance insuring the applicant against liability
arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of the applicant's
outdoor dining and/or sidewalk cafe in amounts of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of one (1) or more persons, and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property. The policy of
insurance shall provide for thirty (30) days' prior notice to the City if
coverage is substantially changed, canceled, or not renewed. The City shall be
named as an additional insured on a primary, non-contributory basis for any
liability arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a sidewalk cafe.
      7.   A statement certifying the applicant shall indemnify, defend, and
hold the City and its officers, agents, and employees harmless from any loss or
expense, including attorney's fees, that result by reason of the liability
imposed by law upon the City for damage because of bodily injury, including
death, at any time resulting therefrom, sustained by any person or persons, or
on account of damage to property arising out of or in consequence of the
granting of a license, operation of a sidewalk cafe or outdoor dining area, or
otherwise occupying public property pursuant to a license under this chapter.
      8.   Payment of the license application fee(s) as established by the City
Council.
      9.   No license shall be issued to an applicant if the owner, or any
partner, shareholder, or resident manager, of said applicant is indebted to the
City.
      10.   While an application is pending and throughout a license period,
any amendments to information contained in a license application shall be
submitted in writing to the City Clerk within five (5) business days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   B.   Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant and not
reviewed by the City. The City Clerk will forward complete applications to the
Mayor for review by individuals designated by the Mayor.
   C.   The City shall act on an application within thirty (30) days of receipt
of a completed application. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
2-13-4: FEE:
The fee for the license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar year. Fees
shall not be prorated or refunded and shall be paid to the City before a
license is issued. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
2-13-5: REGULATIONS:
License holders shall comply with the following regulations.
   A.   Outdoor dining areas and sidewalk cafes shall be operated in accordance
with all laws of the State of Illinois and County and City ordinances.
   B.   Premises shall be kept clean and free from refuse at all times.
Sidewalk dining areas must be free from accumulation of food, litter, liquids,
snow, ice, and other potentially dangerous or unsanitary conditions. Operators
of sidewalk cafes shall clean and sweep the sidewalk area at the end of each
business day.
   C.   A five foot (5') clear zone shall be maintained at the corner location
of two (2) public sidewalks.
   D.   Furniture shall be immediately adjacent to the license holder's
building and shall not extend beyond the license holder's building on any side.
Furniture and other property used in the sidewalk dining area shall not be
stored in the public right of way, and all such furniture and property must be
removed from the sidewalk dining area when the establishment is closed to the
public for any period in excess of seven (7) calendar days.
   E.   The outdoor dining area's or sidewalk cafe's operations shall not
interfere with pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic, or access into or from
any building.
   F.   The license for the outdoor dining area or sidewalk cafe shall be
displayed within the establishment so that it is plainly visible at all times.
   G.   All furnishings shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
Tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings, and any other elements associated with an
outdoor dining area or sidewalk cafe must be of quality design, workmanship,
and materials to ensure the safety and convenience of patrons, as well as to
enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the streetscape and adjacent
neighborhood. No furniture constructed primarily of plastic is allowed. All
dining area elements will be reviewed as part of the license process. Sidewalk
dining area chairs and tables must be placed only inside the area designated
for sidewalk dining. Table size should be kept to a minimum to avoid crowding.
The density of tables and chairs shall be reviewed by the City and shall be
subject to reasonable and appropriate conditions and restrictions. Permanent
structures are not permitted within sidewalk dining areas. Elements cannot be
attached permanently to sidewalks or other public rights of way. The license
holder is responsible for the restoration of the sidewalk or other public
property if any damage is caused by the license holder's use of the sidewalk
for sidewalk dining. Temporary physical barricades to separate sidewalk dining
areas from pedestrian traffic are allowed if they are constructed of finished
quality materials, including wrought iron chains, rope stanchions, picket
fencing, planters, and the like. Physical barriers clearly designating the
licensed premises are required if liquor is consumed at a sidewalk dining area.
No signs shall be placed on barricades.
   H.   Umbrellas and other temporary overhead structures are subject to
approval during the license application process. No portion of any umbrella
shall be less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalk. Umbrellas and overhead
structures cannot interfere with street trees, must be weather resistant, and
designed to be secure during windy conditions. Awnings, either permanent or
temporary, are subject to approval during the license application process.
Awnings shall have no support posts located within the public right of way, and
no portion of an awning shall be less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
Advertising on umbrellas, furniture, or barriers including any types of logos,
graphics, or names (except for the business name and logo of the license
holder) is prohibited.
   I.   Glass containers and/or cups shall not to be used by customers.
   J.   The hours for outdoor dining are limited to the hours of operation of
the license holder's existing business.
   K.   All food shall be prepared within the kitchen of the establishment; no
food preparation is permitted outdoors.
   L.   Smoking is not permitted in outdoor dining areas or sidewalk cafes.
   M.   Any establishment issued a license in accordance with this chapter
shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police, or his designees, to
determine that the establishment continues to meet the requirements set forth
in this chapter. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
2-13-6: DENIAL OF APPLICATIONS; LICENSE REVOCATION:
   A.   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing if an application
is denied and the reasons therefor.
   B.   1.   A license may be revoked if:
         a.   There is any material misrepresentation made on an application;
or
         b.   The required liability insurance is no longer in full force and
effect; or
         c.   The license holder has failed to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or other applicable County ordinance or State law; or
         d.   The City determines the continued operation of the outdoor dining
area or sidewalk cafe within the City constitutes an unreasonable safety
hazard; or
         e.   With respect to sidewalk cafes, the City requires use of its
right of way.
      2.   The City Clerk shall issue a written notice of revocation of a
license which shall be hand delivered to the operator or sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the operator at the address on the
application. Revocation of the license shall be effective immediately after
personal service or on the third day after the post mark of the certified mail
receipt.
   C.   The denial of an application or revocation of a license may be appealed
in writing to the City Council within ten (10) business days from the notice of
denial or the revocation. The City Council shall hold a public hearing at which
the affected license applicant or holder may appear, present witnesses and
evidence and be represented by an attorney. The City Council shall uphold the
denial or revocation if it determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
the insufficiency or violation which was the basis for the denial or revocation
occurred. During the appeal process, a license revocation shall remain in full
force and effect.
   D.   In the event a license is revoked due to a failure to maintain the
required liability insurance in compliance with this chapter, the City Clerk,
in the Clerk's discretion, may reinstate the license, upon documentation of
reinstatement of the required insurance. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
2-13-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), with each and every day that the violation of
this chapter is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and
separate offense. In addition, the City may take such other action as deemed
proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter including, without
limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with its terms. Any person
violating the terms of this chapter shall be subject, in addition to the
foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney
fees. (Ord. 071519A, 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 14
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
SECTION:
2-14-1: Definitions
2-14-2: Conditional Use Permit Required
2-14-3: License Required
2-14-4: License Applications
2-14-5: Fee
2-14-6: Regulations
2-14-7: Maximum Occupancy
2-14-8: Denial of Applications; License Revocation
2-14-9: Violations
2-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
GUEST:                                 A person who rents or occupies a short-
                                       term rental unit.
                                       A marketplace entity, in whatever form
                                       or format which facilitates short-term
                                       rentals through advertising, matchmaking
                                       or other means, using any medium or
HOSTING PLATFORM:                      facilitation, or from which the operator
                                       of the hosting platform derives revenue,
                                       including booking fees or advertising
                                       revenues from providing or maintaining
                                       the marketplace information.
                                       A single-family residential abode,
NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED SHORT-TERM RENTAL   including townhomes, condominiums and
UNIT:                                  rooming house dwelling units that is not
                                       owner-occupied but is rented out for
                                       short-term rental periods.
                                       A person holding title or co-title of an
                                       abode, dwelling unit, or residence that
OWNER:                                 may be leased as a short-term rental but
                                       only in accordance with the terms of
                                       this Chapter.
                                       An owner-occupied single-family
                                       residential abode, including townhomes,
OWNER-OCCUPIED SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT: condominiums and rooming house dwelling
                                       units that is primarily owner-occupied,
                                       except for the duration of any short-
                                       term rental period.
                                       An owner-occupied or non-owner-occupied
                                       single-family residential abode,
                                       including townhomes, condominiums and
                                       rooming house dwelling units that are
SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT:                either primarily owner-occupied, except
                                       for the duration of any short-term
                                       rental period, or are owned but not
                                       owner occupied for the duration of any
                                       short-term rental period. (Ord. 112122A,
                                       11-21-2022)
 
2-14-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A short-term rental unit license shall only be permitted upon the owner’s
receipt of a conditional use permit as provided for in Chapter 8 (Conditional
Uses Permits) of Title 3 (Zoning Title) of the City Code. (Ord. 112122A, 11-21-
2022)
2-14-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, keep, manage, or operate or cause to be conducted,
kept, managed, or operated a short-term rental unit without a license therefor
as provided in this Chapter. A license shall be obtained for each short-term
rental unit and shall not be transferable. Licenses are required to be renewed
annually. A license shall be issued by the City upon payment of the fee as
provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 112122A, 11-21-2022)
2-14-4: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
The City Clerk shall issue a license to an applicant if the applicant meets the
requirements of this Chapter. The applicant shall complete an application on a
form approved by the City Clerk. The applicant shall, at minimum, provide the
following information:
   A.   The applicant’s name and address. If the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, or other entity other than an individual person, the applicant
shall identify a manager and state the name and address of its manager.
   B.   The address of the short-term rental unit.
   C.   The telephone numbers of two (2) local responsible contact persons
capable of physically responding to issues that may arise at the short-term
rental unit within one (1) hour of the initial attempt to contact the owner
(the “Local Contacts”). The Local Contacts must have physical access to the
short-term rental unit property and shall be authorized to make decisions
regarding the short-term rental unit property on behalf of the owner.
   D.   The hosting platform(s) used by the owner.
   E.   Evidence of insurance insuring the applicant against liability arising
out of the ownership and operation of the short-term rental unit in amounts of
at least $1,000,000.00 for the injury or death of one or more persons, and
$100,000.00 for property damage. The policy of insurance shall provide for
thirty (30) days’ prior notice to the City if coverage is substantially
changed, canceled, or not renewed.
   F.   Payment of the license application fee(s) as established by the City
Council.
   G.   No license shall be issued to an applicant if the owner, or any
partner, shareholder, or resident manager of the applicant is indebted to the
City.
   H.   While an application is pending and throughout a license period, any
amendments to information contained in a license application shall be submitted
in writing to the City Clerk within five (5) business days after the change
necessitating the amendment. (Ord. 112122A, 11-21-2022)
2-14-5: FEE:
   A   An owner-occupied short-term rental unit applicant shall pay an annual
license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   A non-owner-occupied short-term rental unit applicant who is a City
resident shall pay an annual license fee of two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00).
   C.   A non-owner-occupied short-term rental unit applicant who is a not a
City resident shall pay an annual license fee of three hundred and fifty
dollars ($350.00).
   D.   The annual license fee covers the period January 1 through December 31.
License fees shall not be prorated or refunded and shall be paid to the City
when an application is filed. (Ord. 112122A, 11-21-2022)
2-14-6: REGULATIONS:
   A.   All owners must use a hosting platform to market a short-term rental
unit. The hosting platform shall be responsible for determining the guest’s
identification information and the accuracy of that information.
   B.   No owner shall rent any short-term rental unit for any period of time
shorter than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours.
   C.   No owner shall rent any short-term rental unit for a period longer than
thirty (30) consecutive days.
   D.   The owner must provide on-site parking sufficient for all guests of the
short-term rental unit and instruct guests to refrain from on-street parking.
Guests shall not park vehicles on City streets overnight unless specially
permitted.
   E.   A short-term rental unit shall have installed working smoke detectors,
carbon monoxide detectors, and any other safety warning systems as required by
Illinois law and/or the Chief of the Wenona Fire Protection District and/or the
City’s law enforcement officer.
   F.   A kitchen in a short-term rental unit shall be cleaned and sanitized
between guest rentals and all food and beverages shall be discarded. All
dishes, utensils, pots, pans, and other cooking utensils shall be cleaned and
sanitized between guest rentals.
   G.   Supplied bed linens and towels for a short-term rental unit shall be
changes at least once each week, and prior to the renting of a short-term
rental unit to a new guest. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance
of all supplied linens in a clean and sanitary manner.
   H.   The owner shall keep a guest register in which the name of every guest
and the guest’s arrival and departure dates shall be recorded in written form.
The guest register shall be maintained for at least a five (5) year period. The
owner shall make the guest register freely accessible to a law enforcement
officer or the City’s Building Inspector.
   I.   The owner shall prominently display in a short-term rental unit rules
and regulations of the City that apply to the occupancy of the short-term
rental unit property. Such information includes information pertinent to the
neighborhood where the short-term rental unit is located including, but not
limited to, parking restrictions, noise restrictions, trash disposal, et
cetera.
   J.   The owner shall post, inside the front entrance to every short-term
rental unit, a shortterm rental license issued by the City stating the owner’s
name, a twenty-four (24)-hour telephone number to reach the owner, the contact
information for the Local Contacts, and the maximum occupancy of the short-term
rental unit as allowed by this Chapter.
   K.   The owner shall comply with the City’s Hotel/Motel Tax as set forth in
Title 2, Chapter 7 of the City Code.
Any short-term rental unit applying for a license or issued a license in
accordance with this Chapter shall be subject to inspection by the City’s
Building Inspector, or designees, to determine that the short-term rental unit
meets and continues to meet the requirements set forth in this Chapter. (Ord.
112122A, 11-21-2022)
2-14-7: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
No owner shall permit the occupancy of any short term rental unit to exceed the
maximum number of persons in a dwelling unit as set forth below.
 
Number of Bedrooms Maximum Number of Persons in a Short-Term Rental Unit At One
                   Time
1                  3
2                  5
3                  7
4                  9
5                  11
 
(Ord. 112122A, 11-21-2022)
2-14-8: DENIAL OF APPLICATIONS; LICENSE REVOCATION:
   A.   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing if an application
is denied and the reasons therefor.
   B.   A license may be revoked if:
      1.   there is any material misrepresentation made on an application; or
      2.   the required liability insurance is no longer in full force and
effect; or
      3.   the license holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter or other applicable County ordinance or State law; or
      4.   the City determines the continued operation of the short-term rental
unit constitutes an unreasonable safety hazard.
The City Clerk shall issue a written notice of a license revocation which shall
be hand delivered to the owner or sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner at the address on the application. Revocation of the
license shall be effective immediately after personal service or on the third
day after the post mark of the certified mail receipt.
   C.   The denial of an application or revocation of a license may be appealed
in writing to the City Council within ten (10) business days from the notice of
denial or the revocation. The City Council shall hold a public hearing at which
the affected license applicant or holder may appear, present witnesses and
evidence, and be represented by an attorney. The City Council shall uphold the
denial or revocation if it determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
the insufficiency or violation which was the basis for the denial or revocation
occurred. During the appeal process, a license revocation shall remain in full
force and effect.
   D.   In the event a license is revoked due to a failure to maintain the
required liability insurance in compliance with this Chapter, the Mayor, in his
discretion, may reinstate the license, upon documentation of reinstatement of
the required insurance. (Ord. 112122A, 11-21-2022)
2-14-9: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter is subject to a fine of not
less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00, plus court costs.
   A.   The fine for a first violation is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   The fine for a second violation is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   The fine for a third violation is five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   The fine for the fourth and subsequent violations is seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   E.   Each day a Section of this Chapter is found to have been violated
constitutes a separate violation subject to the fine schedule set forth in this
Section. (Ord. 112122A, 11-21-2022)
TITLE 3
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Terms Defined
3-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; the word "building"
shall include the word "structure"; the word "lot" shall include the word
"plot", and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY      A subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is
BUILDING:      incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or premises.
ADULT-USE
CANNABIS       An adult-use cannabis cultivation center, craft grower, processing organization,
BUSINESS       infuser organization, dispensing organization or transporting organization.
ESTABLISHMENT:
               A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
ADULT-USE      Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis
CANNABIS CRAFT and perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a
GROWER:        dispensing organization or use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis
               Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time,
               and regulations promulgated thereunder.
               A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
ADULT-USE      Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform
CANNABIS       necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to
CULTIVATION    licensed cannabis business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
CENTER:        Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
               promulgated thereunder.
               A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
               Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis
ADULT-USE      from licensed cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or
CANNABIS       dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or
DISPENSING     related supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis
ORGANIZATION:  patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
               0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
               thereunder.
ADULT-USE      A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
CANNABIS       Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis
INFUSER        concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per
ORGANIZATION   the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from
OR INFUSER:    time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE      A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
CANNABIS       Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or
PROCESSING     compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis
ORGANIZATION   concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the
OR PROCESSOR:  Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-
               to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE      An organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
CANNABIS       Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment
TRANSPORTING   or a community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
ORGANIZATION   Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027),
OR             as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
TRANSPORTER:
               Agricultural activity, including forests and forest products, harvest and
               management, dairy farming, livestock grazing and pasturage, truck gardening, the
AGRICULTURAL   raising of crops, fruit and nursery stock, fish farms, animal kennels and
ACTIVITY:      furbearing animal farms, and the harvesting, processing, packaging, packing,
               shipping, and selling of products produced on the premises, and incidental farm
               occupations and uses such as machinery, farm equipment and domestic repair and
               construction, excluding commercial feed lots.
ALLEY:         A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
               property.
APARTMENT      See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
HOUSE:
               The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage,
               sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. The presence on
AUTOMOBILE     any lot or parcel of land of two (2) or more motor vehicles, which, for a period
WRECKING YARD: exceeding thirty (30) days, have not been capable of operating under their own
               power and from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale,
               shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.
               A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) its height below grade. A
BASEMENT:      basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations, if
               subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
               employed on the premises.
BOARDING       A building other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for
HOUSE:         definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) or more
               persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.
               Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels
BUILDING:      or property, of any kind; and when separated by dividing walls without openings,
               each portion of such building, so separated, shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING,      The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat
HEIGHT OF:     roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the
               highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
CELLAR:        A story having more than one-half (1/2) its height below grade.
COMMERCIAL     An area of land devoted to raising and feeding of livestock where the operation
FEEDLOT:       is not a part of a normal agricultural activity.
DISTRICT:      Any section of the municipality for which the regulations governing the use of
               buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform.
               Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used exclusively for
DWELLING:      residential purposes. It shall not include facilities for the housing of
               transient residents nor to include mobile homes.
DWELLING,      A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more
MULTIPLE-      families.
FAMILY:
DWELLING,      A building designed for occupancy by one family, but excluding trailers and
SINGLE-FAMILY: mobile homes whether wheels are removed or not removed or whether permanently
               fixed to the ground or not permanently fixed to the ground.
DWELLING, TWO- A building designed for occupancy by two (2) families.
FAMILY:
               One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit
               housekeeping unit; provided that a group of five (5) or more persons who are not
               within the second degree of kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a family.
               Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding paragraph, a family shall be
               deemed to include five (5) or more persons not within the second degree of
FAMILY:        kinship occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
               unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons as defined in title VIII of the
               civil rights act of 1968, as amended by the fair housing amendments act of 1988.
               Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the
               same manner and to the same extent as any family unit as defined in the first
               paragraph of this definition.
FILLING        Any building or premises used principally for the storing, dispensing, sale or
STATION:       offering for sale at retail of automobile fuels or oils.
FRONTAGE:      Property on one side of a street measured along the line of the street.
GARAGE,        An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four (4)
PRIVATE:       motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it
               is accessory.
GARAGE,        A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed
PUBLIC:        or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or storing motor
               driven vehicles.
GARAGE,        A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for housing four (4)
STORAGE:       or more motor driven vehicles.
               A.   For buildings having walls adjoining one street, only the elevation of the
               sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
               B.   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of
GRADE:         the elevation of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets.
               C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the
               finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
                  Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from a
               street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
               Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of a family, residing on the
               premises, in connection with which there is used no sign other than one
HOME           nonilluminated nameplate attached to the building entrance which is not more than
OCCUPATION:    one square foot in area; provided that no commodity is sold upon the premises;
               provided that no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family
               residing on the premises; provided that no mechanical equipment is installed or
               used except such that is normally used for domestic or household purposes.
HOTEL/MOTEL:   A building used as the abiding place of more than ten (10) persons who are lodged
               with or without meals for compensation.
HOUSING FOR    A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy of the
THE ELDERLY/   dwellings is restricted to persons fifty five (55) years of age or older or
SENIOR         couples where either the husband or wife is fifty five (55) years of age or
APARTMENTS:    older. This does not include a development that contains convalescent or nursing
               facilities.
INSTITUTION:   A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for
               public use.
JUNKYARD:      A parcel of land on which material or inoperative vehicles and other machinery
               are collected, stored, salvaged, or sold.
               A disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a
LANDFILL:      manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the
               smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of
               the day.
LOADING SPACE: A space on the lot accessible to an alley or a street not less than ten feet
               (10') in height.
               A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three (3) or more,
LODGING HOUSE: but not exceeding ten (10), persons, in contradistinction to hotels open to
               transients.
               A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building together
LOT:           with its accessory buildings, and uses customarily incidental to it, including
               the open spaces required by this title and having its principal frontage upon a
               street or upon an officially approved place.
LOT, CORNER:   A lot adjoining two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE    A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from
FRONTAGE:      a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES:     The lines bounding a lot.
               A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the
LOT OF RECORD: office of the recorder of deeds of Marshall County, Illinois, or a lot described
               by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of
               the recorder of deeds of Marshall County, Illinois.
MANUFACTURED/  A dwelling considered as a sectional unit, designed at a factory meeting the same
MODULAR HOME/  criteria as a conventionally built "house, placed on a permanent perimeter/
HOUSING:       foundation with support on the outside wall of foundation".
MINISTORAGES/  A building or buildings consisting of individual, small, self-contained units
SELF-STORAGE   that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or
FACILITY:      contractor's supplies.
MOBILE HOME:   See definition of Trailer And Mobile Homes.
MUNICIPALITY   See definition of Wenona, Municipality Of.
OF WENONA:
NONCONFORMING  The use of any premises contrary to the use provisions of this title for the
USE:           district in which the premises are located.
               A home for the elderly, chronically ill or incurable persons in which three (3)
NURSING HOME   or more persons, not of the immediate family, are received, kept or provided with
OR REST HOME:  food, shelter, and care for compensation. This definition does not include
               hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis,
               treatment or care of the sick or injured.
PARKING LOT:   A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
               An impervious surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store
PARKING SPACE: one automobile, together with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space
               with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile.
PLACE:         An open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as
               the principal means of access to adjoining property.
               A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as
RECYCLING      newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products; glass, metal cans, and
FACILITY:      other products are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to
               a condition in which they may again be used for production.
               A round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites
SATELLITE DISH and other sources. "Noncommercial dish antennas" are defined as being less than
ANTENNA:       four meters (4 m) in diameter, while commercial dish antennas are usually those
               larger than four meters (4 m) and typically used by broadcasting stations.
STABLE,        A stable with a capacity for not more than three (3) horses or mules.
PRIVATE:
STABLE,        A stable, other than a private stable with a capacity for more than four (4)
PUBLIC:        horses or mules.
               That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface
STORY:         of any floor, and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no
               floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
               A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking
               and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor level, and in
STORY, HALF:   which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for
               use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be
               counted as a full story.
STREET:        All property dedicated or intended for public or private street purposes or
               subject to public easements thereof.
STREET LINE:   A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL     Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or
ALTERATIONS:   partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof.
STRUCTURE:     Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on
               the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
               A vehicle equipped for use as a dwelling and designed to be hauled along a
TRAILER AND    highway. Placing the trailer on a permanent foundation shall not change its being
MOBILE HOMES:  a mobile home for the purpose of this title. Mobile home and trailer shall be
               synonymous.
TRAILER OR     An area containing one or more trailers or mobile homes designed or intended to
MOBILE PARK:   be used as a living facility of one or more families.
               For all purposes of this title, the territory described herein as the city of
WENONA,        Wenona shall be construed as meaning all land lying within the corporate limits
MUNICIPALITY   of the city and also all contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/
OF:            2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any other municipality,
               as shown on the Wenona zoning district map.
               An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied
               and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
YARD:          otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the
               width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the
               minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be
               used.
               A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being
YARD, FRONT:   the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or
               any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies and unenclosed
               porches.
               A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot lines and being
               the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the
YARD, REAR:    main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or
               unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel
               to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On corner lots the rear
               yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
               A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the
YARD, SIDE:    front lot line to the rear lot line. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002; amd. Ord. 121619A,
               12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
3-2-1: Interpretation, Purpose And Conflict
3-2-2: Amendments To Title
3-2-3: Penalty
3-2-1: INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT:
   A.   Purpose: This title is enacted for the purpose of securing adequate
light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers; conserving the taxable
values of land and buildings throughout the municipality; lessening or avoiding
congestion in the public streets; and promoting the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare.
   B.   Interpretation And Conflict: In interpreting and applying the
provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere
with nor abrogate or annul any ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits,
previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of
this title, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the
use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this title; nor
is it intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this
title imposes a greater restriction, this title shall control. (Ord. 070102B,
7-1-2002)
3-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE:
The city council may from time to time amend this title in the manner
prescribed by the statutes of the state of Illinois. No such amendment shall be
made until it shall have been referred to the planning commission and a report
received from said commission upon the effect of said amendment upon the
municipality and the welfare of the inhabitants thereof. The planning
commission shall hold one public hearing upon such amendment as required by law
and is hereby designated as the body to hold such hearings. If no report is
received from the planning commission in sixty (60) days, it may be assumed
that said commission has approved the amendment. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this title, the proper authorities of the municipality,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance or use, or to
enjoin, restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land and to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
If building permits are not obtained, the following procedure will be enacted.
The building inspector will contact the city of Wenona attorney who will send a
registered letter to the builder. A copy of the letter will be sent to the
building inspector and the Wenona city council. If the letter is not picked up,
it will be served by a police officer. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
ARTICLE A.  ZONING PERMITS; CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Zoning Permits
3-2A-2: Certificates Of Occupancy
3-2A-1: ZONING PERMITS:
   A.   Required: It shall not be lawful to construct, alter, repair, remove or
demolish, or to commence the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of
a building or structure without first filing with the building inspector an
application in writing and obtaining a formal permit.
   B.   Application Form: An application for a permit shall be submitted in
such form as the building inspector may prescribe. Such application shall be
made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or the architect, engineer, or
builder employed in connection with the proposed work. If such application is
made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be accompanied by a duly
verified affidavit of the owner in fee or the person making the application
that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that the person
making the application is authorized to make such application.
      1.   Contents: Such application shall contain the full names and
addresses of the applicant and of the owner, and, if the owner is a corporate
body, of its responsible officers. Such application shall describe briefly the
proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by
the building inspector for an intelligent understanding of the proposed work.
      2.   Plans: Application for permits shall be accompanied by such drawings
of the proposed work, drawn to scale, including floor plans, sections,
elevations and structural details, as the building inspector may require.
      3.   Plat Diagram: There shall also be filed a plat diagram in a form and
size suitable for filing permanently with the permit record, drawn to scale,
with all dimensions figured, showing accurately the size and exact location of
all proposed new construction, or, in the case of demolition, of such
construction as is to be demolished, and of all existing buildings and
structures that are to remain.
      4.   Amendments: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of
amendments to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at
any time before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought.
Such amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of
the original application.
   C.   Exemptions From Requirement: Nothing in this title shall require
changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a
lawful permit has been heretofore issued or which has been otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which shall have been actually begun within
ninety (90) days after this title becomes effective and which entire building
shall be completed, as authorized, within two (2) years thereafter.
   D.   Action On Application:
      1.   Examination, Actions: It shall be the duty of the building inspector
to examine applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing. If,
after examination, he finds no objection to the same and it appears that the
proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable
thereto, he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the proposed
work as soon as practicable. If his examination reveals otherwise, he will
reject such application, noting his findings in a report to be attached to the
application and delivering a copy to the applicant.
      2.   Approval In Part: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the building inspector from issuing a permit for the construction of
part of a building or structure before the entire plans and detailed statements
of said building or structure have been submitted or approved, if adequate
plans and detailed statements have been presented for the same and have been
found to comply with this title.
   E.   Conditions Of The Permit:
      1.   All work performed under a permit issued by the building inspector
shall conform to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments
thereof.
      2.   The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plat
diagram, or an approved amendment thereof, shall be strictly adhered to.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plat
of which a plat diagram has been filed and has been used as the basis for a
permit, unless a revised plat diagram showing the proposed change in conditions
shall have been filed and approved; provided that this shall not apply when the
lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public
improvement.
   F.   Issuance; Signature: Every permit issued by the building inspector
under the provisions of this title shall have a signature affixed thereto, but
this shall not prevent him from authorizing a subordinate to affix such
signature.
   G.   Time Limitation: A permit under which no work is commenced within six
(6) months after issuance shall expire by limitation.
   H.   Posting:
      1.   A copy of the permit shall be kept on the premises open to public
inspection during the prosecution of the work and until the completion of the
same.
      2.   The building inspector may require a certified copy of the approved
plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work
to the completion thereof.
      3.   The building inspector shall be given at least twelve (12) hours'
notice of the starting of work under a permit.
   I.   Revocation: The building inspector may revoke a permit of approval
issued under the provisions of this title in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application of
plans on which the permit or approval was based. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-2A-2: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Required:
      1.   Change Of Use Or Occupancy: Subsequent to the effective date of this
title no change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or
occupancy in an existing building, other than for single-family dwelling
purposes, shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied for any purpose
until a certificate of occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies
with all provisions of this title.
      2.   Nonconforming Use: A certificate of occupancy shall be required of
all nonconforming uses of land or buildings created at the time of passage of
this title. Application for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming
uses shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or lessee of the
land or building occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from the
effective date of this title. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to
issue a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use, and failure of the
building inspector to issue such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use
shall be considered evidence that such nonconforming use did not exist at the
effective date of this title.
   B.   Records Maintained: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be
kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
land or a building affected by such certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 070102B, 7-
1-2002)
ARTICLE B.  BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Creation And Membership
3-2B-2: Jurisdiction; Powers
3-2B-3: Meetings
3-2B-4: Orders; Time Limitation
3-2B-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
A board of appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The word "board"
when used in these sections shall be construed to mean the board of appeals.
One of the members of said board shall be designated by the city council as
chairman of said board and shall hold his said office as chairman until his
successor is appointed. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The city council
shall have the power to remove any member of said board for cause and after a
public hearing. Vacancies upon said board shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein provided
for the appointment of such member.
The said board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Wenona city
council to serve respectively for a term of five (5) years. A "quorum" is
defined as at least three (3) members present to transact business in
accordance with the zoning ordinance of the city of Wenona. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-
2002)
3-2B-2: JURISDICTION; POWERS:
   A.   General Authority: The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building
inspector.
It shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this title.
The board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify or amend the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from to the extent and
in the manner that the board may decide to be fitting and proper in the
premises, and to that end the board shall also have all the powers of the
office from whom the appeal is taken.
   B.   Variances: When a property owner shows that a strict application of the
terms of this title relating to the use, construction, or alteration of
buildings or structures or the use of land imposes upon him practical
difficulties or particular hardship, then the board may make such variations of
the strict application of the terms of this title as are in harmony with its
general purpose and intent when the board is satisfied under the evidence heard
before it that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a
convenience to the applicant but is necessary to alleviate some demonstrable
hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the
comprehensive plan by this title created and set forth in the following
instances:
      1.   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record.
      2.   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has
been destroyed or partially destroyed by fire or act of God where the board
shall find some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the
nonconforming use, and in no case shall such a permit be issued if its primary
function is to continue a monopoly.
      3.   To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises
in any location for a public service company for public utility purposes which
the board deems necessary for public convenience and public service
corporation's welfare. Electric distribution centers, and gas regulating
centers of a public utility company may be located in any I industrial
district, but such facilities may be located in any other districts only after
obtaining permission provided for in this section.
      4.   To make a variance where, by reason of an exceptional situation,
surroundings, or a condition of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property of
record, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions, the strict
application of any provisions of this title would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or particular hardship upon the owner of
such property and amount to a practical confiscation of property as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience to such owner, providing such relief
would be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive
plan as established by the regulations and provisions contracted in this title.
      5.   To interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout
actually on ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the
several districts, which map is made a part of this title.
In considering all appeals and all proposed variations to this title the board
shall, before making any variations from this title in a specific case, first
determine that the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in
public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety,
or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the
surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the municipality. The
concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector or
to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by
this title to render decision, or to effect any variance.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the board the
power or authority to alter or change this title, such power and authority
being reserved to the city council.
   C.   Appeals; Hearings: An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by
any person or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality
affected by a decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken
within such time as shall be prescribed by the board of appeals by general
rule, by filing with the building inspector and with the board of appeals a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the building inspector certifies to the board of appeals after the
notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the building inspector and on due cause
shown.
The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a decision
on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at
the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
   D.   Hearings; Notice: The board shall make no recommendation except in a
specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. A notice of
the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a paper of
general circulation in the municipality at least once, not more than thirty
(30) or less than fifteen (15) days previous to the hearing. Such notice shall
contain the particular address or location of the property for which the
variation or other ruling by the board is sought as well as a brief description
of the nature of the appeal, and of what the proposed variance consists.
      1.   The petitioner shall serve written notice, either in person or by
registered mail, return receipt requested, on the owners, as recorded in the
office of the recorder of deeds or the registrar of titles of the county in
which the property is located and as appears from the authentic tax records of
such county, of all property within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each
direction of the location of the property which is the subject of the hearing.
The notice shall contain the address of the property which is the subject of
the hearing; a brief statement of the nature of the hearing; the petitioner's
name and address; and the approximate date on which the petition will be filed.
      2.   At the time of the filing of a petition for relief, the petitioner
shall furnish the board a complete list containing the names and last known
addresses of the owners of the property required to be served and the method of
service of notice on such owners. The petitioner shall also furnish a written
statement certifying that the petitioner has complied with the requirements of
this subsection. The board shall not conduct a hearing unless the petitioner
has furnished the list and certificate herein required.
      3.   The board shall, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing at which the petition is to be considered,
send written notice to the persons appearing on the list furnished by the
petitioner, which notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing, the
address of the property which is the subject of the hearing and the name and
address of the petitioner and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing.
      4.   In order to partially defray the expenses of public hearings, the
petitioner shall pay the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) to the city
treasurer at the time of filing of the petition. (Ord. 100702, 10-7-2002)
3-2B-3: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman
and at such other times as such board may determine. All hearings conducted by
said board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the
minutes of each case of a requested variation, and the reasons for recommending
or denying such variation shall be specified. Every rule or regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement decision or
determination of the board shall be filed immediately in the office of the
board and shall be a public record. The board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure not in conflict with this title or with the Illinois statutes in such
case made and provided. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-2B-4: ORDERS; TIME LIMITATION:
No order of the board permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall
be valid for a period longer than six (6) months, unless a building permit for
such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms
of such permit.
No order of the board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid
for a period longer than six (6) months, unless such is established within such
period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the
erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and
effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within
such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-
2002)
ARTICLE C.  BUILDING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Rules
3-2C-2: Records
3-2C-3: Powers And Duties
3-2C-4: Cooperation Of Other Officials
3-2C-1: RULES:
For carrying into effect its provisions, the building inspector may adopt rules
consistent with this title. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-2C-2: RECORDS:
The building inspector shall keep careful and comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made,
of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file
copies of all papers in connection with building work so long as any part of
the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence.
All such records shall be open to public inspection at reasonable hours, but
shall not be removed from the office of the building inspector. (Ord. 070102B,
7-1-2002)
3-2C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce
this title. The building inspector shall receive applications required by this
title, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued, and shall make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of this title are complied with. He
shall, when requested by the city council or when the interests of the
municipality so require, make investigations in connection with matters
referred to in this title and render written reports on the same. For the
purpose of enforcing compliance with law, he shall issue such notices or orders
as may be necessary.
   B.   Inspections: Inspections shall be made by the building inspector or a
duly appointed assistant.
   C.   Reports: The building inspector shall make a report to the city council
once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits
and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
   D.   Area Of Jurisdiction: Anything to the contrary in this title
notwithstanding, the duties given the building inspector which pertain to
territory not within the municipality, but within contiguous territory not more
than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits, shall be
exercised by building inspectors. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-2C-4: COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS:
The building inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of the
city engineer in fixing grades, of the city attorney in prosecuting violations,
and of the other city officials. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Districts Established
3-3-2: Map Of Boundaries
3-3-3: Determination Of Boundaries
3-3-4: Annexed Territory
3-3-5: Vacations
3-3-6: District Restrictions
3-3-7: Site Restrictions
3-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of trades,
industries, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses; to
regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate and limit the
intensity of the use of lots; and to regulate and determine the area of yards,
courts and other open spaces within the surrounding buildings, the municipality
is hereby divided into districts of which there shall be five (5) in number
known as:
R   Rural district
S   Single-family dwelling district
M   Multiple-family dwelling district
C   Commercial district
I   Industrial district
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3-2: MAP OF BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map made a part of this
title, which map is designated as the district map. The district map and all
the notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of
this title and have the same force and effect as if the district map and all
the notations, references, and other information shown thereon were all fully
set forth or described herein, which district map is made a part of this title
by reference. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3-3: DETERMINATION OF BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the map referred to herein and made a part of this title
by reference, the following rules apply:
   A.   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the districts designated on the map referred to herein and
made a part of this title by reference are bounded approximately by street or
alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the
district.
   B.   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the
districts designated on the map referred to herein and made a part of this
title by reference are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall
be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are
otherwise indicated on the map.
   C.   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map
referred to herein and made a part of this title by reference shall be
determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3-4: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be considered as
being in the S single-family dwelling district until otherwise changed by
ordinance. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3-5: VACATIONS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action by
the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley
or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation
and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to
all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3-6: DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided:
   A.   No person shall use any premises for a use other than those permitted
in the district in which such premises are located.
   B.   No building shall be erected unless it shall conform to the regulations
for the district in which the premises are located.
   C.   No building shall be enlarged, structurally altered, or moved unless
such enlargement, structural alteration, or moving shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which the premises is located.
   D.   Every building hereafter erected, enlarged, or structurally altered
shall be located on a "lot" as herein defined and in no case shall there be
more than one main building on a lot. Land that is part of one lot and that is
not in excess of the area requirements for that lot shall not be used to
satisfy the area requirements of any other lot. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3-7: SITE RESTRICTIONS:
No land shall be used or structure erected where the land is held unsuitable
for such use or structure by the planning commission by reason of flooding,
concentrated runoff, inadequate drainage, adverse soil or rock formation,
unfavorable topography, low percolation rate or bearing strength, erosion
susceptibility, or any feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety,
prosperity, aesthetics, and general welfare of this community. The zoning board
in applying provisions of this regulation, shall consider the findings of the
Marshall/Putnam County soil and water conservation district and the city
engineer. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
ARTICLE A.  R RURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Regulations Established
3-3A-2: Use Regulations
3-3A-3: Height Regulations
3-3A-4: Area Regulations
3-3A-5: Intensity Of Use Of Lot
3-3A-1: REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this article are the B rural district regulations. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3A-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings and uses, including customary church bulletin boards or
identification signs not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area pertaining
to the lease, hire or sale of the premises upon which same are located.
Agricultural activity.
Church.
Golf course, except miniature courses or driving range.
Greenhouse or nursery.
Home occupations.
Park or forest preserve.
Public school, elementary and high, or private school, having a curriculum
equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having no rooms
regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes.
Railroad rights of way, including a strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operations.
Roadside stand for the display or sale of agricultural products raised on the
premises.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings
shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work.
Temporary signs pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises
on which such sign is located. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3A-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed four (4) stories or sixty feet (60') in height. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3A-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than
fifty feet (50'), except as provided in chapter 4 of this title.
      1.   Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
      2.   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot;
provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record need not be
reduced to less than fifty feet (50'), except where necessary to provide a yard
along the side street with a depth of not less than twenty feet (20'). No
accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street.
   B.   Side Yard: Except as provided in chapter 4 of this title, there shall
be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than
twenty feet (20') or fifteen percent (15%) of the average width of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller; provided that no side yard shall have a width of
less than ten feet (10').
   C.   Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in chapter 4 of this title,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifty feet (50') or
thirty percent (30%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3A-5: INTENSITY OF USE OF LOT:
Every residential lot shall have an area of not less than forty three thousand
five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet (1 acre), and an average width of not
less than one hundred fifty feet (150'); except that, if a lot of record has
less area or width than herein required, such lot may be used for any purpose
permitted in this article. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
ARTICLE B.  S SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Regulations Established
3-3B-2: Use Regulations
3-3B-3: Height Regulations
3-3B-4: Area Regulations
3-3B-5: Intensity Of Use Of Lot
3-3B-1: REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this
title, when referred to in this article, are the S single-family dwelling
district regulations. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3B-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the uses provided
herein, not involving the conduct of a business, including a private garage.
Any accessory building that is not a part of the main structure shall be
located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front lot line. Accessory uses
shall not include the raising of poultry, pets or livestock for strictly
commercial purposes or on a scale that would be objectionable because of noise
or odor to surrounding residences.
Camper trailers, provided they are unoccupied and are located only temporarily
on the premises, but not more than one on a lot.
Church or public building bulletin board not exceeding ten (10) square feet in
area and temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area appertaining
to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises.
Churches, but any church that is constructed on a new site shall provide off
street parking space upon the lot or within two hundred feet (200') thereof,
which space is adequate to accommodate one car for every ten (10) persons for
which seating is provided in the main auditorium of the church, exclusive of
the seating capacity of Sunday school and other special rooms.
Home occupations.
Municipally owned or operated parks and playgrounds.
Public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a
curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings
shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3B-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet
(35') in height, except as provided in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 070102B,
7-1-2002)
3-3B-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than
twenty five feet (25'), except as provided in chapter 4 of this title.
      1.   Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
      2.   Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets, there shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot;
provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record at the time of
the passage of this title need not be reduced to less than thirty five feet
(35') except where necessary to provide a yard along the side street with a
depth of not less than five feet (5'). No accessory building shall project
beyond the front yard line on either street, and the front yard line shall be
separately computed for accessory buildings, except that the buildable width
for accessory buildings shall not be reduced to less than twenty two feet
(22').
   B.   Side Yard: Except as provided in chapter 4 of this title, there shall
be a side yard on each side of a building having a width of not less than seven
feet (7') or ten percent (10%) of the average width of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller; provided that, no side yard shall have a width of less than
four feet (4').
   C.   Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in chapter 4 of this title,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than forty feet (40') or
twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3B-5: INTENSITY OF USE OF LOT:
Every residential lot shall have an area of not less than seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet, and an average width of not less than sixty feet
(60'); except that, if a lot of record has less area or width than herein
required and has been duly recorded prior to the date of passage of this title,
such lot may be used for any purpose permitted in this article. (Ord. 070102B,
7-1-2002)
ARTICLE C.  M MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-3C-1: Regulations Established
3-3C-2: Use Regulations
3-3C-3: Parking Regulations
3-3C-4: Height Regulations
3-3C-5: Area Regulations
3-3C-6: Intensity Of Use
3-3C-1: REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this article, are the M multiple-family dwelling district
regulations. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3C-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the S single-family dwelling districts.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Nonprofit religious, educational, and philanthropic institutions, but not penal
or mental treatment institutions.
Nonprofit hospitals and clinics, but not animal hospitals, animal clinics or
mental hospitals.
Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges, excepting those, the chief
activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any above uses,
including storage garage where the lot is occupied by multiple-family dwelling,
hospital, or institutional building. If a storage garage is not part of the
main building, it shall be located no less than sixty feet (60') from the front
lot line. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3C-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Whenever a structure is erected, converted, or structurally altered for a
multiple-family dwelling purpose, 1.5 parking spaces shall be provided on the
lot for each dwelling unit in the structure. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3C-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations are the same as those in the S single- family dwelling
districts. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3C-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Yard: The front yard regulations are the same as those in the S
single-family dwelling districts.
   B.   Side Yard: The side yard regulations are the same as those in the S
single-family dwelling districts.
   C.   Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in chapter 4 of this title,
there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet
(25') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is
smaller. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3C-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling must comply with
regulations described in section
3-3B-5, "Intensity Of Use Of Lot", of this chapter.
A lot on which a multiple-family dwelling is erected or converted shall contain
an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet per family.
When a lot has less than required for a single-family dwelling and was of
record at the time of the passage of this title, that lot may be used for one
single-family dwelling. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
ARTICLE D.  C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-3D-1: Regulations Established
3-3D-2: Use Regulations
3-3D-3: Parking Regulations
3-3D-4: Height Regulations
3-3D-5: Area Regulations
3-3D-6: Intensity Of Use
3-3D-1: REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this title,
when referred to in this article, are the C commercial district regulations.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3D-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the M multiple-family dwelling districts. Buildings
already in existence for commercial use and not residential purposes cannot
have living quarters on the ground level or below.
Amusement places or theaters; provided, however, that no theater shall be
erected or reconstructed unless there is provided on the same lot, or within
three hundred feet (300') thereof, a space for off street parking which
contains an area adequate to accommodate one automobile for every four (4)
seats in the theater.
Bakery, employing not more than ten (10) persons.
Bank.
Barbershop or beauty parlor.
Business or commercial school or dancing or music academy.
Catering establishment.
Dyeing and cleaning works, employing not more than ten (10) persons.
Electrical repair shop.
Filling station.
Florist shop.
Hospitals and clinics for animals.
Laundry employing not more than ten (10) persons on the premises.
Lodge hall.
Messenger or telegraph service station or telephone exchange.
Nameplates and signs relating only to the name and use of the store or premises
or to services or products sold or provided on the premises, but no such signs
shall exceed one square foot in area for each linear foot of street frontage.
Such signs shall be attached to the structure with no portion of the sign
projecting more than one foot (1') into a required yard and, if illuminated,
shall not be of the flashing or intermittent type.
Office.
Painting and decorating shop.
Parking lots.
Pharmacy.
Photographer's or artist's studio.
Plumbing shop.
Public garage and automobile sales room.
Recreation building.
Restaurant.
Sales or showroom.
Shoe repair shop.
Store or shop for the conduct of a retail business.
Tailor shop.
Tavern.
Tinsmithing shop.
Tire repair shop.
Tourist and trailer camps.
Undertaking establishment.
Used car sales or storage lots. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3D-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
The parking regulations for dwellings are the same as those in the M multiple-
family dwelling district.
Commercial buildings shall provide permanent parking spaces on the lot in the
ratio of one parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor
space in the building; provided, however, that two (2) or more establishments
may provide necessary parking spaces upon a single parcel of land within the C
commercial district and within three hundred feet (300') of the establishments.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3D-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet
(35') in height, except as otherwise provided in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3D-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than
twenty feet (20') except as provided in chapter 4 of this title.
      1.   Where lots have double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
   B.   Side Yard: The side yard regulations for dwellings are the same as
those in the S single-family dwelling districts. In all other cases, a side
yard is not required except on the side of a lot adjoining an S, R or M
district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet
(5'); provided, however, that if a side yard is provided it shall not be less
than three feet (3') in width.
   C.   Rear Yard: No rear yard shall be required except where a lot abuts an
S, R or M district, in which event there shall be a rear yard of not less than
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3D-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
The intensity of use regulations shall apply to living facilities above stores
or other commercial uses as well as to residential buildings and shall be the
same as those of the M multiple-family dwelling district. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-
2002)
ARTICLE E.  I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
3-3E-1: Regulations Established
3-3E-2: Use Regulations
3-3E-3: Parking Regulations
3-3E-4: Height Regulations
3-3E-5: Area Regulations
3-3E-6: Intensity Of Use
3-3E-1: REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this title,
when referred to in this article, are the I industrial district regulations.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3E-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Any building or premises may be used for any purpose not in conflict
with any ordinance of the city regulating nuisances; provided, however, that no
building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses
until and unless the location of such use shall have been approved by the city
council.
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Distillation of bones.
Explosives manufacture or storage.
Fertilizer manufacture.
Gas manufacture.
Glue manufacture.
Petroleum, or its products, refining of.
Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores.
Wholesale storage of gasoline.
   B.   In the I industrial district no building shall be erected or converted
for dwelling purposes; provided, however, that dwelling quarters may be
established in connection with any industrial establishment for watchmen and
caretakers employed upon the premises. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3E-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Buildings hereafter erected shall provide off street loading spaces in the
following instances and in the following ratios:
   A.   Buildings occupying corner lots and having a first floor area of five
thousand (5,000) square feet or more and a total floor area of less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet shall provide one off street loading space.
   B.   Buildings occupying interior lots having a first floor area of six
thousand (6,000) square feet or more and total floor area of less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet shall provide one off street loading space.
   C.   All buildings having a total floor area of between forty thousand
(40,000) and eighty thousand (80,000) square feet shall provide two (2) off
street loading spaces.
   D.   All buildings having a total floor area in excess of eighty thousand
(80,000) square feet shall provide one additional loading space for each forty
thousand (40,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of eighty thousand
(80,000) square feet. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3E-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75') in height.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3E-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   Front Yard: Where all the frontage on one side of a street between two
(2) intersecting streets is located in the I industrial district, no front yard
should be required. Where the frontage on one side of the street between two
(2) intersecting streets is located partly in an R, S, M, or C district, the
front yard requirements of the R, S, M or C district shall apply to the I
industrial district.
Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, the
front yard requirements of this subsection shall apply to each street side of
the corner lot, except that the buildable width of a lot of record at the time
of the passage of this title shall not be reduced to less than twenty eight
feet (28'). No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
   B.   Side Yard: The side yard regulations are the same as the C commercial
district.
   C.   Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations are the same as in the C
commercial district. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-3E-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
The intensity of use regulations are the same as in the C commercial district.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
ARTICLE F. ADULT-USE CANNABIS
SECTION:
3-3F-1: Purpose And Applicability
3-3F-2: Conditional Use
3-3F-3: Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components
3-3F-4: Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
3-3F-5: Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
3-3F-6: Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
3-3F-7: Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization
3-3F-8: Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization
3-3F-9: Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization
3-3F-10: Additional Requirements
3-3F-11: Co-Location Of Cannabis Business Establishments
3-3F-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this Section to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation, processing and dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring
within the corporate limits of the City of Wenona. Such facilities shall comply
with all regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-
0027) (the "Act"), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder, and the regulations provided below. In the event that
the Act is amended, the more restrictive of the state or local regulations
shall apply. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-2: CONDITIONAL USE:
Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment facilities, as defined herein,
requiring approval of a conditional use in the respective districts in which
they are requested shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 6 (Conditional
Use Permits) of this Title 3. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-3: ADULT-USE CANNABIS FACILITY COMPONENTS:
In determining compliance with Chapter 6 (Conditional Use Permits) of this
Title 3, the following components of the Adult-Use Cannabis Facility shall be
evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular
property in the context of the existing and intended future use of the
properties:
   A.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
   B.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including co-
tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
   C.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.
   D.   Anticipated parking demand based on Chapter 4 (Comprehensive Parking
Regulations) of this Title 3 and available private parking supply.
   E.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
   F.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
   G.   Proposed signage plan.
   H.   Compliance with all requirements provided in Section
3-3F-4 (Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower); Section
3-3F-5 (Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center); Section
3-3F-6 (Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization); Section
3-3F-7 (Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization); Section
3-3F-8 (Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization); or Section
3-3F-9 (Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization), as applicable.
   I.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
Chapter 6 (Conditional Use Permits) of this Title 3. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-4: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
   B.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for
residential purposes.
   C.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   D.   For purposes of determining required parking, Adult-Use Cannabis Craft
Grower shall be subject to Section
3-3E-3 which sets forth Parking Regulations for Industrial Districts, provided,
however, the City may require that additional parking be provided as a
condition of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-5: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
   B.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for
residential purposes.
   C.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   D.   For purposes of determining required parking, Adult-Use Cannabis
Cultivation Centers shall be subject to Section
3-3E-3 which sets forth Parking Regulations for Industrial Districts, provided,
however, the City may require that additional parking be provided as condition
of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-6: ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing
Organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
   B.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
   C.   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by a dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the dispensing organization as authorized by the Act, and no dispensing
organization shall also sell food for consumption on or in the same tenant
space.
   D.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   E.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall be
subject to Section
3-3E-3 which sets forth Parking Regulations for Industrial Districts, provided,
however, the City may require that additional parking be provided as a
condition of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-7: ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization
may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
   B.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
   C.   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by an infusing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the infusing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not conduct
any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
   D.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall be
subject to Section
3-3E-3 which sets forth Parking Regulations for Industrial Districts, provided,
however, the City may require that additional parking be provided as a
condition of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-8: ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Processing
Organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
   B.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
   C.   At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the floor area of any tenant
space occupied by a processing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the processing organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not
conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the
Act.
   D.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall be
subject to Section
3-3E-3 which sets forth Parking Regulations for Industrial Districts, provided,
however, the City may require that additional parking be provided as a
condition of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-9: ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Transporting Organization may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   Facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this Section.
   B.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used
for residential purposes.
   C.   The transporting organization shall be the sole use of the tenant space
in which it is located. Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
   D.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall be
subject to Section
3-3E-3 which sets forth Parking Regulations for Industrial Districts, provided,
however, the City may require that additional parking be provided as a
condition of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-10: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Petitioner shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras,
lighting or other improvements, as set forth in the conditional use permit, to
ensure the safety of employees and customers of the adult-use cannabis business
establishments, as well as its environs. Said improvements shall be determined
based on the specific characteristics of the floor plan for an Adult-Use
Cannabis Business Establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent
with the requirements of the Act. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
3-3F-11: CO-LOCATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS:
The City may approve the co-location of an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing
Organization with an Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower Center or an Adult-Use
Cannabis Infuser Organization, or both, subject to the provisions of the Act
and the Conditional Use Permit criteria set forth in the Wenona City Code. In a
co-location, the floor space requirements of Section
3-3F-6(C) and Section
3-3F-7(C) shall not apply, but the co-located establishments shall be the sole
use of the tenant space. (Ord. 121619A, 12-16-2019)
0CHAPTER 4
COMPREHENSIVE PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Parking Regulations
3-4-2: Parking Space Requirements
3-4-3: Parking In Required Yards
3-4-1: PARKING REGULATIONS:
In any district, except as noted below, whenever a building is erected,
converted, enlarged, or structurally altered for a use described in this
section, or the use of a building or premises is hereafter changed to a use
prescribed in this section, then off street parking shall be provided as
follows:
Use  Requirement
Use                                     Requirement
Apartment                              2 spaces on the lot for each apartment
                                        1 space on the lot for every 70 square
                                        feet in the main auditorium; provided,
                                        however, that if the building in
Churches and places of assembly        existence and occupied on the effective
                                        date hereof and is located in an R
                                        district, then no off street parking
                                        shall be required
                                        1 space, on the lot, for each 1,500
                                        square feet or portion thereof of
                                        enclosed floor area within the home
Home occupation                        that is devoted to the home occupation.
                                        Whenever a building is devoted to more
                                        than 1 type of use, the off street
                                        parking requirements shall be computed
                                        separately for each use
Hotel                                  1 space on the lot for each rental unit
Industrial use                         1 space on the lot for every 1,500
                                        square feet devoted to the use
Local business and place of assembly
(including community building and a    1 space on the lot for each 200 square
public building when used for a         feet in the sales area
proprietary function)
Multiple-family dwelling               2 spaces on the lot for each dwelling
                                        unit
                                        1 space on the lot for each 200 square
                                        feet of enclosed floor area devoted to
Office                                 the use, excluding hallways, stairways,
                                        restrooms, maintenance areas, and other
                                        comparable areas
Rooming house and hospital             1 space on the lot for every 2 beds
Single-family dwelling                 2 spaces on the lot
Warehouse                              1 space on the lot for every 2
                                        employees on any one shift
 
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-4-2: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever off street parking is required by this title each space shall be at
least eight feet three inches (8'3") in width and at least twenty feet (20') in
length, exclusive of driveways, and shall be connected with a street or public
alley by a driveway affording adequate ingress and egress. A parking space may
be either open or enclosed. Parking spaces and driveways shall be paved or
surfaced with an all-weather material consisting of at least six inches (6") of
compacted gravel or crushed stone. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-4-3: PARKING IN REQUIRED YARDS:
When off street parking, whether voluntary or required, is provided on a lot on
which a building is situated then the parking spaces may be situated only in
the rear yard and in that portion of the side yard not constituting a required
side yard; except, that in the I district, when the building is set back at
least twenty five feet (25') from the front lot line, and then parking spaces
may also be situated in the portion of the front yard not constituting a
required front yard. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Application Of Provisions
3-5-2: Height Regulations
3-5-3: Accessory Buildings
3-5-4: Yard Regulations; Projections; Open Space
3-5-5: Basement Residence
3-5-6: Fences
3-5-7: Temporary Buildings
3-5-8: Commercial Districts; Limit On Employees
3-5-9: Floor Area Regulations
3-5-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in
this title. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-5-2: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public, Semiprivate Buildings: Public, semiprivate or public service
buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools, when permitted in a district,
may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty feet (60'), and churches and
temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy five feet (75') if the
building is set back from each yard line at least one foot (1') for each two
feet (2') of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the district in which the building is located.
   B.   Projecting Structures: Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery
lots, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, and spires, wireless towers,
grain elevators, or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a
height not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in accordance with existing or
hereafter adopted ordinances of the city.
   C.   Storage Buildings: Buildings that are to be used for storage purposes
only may exceed the maximum number of stories that are permitted in the
district in which they are located, but such buildings shall not exceed the
number of feet of building height permitted in such districts. (Ord. 070102B,
7-1-2002)
3-5-3: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Accessory buildings may be built in a rear yard, but such accessory
buildings shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the combined area
of the rear and side yards and shall be located five feet (5') from any side or
rear lot line, except that when a garage is entered into from an alley it shall
not be located closer than ten feet (10') to an alley line.
   B.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic servants
employed entirely on the premises.
   C.   No accessory building on a residential district lot within the city of
Wenona limits shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet
with a maximum plate height of nine feet (9') and a maximum peak height of
fourteen feet (14').
   D.   Accessory buildings may be built on an adjoining lot to a principal
structure building as long as the adjoining lot is owned by the same person and
not broken by a public street or public thoroughfare. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-5-4: YARD REGULATIONS; PROJECTIONS; OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Required Yards: Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky,
unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the
ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features
projecting not to exceed twelve inches (12").
   B.   Fire Escapes In Rear Yards: Open lattice enclosed fire escapes,
fireproof outside stairways, balconies opening upon fire towers, and the
ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into the required rear yard may be
permitted by the building inspector for a distance of not more than three and
one-half feet (31/2') where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and
ventilation.
   C.   Porches In Front Yards: An open unenclosed porch or paved terrace may
project into the required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet
(10'). An enclosed vestibule containing not more than forty (40) square feet
may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet
(4').
   D.   Terraces: Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental
features which do not extend more than three feet (3') above the floor level of
the ground (first) story may project into a required yard, provided these
projections be distanced at least two feet (2') from the adjacent side lot
line.
   E.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Side Yard: For the purposes of the side yard
regulations, a two-family dwelling, or a multiple- family dwelling, shall be
considered as one building.
   F.   Commercial Buildings On Single Lots: Where a lot or tract is used for
commercial or industrial purpose, more than one main building may be located
upon the lot or tract but only when such buildings conform to all open space
requirements around the lot for the district in which the lot or tract is
located.
   G.   Residential, Institutional: In the event that a lot is to be occupied
by a group of two (2) or more related buildings to be used for residential,
institutional, or hotel purposes, there may be more than one main building on
the lot; provided, however, that open space between buildings that are parallel
or within forty five degrees (45°) of being parallel shall have a minimum
dimension of twenty feet (20') for one-story buildings, thirty feet (30') for
two-story buildings and forty feet (40') for three-story buildings.
   H.   Minimum Open Space Width: Where an open space is more than fifty
percent (50%) surrounded by a building, the minimum width of the open space
shall be at least twenty feet (20') for one- story buildings, thirty feet (30')
for two-story buildings and forty feet (40') for three-story buildings.
   I.   Dwellings Above Other Uses; Side Yard: No side yards are required where
dwelling units are erected above commercial and industrial structures.
   J.   Front Yard Adjustments: The front yards heretofore established shall be
adjusted in the following cases:
      1.   Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that
have observed (with a variation of 5 feet or less) a front yard greater in
depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the
street than the front yard so established by the existing buildings.
      2.   Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that
have not observed a front yard as described above, then:
         a.   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is
within one hundred feet (100') of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum
front yard shall be a line drawn between the two (2) closest front corners of
the adjacent buildings on the two (2) sides.
         b.   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is
within one hundred feet (100') of an existing building on one side only, such
building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent
building. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-5-5: BASEMENT RESIDENCE:
No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the
remainder of the building has been substantially completed. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-
2002)
3-5-6: FENCES:
   A.   Residential fences are permitted along the rear lot line and along the
side lot line and behind the front building lot line provided they shall not
exceed six feet (6') in height. No fence shall be constructed closer than two
feet (2') to any street right of way. No fence shall be permitted that would
obstruct traffic visibility on corner lots or other alley or driveway
entrances. Residential fences are permitted in the required front yards
provided they meet the above listed requirements where they apply and the
following provisions:
      1.   They do not exceed forty two inches (42") in height.
      2.   They are constructed aboveground entirely of treated wood, stone,
wrought iron, face brick, or a combination of these materials.
      3.   Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the overall surface plane of
the fence from the ground to the top of the fence shall be open. The open area
shall be distributed evenly from side to side, top to bottom, and end to end.
   B.   Security fences surrounding nonresidential uses are permitted on the
property lines in all districts but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height
and shall be of an open type similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-5-7: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work only
may be permitted in any district during the period that the building is being
constructed, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of
the construction work. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-5-8: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS; LIMIT ON EMPLOYEES:
Whenever the number of employees is restricted in connection with any use in
the commercial districts, such maximum number applies only to employees engaged
in processing or treating materials or products on the premises and not to
employees engaged in selling, clerical, delivery or similar activities. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-5-9: FLOOR AREA REGULATIONS:
   A.   A single-family dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of nine
hundred (900) square feet.
   B.   Every two-family dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of one
thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
   C.   Every multiple-family dwelling shall have a minimum floor area of one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose Of Control
3-6-2: Types Of Signs
3-6-3: Permitted Location
3-6-4: General Requirements
3-6-5: Classes Of Signs Regulated
3-6-6: Special Signs
3-6-1: PURPOSE OF CONTROL:
There is a significant relationship between the manner in which signs are
displayed and public safety, and the value and economic stability of adjoining
property. The reasonable display of signs is necessary as a public service and
to the conduct of competitive commerce and industry. The regulations in this
chapter establish minimum standards for the display of signs in direct
relationship to the functional use of property and to the intensity of
development as permitted within the zoning districts which are provided in this
title. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-6-2: TYPES OF SIGNS:
For the purpose of this chapter, signs are classified according to their
function as follows:
   A.   Advertising signs.
   B.   Business signs.
   C.   Special signs and devices:
      1.   Temporary signs.
      2.   Public service signs. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-6-3: PERMITTED LOCATION:
No sign shall be permitted on a zoning lot unless:
   A.   Advertising signs: When allowed as a permitted or conditional use in a
specific district.
   B.   Business signs: When necessary to a lawfully established use, and
permitted as an accessory use.
   C.   Special signs: When allowed as a conditional or temporary use.
   D.   General: The sign is erected, constructed, and displayed in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-6-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permits Required: No person shall erect, alter, or relocate within the
city any sign or other advertising structure without first obtaining a sign
permit from the zoning administrator and making payment of the required fee.
Temporary signs and signs smaller than six (6) square feet shall be exempt from
the requirement of obtaining a sign permit. Each applicant for a sign permit
shall pay a five dollar ($5.00) permit fee.
   B.   Unsafe Or Obsolete Signs:
      1.   Unsafe Signs: If the zoning administrator shall find that any sign
is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, he shall give written
notice to the person to whom the sign permit has been issued. If he fails to
remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth
within ten (10) days after such notice, such sign may be removed or altered to
comply, by the zoning administrator, at the expense of the sign permit issues
or owner of the property upon which it is located. The zoning administrator may
cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed
summarily and without notice. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for
the inspection of the condition of signs and to investigate complaints issued
regarding signs.
      2.   Obsolete Signs: Any obsolete sign which does not advertise a bona
fide business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed by
the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the structure upon
which such sign may be found within ten (10) days after written notification
from the zoning administrator, and upon failure to comply with such notice
within the time specified in such order, the zoning administrator may cause
removal of such sign; and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner of the property to which such a sign is attached. At the termination of a
business of commercial or industrial enterprise, all signs pertaining thereto
shall forthwith be removed from public view.
   C.   Alterations: No display sign or outdoor advertising device shall be
altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. The repainting, changing of parts, and preventative
maintenance of signs shall not be deemed to be alterations.
   D.   Maintenance: All signs shall be adequately maintained to keep them in a
state of good appearance and repair. Painted signs will be considered in need
of refinishing if:
      1.   Twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface shows evidence of
peeling, checking, cracking, or blistering of the paint.
      2.   Twenty percent (20%) or more of the surface shows evidence of
mildew.
      3.   The colors used have faded appreciably and the surface sheen is
gone.
   E.   Wind Pressure: Any sign, other advertising structure, marquee, canopy
or awning shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not
less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of net surface area; and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building code and/or other
ordinances of the city of Wenona.
   F.   Miscellaneous:
      1.   No sign shall block any required accessway or window.
      2.   Signs advertising the premises for sale or lease may be permitted.
      3.   No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole.
      4.   The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this chapter:
         a.   Memorial signs and tablets displayed on private property.
         b.   Address numerals and signs not exceeding one square foot in area
and bearing the names of occupants of the premises.
         c.   Flags and government insignia.
         d.   Legal notices.
         e.   Traffic and parking signs bearing no advertising. (Ord. 070102B,
7-1-2002)
3-6-5: CLASSES OF SIGNS REGULATED:
   A.   Residential Districts: In all residential districts, the following
classes of signs are permitted in accordance with regulations set forth in this
chapter:
      1.   Nonflashing, nonilluminated accessory signs:
         a.   House number signs shall be required on all premises.
         b.   Nameplates and identification signs, subject to the following:
            (1)   One- And Two-Family Dwellings: For one- and two-family
dwellings, there shall be not more than one nameplate, not exceeding one square
foot in area for each dwelling unit, indicating the name or address of the
occupant or a permitted occupation.
            (2)   Multiple-Family Dwellings And Nonresidential Buildings: A
single identification sign may be displayed for multiple-family dwellings,
apartment hotels, and for buildings other than dwellings. Only the name and
address of the building and the name of the management thereof may be contained
on the sign. The size of the sign shall not exceed twenty four (24) square
feet.
            (3)   Construction Sign: In connection with the construction or
remodeling of a building, there shall be permitted one sign not exceeding forty
eight (48) square feet in area, on corner lots two (2) such signs, one facing
each street, shall be permitted. Such signs shall be removed within two (2)
weeks after completion of the structure indicated.
            (4)   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or seven
feet (7') above the established average grade, whichever is lower.
            (5)   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line.
         c.   For sale and to rent signs, subject to the following:
            (1)   Area And Number: There shall be not more than one such sign
per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot two (2) signs, one facing each
street, shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in
area nor be closer than eight feet (8') to any other zoning lot.
            (2)   Height: No sign shall be located higher than the first story
of a building or more than seven feet (7') above the established average grade
of the property.
            (3)   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line.
            (4)   Duration: The sign shall be removed within thirty (30) days
after the property is sold or rented.
         d.   Signs accessory to parking area, subject to the following:
            (1)   Area And Number: Signs designating parking area entrances or
exits are limited to one sign for each such exit or entrance and to a maximum
size of two (2) square feet each. One sign per parking area, designating the
conditions of use or identity of such parking area and limited to a maximum
size of nine (9) square feet, shall be permitted. On a corner lot, two (2) such
signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
            (2)   Height: No sign shall project higher than seven feet (7')
above the established average grade of the parking area.
            (3)   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line.
      2.   Illuminated, nonflashing signs (church bulletins and signs for
public or quasi-public buildings), subject to the following:
         a.   Area And Number: There shall be not more than one such sign per
zoning lot, except that on a corner lot two (2) such signs, one facing each
street, shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet in
area nor be closer than eight feet (8') to any other zoning lot.
         b.   Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or seven feet
(7') above the established average grade.
         c.   Projection: No sign shall project beyond the property line.
         d.   Illumination: The intensity of light shall not exceed five-
tenths (5/10) foot-candle at the property line.
   B.   Commercial District: In the commercial district, the following signs
are permitted, subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter:
      1.   Residential Signs: All signs and nameplates permitted in the
residential districts.
      2.   Advertising Signs: Advertising signs (including outdoor billboards)
which advertise products, business or public service activities not related to
the occupancy and use of the premises are subject to the following:
         a.   Area: No individual sign shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in
vertical measurement nor twenty five feet (25') in total length, nor be more
than three hundred seventy five (375) square feet in area. Both surfaces of the
sign may be used for advertising purposes. The surface area of the sign shall
not be more than fifty percent (50%) greater than the display area of the sign.
         b.   Location: No advertising sign shall be erected on the front of
any building and no advertising sign shall be erected closer than two hundred
feet (200') to any other such sign facing in the same direction. All
advertising signs must be located at least one hundred feet (100') from a
residential district unless separated by a building that effectively screens
the sign from the residential district. No portion of the sign may project into
the public way.
         c.   Height: No advertising sign shall project higher than thirty feet
(30') above ground level or curb level, or four feet (4') above the roof or
parapet line of the nearest building, whichever is higher.
         d.   Illumination: Lights shall be shielded whenever necessary to
avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district.
The intensity of light projected upon such property shall not exceed one foot-
candle. In the C zoning district, flashing or intermittent type illumination is
permitted, but no rotating beam beacon or illumination resembling an emergency
light is permitted. Signs which may be in conflict with public traffic signals
shall not be permitted.
         e.   Setback: All advertising signs shall be required to be set back
to the existing established building line or, in the absence of buildings, to
the prevailing setback lines for the district. On corner lots no sign shall
obstruct a clear path of a motor vehicle driver's vision within a triangular
area determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points on the lot line,
fifty feet (50') from the street corner.
         f.   Miscellaneous:
            (1)   Signs On Standards: Signs, clocks, or other advertising
devices erected upon standards, poles, or separate supports shall be placed so
as to be entirely within the property lines of the premises upon which they are
located, and no part of the sign or standard shall have a total height greater
than thirty feet (30') above the level of the street upon which the sign faces,
or above the adjoining ground level if such ground level is above the street
level, nor shall the surface of any such sign exceed an area of two hundred
(200) square feet.
            (2)   Signs Near Parks Or Expressways: No sign, the informative
contents of which are to be visible from a park or expressway, shall be
permitted to be erected within five hundred feet (500') of any public park of
more than five (5) acres in area, or any freeways, expressways and toll roads
designated as such in the records of the governing authorities.
      3.   Business Signs: Business signs are subject to the following:
         a.   Area: The gross area of a sign or signs on the front or rear wall
of any principal building shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of
the front face (including doors and windows) of the principal building. The
gross area of a sign or signs on a sidewall of a principal building shall not
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the sidewall (including doors and
windows) of the principal building. Freestanding signs shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
         b.   Location: The sign or signs may be located on the front, side or
rear walls or wall of the principal building or be freestanding separate signs.
         c.   Projection: Signs suspended from any building shall not project
more than four feet (4') beyond the front of the building and the bottom of
such signs shall not be less than ten feet (10') above the finished grade of
the sidewalk or ground elevation. Its location and arrangement shall be subject
to approval by the city.
         d.   Height: No sign shall project higher than twenty five feet (25')
above ground level or curb level, and in no case shall a sign project higher
than four feet (4') above the roofline. Higher signs may be permitted subject
to the approval of the planning commission.
         e.   Illumination: Lights shall be shielded whenever necessary to
avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district.
The intensity of light projected upon such property shall not exceed one foot-
candle. In the C zoning district, flashing or intermittent type illumination is
permitted, but no rotating beam, beacon or illumination resembling an emergency
light is permitted. Signs which may be in conflict with public traffic signals
shall not be permitted.
         f.   Miscellaneous:
            (1)   Freestanding Signs: Signs, clocks or other devices erected on
standards, poles, or separate supports shall be placed so as to be entirely
within the property lines of the premises upon which they are located.
            (2)   Signs On Marquees, Canopies And Awnings: Restrictions imposed
hereinafter on the projection of signs across property lines into the public
way shall not apply to signs located on marquees or canopies, provided that any
sign located on a marquee or canopy shall be affixed flat to the surface
thereof, and further, no sign shall extend vertically or horizontally beyond
the limits of such marquee or canopy, except that individual, freestanding
letters may project to a height not exceeding twelve inches (12") above same.
Restrictions imposed herein on the projection of signs across property lines
into the public way shall not apply to signs located on awnings, provided that
any sign located on an awning shall be affixed flat to the surface thereof,
shall be nonilluminated and nonflashing, shall indicate only the name and
address of the establishment on the premises. Further, no such sign shall
extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of such awning. All
marquees, canopies and awnings projecting over the public way shall adhere to
the following design criteria:
               (A)   They shall be supported only by attachment to a building
and shall not extend more than six feet (6') beyond the building. No posts
shall be permitted for support.
               (B)   ertical clearance above the sidewalk shall be at least
eight feet (8'), except that retractable awnings may have a clearance of not
less than seven feet (7').
               (C)   Marquees or canopies thicker than eighteen inches (18")
must be beveled horizontally at a forty five degree (45°) angle to permit an
unobstructed view of adjacent property.
            (3)   Shopping Center Signs: For an integrated planned business
development in single ownership and management, or under unified control, one
additional sign may be erected, not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in
area, advertising only the name, location, and special events of the integrated
shopping center, and the names of the tenants therein. Such sign shall be
placed so as to be entirely within the property lines of the premises upon
which it is located. The bottom edge of such sign shall be at least ten feet
(10') above the grade of the adjacent street, and the overall height shall not
exceed twenty five feet (25') above grade of the adjacent street or above the
adjoining ground level if such ground level is above the street level.
            (4)   Wall Signs: No sign shall be permitted to be placed on any
wall, fence or standard facing the side of any adjoining lot located in a
residential district.
            (5)   Traffic Signs: Traffic or directional signs designating
entrances, exits and conditions of use of parking facilities accessory to the
main use of premises may be maintained, provided they are located within the
property lines of the subject lot.
            (6)   Automobile Service Station Signs: The following signs
accessory to automobile service stations are permitted:
               (A)   Racks for the orderly display of cans of engine oil for
convenience in dispensing such oil may be located on or at the ends of pump
islands (limit of 2 to each island).
               (B)   Two (2) open portable tire racks (not more than 7 feet in
height, including signs, and 6 feet in length) on casters for the purpose of
displaying new tire casings, shall be permitted for each gasoline or tire
service station. A sign may be painted on the inside and outside front door
face of the closed tire rack but shall not be painted on the sides or rear.
               (C)   Items for sale on the premises may be openly displayed
within ten feet (10') of the principal building. Products may be displayed
under group island canopies or between pumps within the area of the pump island
base.
               (D)   One set of gasoline price signs may be displayed in the
service station area.
               (E)   One movable easel type sign announcing services available
is permitted in the service station area.
   C.   Industrial District: In the industrial district, the following signs
are permitted, subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter:
      1.   Residential Signs: All signs and nameplates permitted in the
residential districts.
      2.   Business Signs: All advertising, business and special signs
permitted in the commercial district.
      3.   Industrial Signs: All signs shall adhere to the requirements for
that type of sign in the commercial district, except as noted in subsection C4
of this section.
      4.   Illumination: Flashing or intermittent type illumination is
permitted, but no rotating beam, beacon or illumination resembling an emergency
light is permitted. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-6-6: SPECIAL SIGNS:
Signs of a special nature, such as temporary signs and public service signs,
shall be authorized as conditional uses. Other signs, such as governmental
signs on public rights of way, may be exempt from the sign provisions.
   A.   Procedure: Special signs, not covered herein, shall be considered on an
individual basis by the planning commission, with recommendations to the city
council.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Temporary Signs:
         a.   Temporary signs for sales promotion, sale or rent of real estate
(other than as specified in residential districts), fund drives, etc., shall be
permitted for a period not exceeding six (6) months.
         b.   Temporary signs for construction projects shall be permitted for
the period of time of the proposed construction. Signs must be removed upon
completion of the project.
         c.   Temporary mobile signs advertising a special sale or event shall
be permitted for a period not exceeding one week.
         d.   Special event posters, including flags, pennants, or bunting,
shall be permitted for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
      2.   Public Service Signs: Public service and governmental signs on
private property shall be allowed if authorized by the planning commission.
      3.   Governmental Signs: Governmental signs located on public rights of
way shall be exempt from the sign provisions of this chapter.
      4.   Highway Signs: Highway directional signs and markers shall be made
and installed in accordance with the specifications of the city. Included shall
be signs announcing the location of, or directing traffic to, given locations
which include, but are not limited to, the following:
         a.   Service areas (automobile, food, lodging).
         b.   Public and quasi-public information signs.
         c.   Businesses or commercial district. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 7
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Special Regulations In All Districts
3-7-2: Noise
3-7-3: Earthborne Vibration
3-7-4: Smoke And Particulate Matter
3-7-5: Toxic Matter
3-7-6: Odorous Matter
3-7-7: Fire And Explosion Hazards
3-7-8: Radio And Electrical Interference
3-7-9: Water Pollution
3-7-1: SPECIAL REGULATIONS IN ALL DISTRICTS:
   A.   The following uses are prohibited in all districts whether or not they
meet the performance standards: crematories, fireworks or explosives
manufacture or storage; dumping, fertilizer plants, reduction or other
processing of garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse, except as customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use; stockyard or slaughter of animals or
fowl; tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; junk shops, junkyards
or automobile wrecking yards.
   B.   No activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except
that those activities customarily incidental to the operation of permitted
principal uses may be permitted by a variation by the board of zoning appeals.
Such materials shall be stored, utilized, and manufactured in accordance with
the applicable rules and regulations of the county of Marshall and the state of
Illinois. Such materials shall include, but shall not be confined to, all
primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphanate, fulminates, and
tetracens; all high explosives such as trinitrotoluene (TNT), cyclonite
research department explosive (RDX), high explosive (HX), pentaerythritol
tetranitrate (PETN), and picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such
as dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine, and its
derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and
nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and
ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid,
perchlorates, chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than
thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials, and
products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
   C.   Any use established in a manufacturing district shall be operated in
such a manner as to comply with the applicable performance standards as set
forth in this chapter governing noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, odors,
fire and explosive hazards, radio and electrical interference, air pollution,
and water pollution. No use already established on the effective date hereof
shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with or further conflict with
the applicable performance standards for the district in which such use is
located.
   D.   Established uses found to be in noncompliance will be liable for
inspection fees and costs. In the event no due cause is found, the challenger
will be liable for the fees and costs. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-7-2: NOISE:
   A.   In commercial and industrial districts, any use established after the
effective date hereof shall meet the performance standards for noise as
described in this section. For the purpose of measuring the intensity and
frequency of sound, the sound level meter, the octave band analyzer and the
impact noise analyzer shall be employed. The flat network and the fast meter
response of the sound level meter shall be used. Sounds of short duration as
from forge hammers, punch presses, and metal shears which cannot be measured
accurately with the sound level meter shall be measured with the impact noise
analyzer. Octave band analyzers calibrated in the preferred frequencies
(American Standards Association S1.6-1960, preferred frequencies for acoustical
measurements) shall be used with tables marked "Preferred Frequencies". Octave
band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave bands (American Standards
Association Z24, 10-1953 octave band filter set) shall use tables marked "Pre-
1960 Octave Bands".
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level
regulations:
      1.   Noises not directly under the control of the property user.
      2.   Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
      3.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves.
      4.   Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks,
airplanes, and railroads.
   B.   At no point beyond a lot line of any lot in the industrial district or
commercial district shall the sound pressure level resulting from any use on
that lot exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave
bands as set forth in tables 1 and 2 of this section that follow:
   TABLE 1
   PREFERRED FREQUENCIES
Center Frequency    Maximum Permitted
(Cycles Per Second) Sound Pressure
                    Level (Decibels)
 
31.5                76
   63            71
   125           65
   250           57
   500           50
   1,000         45
   2,000         39
   4,000         34
   8,000         32
 
   TABLE 2
   PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS
Center Frequency
(Cycles Per Second)
Maximum Permitted
Sound Pressure
Level (Decibels)
   20   –   75
72
   75   –   150
67
   150   –   300
59
   300   –   600
52
   600   –   1,200
46
   1,200   –   2,400
40
   2,400   –   4,800
34
   4,800   –   10 KC
32
 
   1.   Impact noises, as measured on the impact noise analyzer, shall not
exceed eighty decibels (80 dB) at any point beyond a lot line of any lot in the
manufacturing districts.
   2.   Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. the decibel values tabulated above shall be reduced by six decibels (6 dB)
when measured in a residential district. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-7-3: EARTHBORNE VIBRATION:
   A.   Limited Generally: In the industrial district, no use shall cause or
create earthborne vibrations in excess of the displacement values given in this
section. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the
nearest residential district boundary line, as described below. Vibration
displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously
measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum permitted
displacement shall be determined in each district by the following formula:
   D   K
      f
      Where D  =   displacement in inches
      K  =   a constant to be determined by reference to the table below
      f  =   the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground,
cycles per second
   B.   Industrial District: The maximum earth displacement permitted at the
points described below shall be determined by use of the formula in subsection
A of this section and the appropriate K constant shown in table 1 of this
subsection.
         TABLE 1
         VALUES OF K TO BE USED IN VIBRATION FORMULA
Location
   K   
On or beyond any adjacent lot line:
Continuous
0.008
Impulsive
0.015
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period
0.037
Location
   K   
On or beyond any residential district boundary line:
Continuous
0.003
Impulsive
0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period
0.015
 
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-7-4: SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
The "Rules And Regulations Governing The Control Of Air Pollution", published
by the state of Illinois environmental protection agency, shall prevail, unless
in conflict with local ordinances, in which case the more restrictive control
will take precedence. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-7-5: TOXIC MATTER:
   A.   I Industrial District: The release of airborne toxic matter (including
radioactive matter) shall not exceed one-thirtieth (1/30) of the maximum
permissible concentration allowed an industrial worker when measured at any
point beyond the lot line, either at ground level or habitable elevation,
whichever is more restrictive. Concentrations shall be measured and calculated
as the highest average that will occur over a continuous twenty four (24) hour
period.
   B.   Decision By Health Officer: If a toxic substance is not contained in
the most recent listing of threshold limit values published by the American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, the applicant shall satisfy
the Marshall County health officer that the proposed levels will be safe to the
general population. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-7-6: ODOROUS MATTER:
   A.   District Standards: The release of materials capable of becoming
odorous, either by bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, shall meet the
standards of the district in which the odor is created.
   B.   I Industrial District: When odorous matter is released from any
operation, activity, or use in the manufacturing district, the concentration of
such odorous materials shall not exceed the odor threshold when measured beyond
the lot line, either at ground level or habitable elevation. (Ord. 070102B, 7-
1-2002)
3-7-7: FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARDS:
   A.   Materials Storage, Etc.: In all manufacturing districts the storage,
utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from
incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. The storage, utilization, or
manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning
to intense burning is permitted, provided either of the following conditions is
met:
      1.   Such materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior
walls and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system.
      2.   Such material, if stored outdoors, shall be stored in accordance
with National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 58, Appendix I standards as
follows in Table 1:
   B.   I Industrial District: The storage, utilization, or manufacture of
flammable liquids shall be permitted in accordance with the following table,
exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers, which
shall be restricted. Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks shall not be less
than fifty feet (50') from all lot lines.
TABLE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9ded82d1272e5eb87567ce452252a815c8148b0a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1559.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/9ded82d1272e5eb87567ce452252a815c8148b0a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1561.jpg]
         TABLE 2
         TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE
         MATERIALS (GALLONS) PERMITTED
 
                                                      Aboveground Underground
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint over 187
degrees Fahrenheit but less than 300 degrees              20,000   100,000
Fahrenheit
From and including 105 degrees Fahrenheit to and          10,000   100,000
including 187 degrees Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than     3,000    100,000
105 degrees Fahrenheit
 
When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure
shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed above.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002; amd. Ord. 091823, 9-18-2023; Ord. 082123, 8-21-2023;
Ord. 091823, 9-18-2023)
3-7-8: RADIO AND ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE:
No use may be made of land within any zone established by this chapter in such
a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication or
create radioactivity or radio wave or electrical interference with utility
transmission or reception beyond the lot line nor more than two hundred feet
(200') above the average grade of the lot responsible for creating such
interference and in all cases shall meet the federal communications commission
requirements. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-7-9: WATER POLLUTION:
All uses within zones established by this chapter must follow the
recommendations of the state of Illinois department of public health, circular
815 concerning septic tanks and circular 840 concerning sewerage treatment and
be guided by technical standards contained in TR-20 22. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-
2002)
CHAPTER 8
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Conditional Uses Permitted
3-8-2: Conditional Use Permit Procedure
3-8-3: Conditional Uses Designated
3-8-1: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The city council may, by special permit after public hearing, authorize the
location of any of the following buildings or uses in a district from which
they are prohibited by this title, and may also permit an increase in the
height of any such buildings. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-8-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Before issuance of any conditional use permit for any of the buildings or uses
as listed in section
3-8-3 of this chapter, the city council shall refer the proposed application to
the planning commission, which commission shall be given thirty (30) days in
which to make a report regarding the effect of such proposed building or use
upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility
facilities and other matters pertaining to the public health, public safety and
general welfare. No action shall be taken upon any application for a proposed
building or use herein referred to until and unless the report of the planning
commission has been filed; provided, however, that if no report is received
from the planning commission within thirty (30) days, it shall be assumed that
approval of the application has been given by the said commission. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-8-3: CONDITIONAL USES DESIGNATED:
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower Organization (only in I districts).
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center (only in I districts).
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization (only in I districts).
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization (only in I districts).
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization (only in I districts).
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization (only in I districts).
Airport or landing field.
Any development within five hundred feet (500') of the existing or proposed
rights of way of freeways, expressways, intersections, and controlled access
trafficways and within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of their
existing or proposed interchange or turning lane rights of way shall be deemed
to be conditional uses. Such development shall be specifically reviewed by the
city planning commission according to the conditional use provisions of this
title.
Any public building erected or used by any department of the city, school
district, county, state or federal government.
Automobile service station, motel, restaurant, garage, farm implement sales and
services, and food stores.
Cemetery.
Clubs, and semipublic buildings.
Community building or recreation field.
Extraction of sand, gravel, coal and other raw materials.
Greenhouses and nurseries.
Hospitals, clinics and institutions, including educational, religious and
philanthropic institutions and convalescent homes; provided, however, that such
buildings occupy not over forty percent (40%) of the total area of the lot and
will not have any serious and depreciating effect upon the value of the
surrounding property; and provided further, that the buildings shall be set
back from all yard lines a distance of not less than one foot (1') for each
foot of building height, and that adequate off street parking space be
provided.
Offices, but only in the M district.
Outdoor theaters, but only in the C and I districts.
Parking lots on land not more than three hundred feet (300') from the boundary
of any commercial district.
Private recreational uses where buildings do not cover more than five percent
(5%) of the area of the site.
Private schools, including nursery, prekindergarten, kindergarten, play and
special schools.
Radio towers and broadcasting stations.
Riding stables and private stables.
Roadside stands and recreational activities for temporary or seasonable
periods.
Undertaking establishment. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002; amd. Ord. 121619A, 12-16-
2019)
CHAPTER 9
COMMUNITY UNIT PLAN DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
3-9-1: Plan Consideration
3-9-2: Required Conditions For Approval
3-9-3: Approval Of Plan
3-9-1: PLAN CONSIDERATION:
   A.   The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less
than three (3) acres may submit to the city council a plan for the use and
development of all of the tract of land for residential purposes or for the
repair and alteration of any existing housing development on an area comprising
three (3) acres or more. The development or alteration plans shall be referred
to the planning commission for study and report and for public hearing. If the
commission approves the plans, they shall then be submitted to the city council
for consideration and approval. The approval and recommendations of the
commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval of
the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed
community unit plan meets the conditions set out herein.
   B.   Multi-family, commercial or larger developments of one to three (3)
acres shall be required to have site plan of the development submitted for
review by the city of Wenona engineer prior to being issued a building permit.
The city of Wenona engineer shall review the proposed development for conflicts
with local drainage patterns and for compliance with subsection
4-6-8A3 of this code. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-9-2: REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL:
The proposed community unit plan shall meet the following conditions:
   A.   That property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be
adversely affected.
   B.   That the plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title
to promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
   C.   That the buildings shall be used only for single-family dwellings, two-
family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings and the usual accessory uses,
such as garages and storage space, or community activities including churches.
   D.   That the average lot area per family contained in the site will not be
less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the
development is located.
   E.   That the buildings do not exceed the height regulations of the district
in which the development is located. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-9-3: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
If the city council approves the plans, building permits and certificates of
occupancy may be issued even though the use of land and the location of the
buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces contemplated
by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Nonconforming Uses Allowed
3-10-2: Restoration Of Damaged Buildings
3-10-3: Discontinuance Of Use
3-10-4: Additions; Expansions
3-10-1: NONCONFORMING USES ALLOWED:
The lawful use of land on which no buildings exist, which does not conform to
the provisions of this title, shall be discontinued within one year from the
date of the approval of this title, and the use of such land which becomes
nonconforming by reason of a subsequent change in this title shall also be
discontinued within one year from the date of the change. The lawful use of a
building existing at the time of the adoption of this title may be continued,
although such use does not conform with the provisions hereof, and such use may
be extended throughout the building, provided no structural alterations, except
those required by law or ordinance, are made therein. If no structural
alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to
another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification. The
foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts
hereafter changed. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed
to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter
be changed to a less restricted use. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-10-2: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS:
Any building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the
public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed
value shall be restored in conformity with the regulations of this title,
except a mobile home which is being used for living purposes when this title is
passed may be replaced in a single-family dwelling district if damaged as
outlined above. This exception is not intended to otherwise permit the future
use of mobile homes for living purposes in any district except in conformity
with the regulations of this title. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-10-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is
discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a period of one year or twelve
(12) continuous months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-10-4: ADDITIONS; EXPANSIONS:
No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this title
in the district in which such building or premises is located, except when
required to do so by law or ordinance, shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or structurally altered, unless such use is changed to one
permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located;
provided, however, that during the ten (10) year period immediately following
the passage of this title nonconforming mobile homes in the S single-family
dwelling district may be extended or enlarged or replaced with a newer model
provided that all height and area regulations be observed in any such
extension. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 11
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Building Permit
3-11-2: Building Permit Fees
3-11-3: General Regulations
3-11-1: BUILDING PERMIT:
A building permit must be obtained from the city before any additions or
buildings are constructed or portable buildings are placed. The fee for the
same shall be in accordance with the schedule below. Any person guilty of a
violation of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be subject to
payment of all costs to enjoin the construction. A building permit will be
required for additions or buildings within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
Wenona corporate limits. No fee will be applicable for this permit. (Ord.
100515, 10-5-2015)
3-11-2: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Each applicant for a building permit shall pay a fee in accord with the
following schedule:
 
Cost Of Construction Fee
$20.00 - $20,000.00  $35.00
Over $20,000.00      $35.00 plus $1.50 per $1,000.00
 
(Ord. 100515, 10-5-2015)
3-11-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Any new building or addition must be at least seven feet (7') from the
owner's lot line, including eaves. (Ord. 100702, 10-7-2002)
   B.   The same grade shall be maintained as of surrounding lots, including
landscaping.
   C.   All new buildings and additions must maintain the same setback from
streets as surrounding buildings.
   D.   No building permit will be required for any accessory structure
measuring ten feet by ten feet (10'x10') or less. Other regulations, including
setback requirements, will apply, however. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 12
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Penalties For Violation
3-12-3: Other Ordinances
3-12-4: Permits
3-12-5: Environmental, Open Space, And Access Requirements
3-12-6: Water Supply
3-12-7: Sewage Disposal
3-12-8: Electrical Distribution System; General Requirements
3-12-9: Fuel Supply And Storage
3-12-10: Alterations, Additions, Storage And Occupancy
3-12-11: Temporary Mobile Home Parks
3-12-12: Compliance
3-12-13: Appeals
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building subordinate to and smaller than a principal
building or mobile home, that contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile home.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The zoning board of appeals.
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME OR DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: A mobile home which does not
have a toilet and bath or shower facilities, and the use of such mobile home is
prohibited in any mobile home park.
ENFORCING OFFICER: The legally designated enforcing officer (or his authorized
representative) of the city of Wenona.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME OR INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: Any enclosure or vehicle
used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes on wheels which is
suitable for year round occupancy, and containing toilet and bath or shower
facilities. This definition is not intended to include travel trailers or
camper buses.
MAY: Permissible.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land designated for the exclusive use of the
occupants of a single mobile home, also termed "mobile home space".
MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land upon which twenty (20) or more mobile home
lots are located and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile
home park.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for
the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
PERMIT: A written permission issued by the enforcing officer permitting the
owner to construct or alter a mobile home park under this chapter and
regulations promulgated hereunder.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, or association.
SERVICE OR COMMUNITY BUILDING: A building housing manager's office, recreation
facilities, laundry facilities, maintenance equipment, toilet facilities for
employees, and emergency sanitary accommodations.
SHALL: Imperative and mandatory.
TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME PARKS: The location of multiple mobile homes in a given
area for a period of fourteen (14) days or less. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-2: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any provision of any
regulation adopted by the enforcing officer pursuant to authority granted by
this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by
imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days; and each day's
failure of compliance with any such provision shall constitute a separate
violation. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-3: OTHER ORDINANCES:
Each park to be constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall provide
at least the minimum number and quality of facilities as are required by the
mobile home park control law of the state and the rules and regulations adopted
by the Illinois department of public health pursuant thereto. Where the
requirements of this chapter exceed the requirements of such state of Illinois
law, the provisions of this chapter shall control. This chapter shall apply
only to construction of parks and shall not be construed or act as licensing or
governing the operation of parks. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-4: PERMITS:
   A.   Generally: No person, firm, or corporation shall construct a mobile
home park without first obtaining a conditional use building permit and a
permit pursuant to this chapter to do so. Each of the aforementioned permits
shall be prominently displayed in the office of the mobile home park for which
the same was issued.
   B.   Permit Requirement: In order to obtain a permit to construct a new
mobile home park, or an addition to an existing mobile home park, the applicant
shall file with the enforcing officer a written application setting forth:
      1.   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of filing of the
application.
      2.   Location and legal description of the tract of land, certified on a
plat of a survey by an Illinois registered land surveyor, drawn to scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or larger.
      3.   The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply,
sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection, and for a community
building.
      4.   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the park is to be located.
      5.   All corners and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or
wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen inches (18") in
length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of the pipe
or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the ground.
      6.   The plot plans of the park drawn to scale including building plans
and specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and
specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in
existing facilities, all showing compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The plot plans shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1"=100') and shall contain, among other things, the following:
         a.   The date on which such plot plans were planned.
         b.   An arrow indicating north.
         c.   All mobile home sites shall be properly numbered on the plot
plans.
         d.   Complete information regarding storm sewers.
         e.   Storm water runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
         f.   Contour lines at one foot (1') intervals shall be shown on a
separate plat, and United States geological survey data shall be used for the
preparation of such plat.
         g.   Grades of driveways and all ditches shall be shown on a separate
plat.
      7.   A good and sufficient performance bond or other security acceptable
to the planning commission of the city of Wenona in a sum sufficient to cover a
written estimate made by a qualified engineer or other qualified person of the
cost of improvements. Such bond shall be payable to the city of Wenona, and
conditioned upon the completion of such construction in a reasonable time. An
affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained in the
application shall be attached thereto. Each application for a permit to
construct shall be accompanied by an application fee established by the city
council. Each application fee shall be paid to the city clerk of the city of
Wenona and said application fee, once paid to the city clerk, shall not be
refunded.
   C.   Permit Procedure: Upon receipt of an application for a permit to
construct a park, the enforcing officer shall, if the park is, or the proposed
park will be, in conformity with this chapter, issue a permit to construct. If
the application for a permit to construct is declined, the enforcing officer
shall give the reasons therefor, in writing, to the applicant; and if the
objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and
resubmit it for approval. If a permit to construct a park is issued, periodic
inspection by the enforcing officer is to be made during time of construction
to verify compliance; the applicant shall, upon completion thereof, so notify
the enforcing officer. He shall then inspect the park and, if completed in
accordance with the accepted application, present to the city council his
findings, and upon their acceptance they shall issue a license upon payment of
the fee as determined by the city council. No change in any sanitary
facilities, methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste
disposal, and no change in the plot plan shall be made without first making a
written application to the enforcing officer and receiving a permit therefrom.
Such a permit does not relieve the applicant from securing any other permit or
from complying with any other ordinances of the city of Wenona, Illinois. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-5: ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site Drainage Requirement: Every park to be constructed under the
provisions of this chapter shall provide for the following, in the manner
hereinafter specified:
      1.   No park shall be so located that the drainage of the park area will
endanger any water supply. All such parks shall be well drained and shall be
located in areas free from ponds, swamps, and similar places in which
mosquitoes may breed. No wastewater from mobile homes shall be deposited on the
surface of the ground.
      2.   All land proposed for mobile home parks shall be adequately
protected against flooding.
      3.   The park shall not be subject to any adverse influence from
adjoining streets and areas.
      4.   The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
      5.   Adequate provisions shall be made for sewer facilities.
   B.   Soil And Ground Cover Requirements:
      1.   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings, or other solid material or protected with a
vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation
of dust during dry weather.
      2.   Where the topography has a slope of twenty five percent (25%) or
more, a rip wall cribbing or other approved system of soil and slope
stabilization shall be installed and maintained.
   C.   Nuisances In Parks: All parks shall be maintained free of nuisances
such as excessive heat, glare, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, and
fire or explosive hazards, and shall comply with this title.
   D.   Physical Hazards In Parks:
      1.   Adequate protective barriers shall be provided and maintained where
there is a slope in excess of forty five degrees (45°) and a change in
elevation of six feet (6') or more. Such barriers may include, but are not
limited to, continuous shrubs or fences.
      2.   Swimming pools shall be fenced and secured when not in active use to
prevent unauthorized entry. Fencing or other artificial enclosures shall
completely enclose the pool area.
      3.   Swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of the state department of public health.
   E.   Nonresidential Uses: No part of any park shall be used for
nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for direct
servicing and well being of park residents and for the management and
maintenance of the park. Mobile home unit sales are permitted but the quantity
of them on exhibit shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the occupied lots
in the park and may not occupy more than one acre.
   F.   Required Separations Between Mobile Homes: Mobile homes shall be
separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least
thirty feet (30'). Every mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of four
thousand (4,000) square feet, and be a minimum of fifty feet (50') wide.
   G.   Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips, And Screening In Mobile Home Parks:
      1.   All mobile homes shall be located at least thirty five feet (35')
from any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway
and at least fifteen feet (15') from other park property boundary lines. There
shall be a minimum distance of ten feet (10') between an individual mobile
home, including any accessory structures, and adjoining pavement of a park
street, or common parking area, or other common areas accessible to park
residents.
      2.   All mobile home parks shall be provided with a screening buffer
strip at least five feet (5') wide along all property boundary lines. Where
effective visual barriers do not already exist along such property boundary
lines, the buffer strip shall be furnished with screening at least five feet
(5') high and consisting of fences, freestanding walls or natural growth. Such
growth shall consist of a compact growth of shrubbery, hedges, evergreens, or
other suitable planting sufficient to serve as an effective visual screen.
Fences or walls shall not contain electrical charges, barbed wire, broken
glass, or other material designed to do bodily harm.
      3.   All mobile home sites shall provide a front yard of not less than
ten feet (10') measured from the edge of the pavement.
      4.   Street trees shall be planted within five feet (5') of the pavement
edge. At least one tree per lot shall be planted. Trees shall not be of the
following, or any other brittle wood or species subject to extreme
vulnerability from insects or diseases: elms, willows, poplars, box elders,
soft maple, and hackberry. All trees shall be of a diameter of not less than
two inches (2"), and the developer shall furnish certification from the state
of Illinois that such trees are free from disease. Trees shall be transplanted
stock with the transplanting having been done on or before a date four (4)
years after the date of recording of the subdivision. Trees, when so planted,
shall be only of one species between two (2) intersecting streets.
   H.   Required Recreation Areas In Mobile Home Parks: In all parks there
shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all
park residents. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum
of five hundred (500) square feet for each space in the park that is designated
to accommodate mobile homes. No outdoor recreation; area shall contain less
than one acre. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic
hazards and should, where topography permits, be centrally located.
   I.   Park Street System:
      1.   General Requirements: All parks shall provide safe, continuous and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home space. For the purpose of this chapter, all streets or roads
providing such vehicular access shall hereinafter be referred to as the "park
street system" and shall be maintained by the owner/owners.
      2.   Primary Entrance Road: The primary entrance road connecting the park
street or road to a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement
width of thirty three feet (33').
      3.   Secondary Entrance Road: In addition to the required primary
entrance road, all parks containing twenty (20) or more acres in total area and
that provide for the accommodation of one hundred fifty (150) or more mobile
homes shall have at least one secondary entrance road connecting the park
street system with a public street or road. Such a secondary road or roads
shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24'). Where primary
and secondary entrance roads connect to the same public street or road, there
shall be a minimum separation of one hundred fifty feet (150') between such
access points.
      4.   Interior Streets: All interior streets in the park street system
shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24') on a twenty four
foot (24') right of way with parking prohibited on both sides. Dead end streets
shall be limited in length to three hundred feet (300') and shall be provided
at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at
least sixty five feet (65').
   J.   Street Construction And Design Standards:
      1.   Pavement Materials: All streets shall be provided with seven inch
(7") reinforced concrete or asphalt B-4 mix three inches (3") thick on top of
eight inches (8") of crushed stone or gravel.
      2.   Pavement Design: Primary and secondary entrance roads shall have the
standard city cross section with curbs. Paving on interior streets may have an
alley cross section.
      3.   Grades: Grades on all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate
surface drainage, but shall not be more than eight percent (8%). Short runs
with a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) may be permitted, provided traffic
safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance
of lateral curves.
      4.   Intersections: Within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection,
streets shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least one
hundred fifty feet (150') shall be maintained between centerlines of offset
intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point
shall be avoided.
   K.   Required Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in
all parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be
furnished at the rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home.
Parking bays shall be so located as to provide convenient access to mobile home
spaces. They shall be hard surfaced and a minimum size of twenty feet (20')
commencing at the right of way. There shall be no parking directly in front of
the mobile home.
   L.   Pedestrian Access:
      1.   General Requirements: All parks shall provide safe, convenient four
inch (4") concrete pedestrian access walks between individual mobile homes, the
park street system and all community facilities provided for park residents.
For the purpose of this chapter, all common walks providing such pedestrian
access shall hereinafter be referred to as the "common walk system".
      2.   Individual Walks: All mobile homes shall be connected with the
common walk system and the park street system by one or more individual walks
on each mobile home space. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
two feet (2').
      3.   Common Walk System: A common walk system, two feet (2') wide, shall
be provided in every park for pedestrian access between each mobile home space
and all required open areas, community structures and facilities.
   M.   Required Illumination Of Park Street Systems: All parks shall be
furnished with sufficient electrical systems and lighting units at the owner's
expense, so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights
as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the
safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
      1.   All parts of the park street system: Four-tenths (4/10) foot-candle
average with a minimum of two-tenths (2/10) foot-candle.
      2.   Potentially hazardous locations such as major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps: Individually illuminated with a minimum of four-
tenths (4/10) foot-candle. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-6: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   General Requirement: Every park shall have a water supply system
capable of providing a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate
pressure to water supply facilities for mobile homes, service buildings, fire
hydrants, drinking fountains, and other accessory facilities, as required by
this code for the well being of park residents and for park maintenance. Such
system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
state standards of the Illinois department of public health and approved by the
city of Wenona.
   B.   Water Distribution System: The water distribution system shall be
constructed of piping, fixtures and other equipment of approved materials and
shall be so designed and maintained to provide a pressure of not less than
twenty (20) pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions, at each
mobile home, service building, and other locations requiring potable water
supply.
   C.   Individual Water Connections:
      1.   Individual water service connections shall be provided at each
mobile home lot in the mobile home park. All water service connections shall be
watertight and located at a minimum distance of five feet (5') from sanitary
sewer connections belowground. The minimum pipe size of connections shall be
three-fourths inch (3/4"). Outlets shall be so constructed as to be free of
possible contamination from surface drainage and possible damage during
installation of a mobile home and shall be four inches (4") above grade.
      2.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe, and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of ground during freezing weather.
      3.   Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any
connection.
   D.   Required Water Supply For Fire Protection: All parks shall provide
water supply facilities. Hydrants shall be located within three hundred feet
(300') of any mobile home, service building, or other accessory structures and
shall be of a type prescribed by the city of Wenona. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-7: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be disposed of into a common
sewage system. All provided sewage systems shall be constructed in conformity
with all laws of the state of Illinois, regulation of any department, division
or board of the state of Illinois, and any ordinance of the city of Wenona,
Illinois, relative thereto. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a
sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each mobile
home. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of such mobile home park to
provide an approved type of water and odor tight connection from the mobile
home water drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of such
owner or operator to make such connection and keep all occupied mobile homes
connected to such sewer while located in a mobile home park. Sewer connections
in unoccupied mobile home sites shall be so closed that they will emit no odors
or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or waste shall be allowed to fall
on the ground from a mobile home. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-8: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of approved
wiring, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances, which shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. All parts of the park electrical distribution system shall conform
with the approved standards for safety to life and property and with accepted
engineering practices as required by the city of Wenona. All electric wires
shall be underground. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-9: FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE:
   A.   Natural Gas System: Natural gas piping systems in all parks shall be
installed and maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices and
the rules and regulations of the city of Wenona.
   B.   Fuel Oil Supply Systems: All fuel oil supply systems provided for
mobile homes, service buildings, and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the city of Wenona.
Fuel oil systems underground shall be located at a minimum of ten feet (10')
horizontally from waterlines and at necessary crossings shall be placed in
substantial pipe sleeves extending ten feet (10') from each side of the water
pipe. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-10: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS, STORAGE AND OCCUPANCY:
   A.   General Requirements: All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical connections, alterations or repairs in mobile home parks and
individual mobile homes shall be made in accordance with applicable local
regulations.
   B.   Permanent Additions: No permanent additions to a mobile home unit shall
be permitted. Roofed patios are permitted, provided they are not physically
attached to the mobile home unit.
   C.   Separate Storage Structures: Small storage structures are permissible
within ten feet (10') of a mobile home, provided they are:
      1.   Not larger than approximately six feet (6') by eight (8) in floor
plan by eight feet (8') in height.
      2.   Constructed entirely of fireproof materials such as sheet metal.
      3.   Capable of being completely and easily disassembled and are readily
portable.
      4.   Used for only storage purposes.
      5.   Not attached to a mobile home or used as an auxiliary room or
otherwise used for dwelling or living purposes.
      6.   So constructed and maintained that a rodent harborage is not
created.
      7.   Placed no closer than fifty feet (50') from any street.
   D.   Cupboards: Small storage cupboards if neatly and substantially
constructed shall also be considered permissible within ten feet (10') of a
mobile home even when constructed of nonfireproof materials, provided they are:
      1.   Serviced without walking into the structure.
      2.   Equipped with shelves so arranged as to prevent a person from
stepping or walking into the structure.
      3.   Horizontal depth of structure not greater than approximately thirty
inches (30") (average adult arm length) in order that the rear portion of
shelves can be serviced from a position outside the structure.
      4.   Do not create a rodent harborage.
      5.   Placed no closer than fifty feet (50') from any street.
   E.   Occupancy Of Mobile Homes: Occupancy of the mobile home shall be
limited to the design capacity of the mobile home. This is established by the
number of sleeping spaces provided in the mobile home.
   F.   Mobile Home Stand: Each mobile home stand is to be four inch (4")
reinforced concrete and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') wide by fifty five feet
(55') long.
   G.   Wheels and hitches shall not be removed from mobile home units. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-11: TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME PARKS:
Temporary mobile home parks are exempt from the permanent facility requirements
of this chapter. However, they must comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Reuse: The area used as the park may not be similarly used for a period
of ninety (90) days following the vacating of the site.
   B.   Disposal: All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be contained
in a sealed sanitary tank with each mobile home and, disposed of in a sanitary
manner. No water or waste shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile
home.
   C.   Property Line: Individual mobile homes shall be placed no less than
fifteen feet (15') from any property line abutting a residential district.
(Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-12: COMPLIANCE:
Pursuant to the regulations of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner or owners of the mobile home park to provide for the general
maintenance of the streets, curbings, sidewalks, and any accessory building,
also, to provide for and enforce the general cleanliness of the entire park
area. Abandoned automobiles and/or vehicles must be removed from the general
park area, at the park owner's expense. An "abandoned automobile or vehicle" is
an automobile or vehicle that is unlicensed or inoperative. The enforcing
officer is hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of
such mobile home park at any reasonable time for the purpose of verifying
compliance with this chapter. Failure to conform to the aforementioned
regulations of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the park license;
and the owner or owners upon conviction shall be subjected to all the penalties
as set forth in section
3-11-1 of this title. (Ord. 070102B, 7-1-2002)
3-12-13: APPEALS:
Any person refused a permit to construct or alter a mobile home park shall have
the right to a hearing before the board of appeals of the city of Wenona,
Illinois, which shall have full power to conduct such hearings, issue
subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations, and all other power necessary to
conduct such hearing.
   A.   All hearings before the board of appeals shall be open to the public.
   B.   The board of appeals shall keep minutes of the proceedings showing its
determination and shall also keep records of its other official actions.
   C.   In the performance of its duties under provisions of this chapter, the
board of appeals may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by the city
of Wenona, Illinois.
   D.   The board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure. (Ord.
070102B, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 13
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
3-13-1: Purpose And Scope
3-13-2: Definitions
3-13-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
3-13-4: Dispute Resolution
3-13-5: Indemnification
3-13-6: Insurance
3-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (the Act).
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 071618A, 7-16-2018)
3-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
ANTENNA: Means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Means Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical
Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Means any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
APPLICATION: Means a request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: Means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Means a cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: Means a cable operator, as defined in 47 USC
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153
(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51),
as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: Means a one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: Means a building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation
Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: Means a Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation,
order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: Means a utility pole owned or operated by the City in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: Means a written authorization required by the City to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: Means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: Means the functional division of the Federal government,
the State of Illinois, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: Means a recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. Right-of-way does not include City-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: Means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Means any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: Means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Means any services provided to the general public, including
a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: Means a person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
071618A, 7-16-2018)
3-13-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received
and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions
and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The City shall process applications as follows:
         a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice
shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this section.
         c.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice
shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this section.
         d.   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent
to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City shall
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the City's review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with
the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with
the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         e.   Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a
small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant
shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the City for
the initial collocation on a Municipal utility pole by the applicant. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a
Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a License
Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the City shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the City's permit application form are submitted by the applicant
to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City;
or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
duration unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or
the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes
or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable City Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by personal
delivery at the City's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used commercial delivery services.
   C.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Location: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the top
of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies
with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a comprehensive plan
or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-
way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a conditional use permit in conformance with procedures, terms
and conditions set forth in chapter 8 of this title.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   D.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   E.   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 1) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or 2) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter.
   F.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the City and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
City utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the City's utility poles pursuant
to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the City
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City's utility
poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before the wireless
provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
   G.   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the City an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility
pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00)
per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the City utility pole.
If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the
fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   H.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless
provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days
of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. 071618A, 7-16-2018)
3-13-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Marshall County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 071618A, 7-16-2018)
3-13-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and
all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City
improvements or right-of- way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 071618A, 7-16-2018)
3-13-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the City's improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of City improvements or rights-
of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the
collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the City.
(Ord. 071618A, 7-16-2018)
CHAPTER 14
SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS ("SECS")
SECTION:
3-14-1:    Purpose And Scope
3-14-2:    Rooftop Mounted SECS
3-14-3:    Ground Mounted SECS
3-14-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The City of Wenona has found solar energy conversion systems ("SECS")
to be a viable and useful method of localized energy generation. SECS shall be
permitted in all zoning districts in accordance with the minimum standards set
forth in this Chapter.
   B.   Solar energy conversion systems shall comply with the National Electric
Code and the Illinois State Electric Code.
   C.   In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the requirements of this
Chapter shall be complied with to the maximum extent possible without violating
Federal or State laws ot regulations.
   D.   Prohibitions.
      1.   Solar Farms, defined as a commercial facility that converts sunlight
into electricity, whether by photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar thermal
devices (CST), or other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of
wholesale sales of generated electricity and is the principal land use for the
parcel on which it is located, are prohibited in all zoning districts.
      2.   Solar Gardens, defined as a commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic)
array that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail
power) to individual or multiple households or businesses residing or located
either on-site or off-site from the location of the solar energy system and is
either an accessory or a principal use, are prohibited in all zoning districts.
(Ord. 042125A, 4-21-2025)
3-14-2: ROOFTOP MOUNTED SECS:
   A.   Shall not project higher than the maximum building height permitted for
the zoning district. If mounted on an accessory structure, the SECS shall not
project higher than the maximum height permitted for that structure.
   B.   If mounted on a pitched roof, shall be mounted flush with the slope of
the roof and shall not extend further than twelve inches (12") from the roof
surface at any point. SECS shall not extend beyond the ridgeline of the roof at
any point.
   C.   Shall be safely and securely attached to the rooftop.
   D.   At a minimum, two (2) access pathways with a minimum of thirty-six
inches (36") each must be provided on separate planes of the roof. One access
pathway must be on the street or driveway side. The pathway must be on the same
roof plane as the panels, on an adjacent roof plane, or straddling the same and
adjacent roof plane.
   E.   The panels must be set back from the ridge line to allow for fire
service roof ventilation at the peak of the roof. The setback is a minimum of
thirty-six inches (36"). This setback occurs on both sides of the ridge.
   F.   Permit Required. The property owner shall submit an application to the
City for a rooftop mounted SECS demonstrating compliance with the requirements
set forth herein. The permit fee is thirty-five dollars ($35.00). No rooftop
mounted SECS shall be installed without a permit issued by the City.
(Ord. 042125A, 4-21-2025)
3-14-3: GROUND MOUNTED SECS:
   A.   A ground mounted SECS is a solar energy system mounted on a rack or
pole that rests or is attached to the ground. Ground-mount systems can be an
accessory use, not a principal use of the property.
   B.   Are not permitted in residential zoning districts unless the property
owner obtains the written consent of all adjacent property owners.
   C.   Shall satisfy the applicable setback requirements for an accessory
structure on the lot for the zoning district, however, ground mounted SECS are
not permitted in the front yard.
   D.   Shall be no higher than eight feet (8') in height.
   E.   Shall be limited to an area no larger than ninety-six (96) square feet
in size.
   F.   In commercial and industrial districts, the perimeter shall be enclosed
by a fence constructed of a type suitable for security purposes. The fence must
be a minimum of six feet (6') high but no more than ten feet (10') in height
and must comply with City regulations concerning fences.
   G.   Shall be designed to avoid glare or reflection onto adjacent properties
and adjacent roadways. The exterior surface shall have a nonreflective finish
and shall be color coordinated to harmonize with roof materials and other
dominant colors of the structure.
   H.   Permit Required. The property owner shall submit an application to the
City for a ground mounted SECS demonstrating compliance with the requirements
set forth herein. The permit fee is thirty-five dollars ($35.00). No ground
mounted SECS shall be installed without a permit issued by the City.
(Ord. 042125A, 4-21-2025)
TITLE 4
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
4-1-1: Title
4-1-2: Intent And Purpose
4-1-3: Geographic Jurisdiction
4-1-4: General Provisions
4-1-5: Interpretation
4-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF WENONA, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth which will become a permanent community asset by establishing minimum
standards for subdivision design and construction.
   B.   To assure the development of land for the highest possible use with all
the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence which would
adversely affect the living environment or tax base.
   C.   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the city of Wenona and the developer and to safeguard the
interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the investor, and the city of
Wenona.
   D.   To control the scattered and premature platting of lots beyond the
effective operating range of existing public utilities and improvements.
   E.   To cause the cost of design and installation of improvements in new,
platted subdivisions to be borne by the persons purchasing the lots rather than
by any direct or indirect burden upon existing property owners beyond the
limits of the subdivision who have already paid for the improvements servicing
their property.
   F.   To bring about compact development of both homes and public
improvements without delay often experienced through future use of special
assessment methods.
   G.   To coordinate new subdivision design with the design of the city of
Wenona as a whole to allow for the proper capacity of all types of improvements
on the basis of an orderly sequence of subdivisions as a part of neighborhoods
and neighborhoods as a part of the community.
   H.   To secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters.
   I.   To improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plats. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-1-3: GEOGRAPHIC JURISDICTION:
Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the city of Wenona or
within one and one-half (11/2) miles of such corporate limits on unincorporated
land, wishing to divide the same into lots or to resubdivide for the purpose of
sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys, or other
lands for public use, shall follow the procedures and requirements of this
title. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-1-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereinafter be laid out, the
subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit a preliminary and a final
subdivision plat to the planning commission. Said plats and plans of proposed
improvements, and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in
full compliance with these regulations.
   B.   Until plats and plans for the subdivision are approved, properly
endorsed and recorded:
      1.   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to natural land;
      2.   No lot, tract, or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale or option be made or given;
      3.   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric or lighting,
grading, paving, or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by any public
service corporation at the request of such owner or owners or his or their
agent.
   C.   All lands offered to the city of Wenona for use as streets, alleys,
schools, parks, and other public uses shall be referred to the planning
commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the Wenona
city council or by any other governing authority of the city of Wenona.
   D.   No plat will be approved for a subdivision which is subject to periodic
flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities and which would make
adequate drainage of the lots and streets impossible. However, if the
subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the city
of Wenona engineer, make the area safe for residential occupancy, and provide
adequate lot and street drainage, the preliminary plat of the subdivision may
be approved.
   E.   In all subdivisions due regard shall be given to the preservation of
historical sites and natural features such as large trees, watercourses, and
scenic views.
   F.   In the case of tentative plats for parts of tracts, where it appears
necessary to the planning commission for the satisfactory overall development
of an area, an owner may be required to prepare at least a street plan of his
entire tract based upon proper topographic surveys for approval of any portion
of such plan.
   G.   Whenever an area is subdivided into lots which may at a later date be
resubdivided, consideration shall be given to the street and lot arrangement of
the original subdivision so additional minor streets can be located which will
permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
   H.   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this title:
      1.   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre, in any
recorded subdivision, which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
      2.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use of
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access.
      3.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
      4.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants of conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
      5.   The conveyance made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
      6.   The division of lots of record existing as of 1994, into no more
than two (2) parts and not involving any new streets or easements of access,
provided that the two (2) parts meet the requirements of the applicable zoning
ordinance and all other ordinances of the city of Wenona.
      7.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of two
(2) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
   B.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the
use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this title or of any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation, of any kind, the regulations which
are most restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements, shall
govern.
   C.   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any
other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this title are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, then the requirements of
this title shall govern.
   D.   If an article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this title is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Rules
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-1: RULES:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the futures and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and "parcel".
(Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING SETBACK LINES: Lines within a lot or other parcel of land, so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision, between which, and the
adjacent boundary of the street upon which, the lot abuts, the erection of an
enclosed structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
BUTT LOTS: Lots the rear lot lines of which abut the side lot lines of other
lots platted in the same block and not separated therefrom by an alley or other
open space.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the
major street system, including the principal entrance streets of residence
development and the primary circulating streets within such a development.
CROSSWALK: A public or private right of way across a block to be used by
pedestrians and/or for underground utilities.
EASEMENT: The quantity of land set aside for which a liberty, privilege, or
advantage in land without profit, existing distinct from the ownership of land,
is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public.
FINAL PLAT: A map or chart of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed,
and such survey marked on the ground so that streets, blocks, lots, and other
divisions thereof can be identified.
LOT WIDTH: The width of the lot measured along the minimum building setback
line, except for lots which front on the concave side of a curving street,
where the width of lot shall measure sixty feet (60') back from the front lot
line.
MAJOR STREET: A public thoroughfare with a high degree of traffic continuity
having a width established in the table, "Minimum Standards For Street Design",
in section
4-6-9 of this title.
OWNER: Includes the plural as well as the singular, and may mean either a
natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or
quasi-public corporation, or combination of any of these.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The local planning commission of the city of Wenona,
Illinois.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A map or plan of a proposed land division or subdivision.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords primary access by
pedestrians and vehicles to abutting property.
SUBDIVISION: A division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of: a) transfer of ownership, b) building development, or c) redevelopment,
including all changes in street or lot lines; provided, however, that divisions
of land for agricultural purposes of five (5) acres or more not involving any
new street or easement of access shall be exempted.
TENTATIVE APPROVAL: Approval with or without recommended alterations given to a
preliminary plat by the planning commission, and provides the necessary
authority to proceed with the preparation and presentation of the final plat.
WENONA, MUNICIPALITY OF: The city of Wenona, Marshall County, Illinois. (Ord.
070102C, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLATS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Preapplication Procedure
4-3-2: Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Plat
4-3-3: Procedure For Approval Of Final Plat
4-3-1: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Prior to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary
plan, the subdivider shall submit to the office of the planning commission
plans and data as specified below. This step does not require formal
application, fee, or filing of plans with the city clerk. The subdivider may
request a meeting with the planning commission of the city of Wenona in order
to discuss his plans and particular problems.
   B.   Preapplication information is suggested as follows:
      1.   General subdivision information shall describe or outline the
existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to
supplement the submitted plans. This information may include data on existing
covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number
of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
school, playground, park areas, and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants, and proposed utilities and street improvements.
      2.   Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form
the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on a
print of the topographic data and contours of not less than five foot (5')
intervals. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-3-2: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together
with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in chapter
4 of this title.
   B.   Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat and supplemental material
specified shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning commission with
written application for conditional approval.
   C.   At the time of filing for conditional approval of the preliminary plat,
the application shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order,
payable to the city of Wenona, to cover the cost of checking and verifying the
proposed plat, based upon the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per lot or twenty
dollars ($20.00), whichever sum shall be greater, and not refundable.
Upon the acceptance of the application by the planning commission, the planning
commission secretary shall surrender the check or money order to the city of
Wenona treasurer for deposit in the general fund.
   D.   Following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted
for conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements
to be made by him, the planning commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act
thereon as submitted or modified, and, if approved, the planning commission
shall express its approval as a conditional approval and shall state the
conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its
disapproval and its reasons therefor.
The action of the planning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the
preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy forwarded with a report to
the Wenona city council and the other retained by the planning commission.
   E.   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of
approval to the layout submitted in the preliminary plat as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the
planning commission and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of
these regulations and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any. (Ord.
070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-3-3: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and
develop at that time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
   B.   Prior to the time of submission of the final plat of subdivision, final
plans and specifications for public improvements shall be submitted in
triplicate to the planning commission and shall include at least the following:
      1.   Detailed drawings of a grading plan, street improvements plan, water
system improvements plan and storm sewer plan.
      2.   Plans and profiles drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') horizontally and one inch to ten feet (1" = 10')
vertically indicating additional horizontal and vertical location of streets,
sewers, appurtenances, and the existing grade.
      3.   Detailed material and construction specifications concerning the
work to be performed, including general conditions of the contract acceptable
by the city of Wenona.
   C.   Upon the receipt of these final plans, the planning commission shall
refer same to the city of Wenona engineer for his comments and corrections. The
city of Wenona engineer shall review these plans for compliance with the
requirements of the city of Wenona, and shall return them together with his
recommendations to the planning commission. The city of Wenona engineer may, at
his discretion, confer with the engineer for the developer concerning
correction to the final plans prior to his final approval. All final plans
shall be submitted on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") cloth or
paper and shall bear the signature and seal of the Illinois registered
professional engineer under whose directions they were prepared.
   D.   Seven (7) copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for
approval shall be prepared as specified in chapter 4 of this title, and shall
be submitted to the planning commission within twelve (12) months after
approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, preliminary plat approval shall
become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by
the planning commission.
   E.   Within thirty (30) days after application for approval of the final
plat, if the planning commission approves, it shall affix its seal upon the
plat together with the certifying signature of its chairman and secretary. If
the planning commission disapproves, it shall set forth its reasons in its own
records and provide the applicant with a copy.
   F.   1. After approval of the final plat by the planning commission and the
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one tracing of the final
plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink on tracing cloth or other permanent
plastic base, shall be submitted to the Wenona city council for approval.
      2.   Action must be taken by the Wenona city council within sixty (60)
days after the final plat has been submitted to the council for approval.
      3.   Upon approval of the Wenona city council, the developer shall record
the plat with the county recorder or registrar of titles within four (4)
months. If not recorded within this time, the approval shall be null and void.
Immediately after recording, the original or a duly certified copy of the
recorded plat shall be filed with the Wenona city clerk. The developer shall
furnish the Wenona city clerk with three (3) additional copies to be
distributed as follows: one copy each to the city of Wenona engineer, city of
Wenona public works official, and the planning commission. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-
2002)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLATS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Preapplication Plans And Data
4-4-2: Plats And Data For Conditional Approval
4-4-3: Plats And Data For Final Approval
4-4-1: PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA 1 :
   A.   General subdivision information should describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement
the drawings listed below. The information may include data on existing
covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number
of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
school, playground, park areas, and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
   B.   Sketch plan, on topographic survey, should show in simple sketch form
the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made
directly on a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan should include
the existing topographic data listed in subsection
4-4-2A of this chapter. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. Preapplication plans and data are recommended, but not required.
4-4-2: PLATS AND DATA FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
   A.   Topographic data required as a basis for the preliminary plat in
subsection B of this section shall include existing conditions as follows,
except when otherwise specified by the planning commission:
      1.   Boundary lines: Bearings and distances.
      2.   Easements: Location, width and purpose.
      3.   Streets on and adjacent to the tract: Name and right of way width
and elevation of surfacing; and legally established centerline elevations;
walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
      4.   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: Location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water
mains and sewers; location of gas lines; fire hydrants, electric and telephone
lines and streetlights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the
tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones,
showing invert elevation of sewers.
      5.   Ground elevations on the tract, based on the city of Wenona datum
plane: For land that slopes less than one-half percent (1/2%) show not less
than one foot (1') contours, show spot elevation at all breaks in grade, along
all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than one
hundred feet (100') apart in all directions, and for land that slopes more than
two percent (2%) show not less than two foot (2') contours.
      6.   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the planning
commission: Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock and ground water conditions; depth to ground water, unless test pits are
dry at a depth of five feet (5'); location and results of soil percolation
tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
      7.   Other conditions on the tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter,
houses, barns, shacks, and other significant features.
      8.   Other conditions on adjacent land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other
nearby residential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date, and number, and show approximate percent buildup, typical lot
size, and dwelling type.
      9.   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
      10.   Proposed public improvements: Highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
      11.   Key plan showing location of the tract.
      12.   Title and certificates: Present tract designation according to
official records in office of the county recorder; title under which proposed
subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, notation
stating acreage, scale, north arrow.
   B.   Preliminary plat shall be drawn to scale of one hundred feet to the
inch (100'=1"). It shall show all existing conditions required above in
subsection A of this section and shall show all proposals including the
following:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      2.   Its location by section, township, and range and as forming a part
of some larger tract or parcel of land referred to in the indexes of the
records of the county clerk.
      3.   Sufficient information to accurately locate the plat.
      4.   The description and location of all survey monuments erected in the
subdivision shall be shown.
      5.   The names and addresses of the persons to whom the notice of the
hearing to be held by the planning commission should be sent (the subdivider,
the designer of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately
adjoining the land to be platted.)
      6.   The names, locations, roadway widths, right of way widths,
approximate gradients and other dimensions of streets, alleys, easements,
parks, and other open spaces.
      7.   Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches and industry.
      8.   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or
reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
      9.   Location and size of utilities.
      10.   Block numbers and layout, numbers, dimensions and area of lots.
      11.   Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
      12.   North point and scale and date of preparation.
      13.   Draft of protective covenants, if any, whereby the subdivider
proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed development.
(Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-4-3: PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
   A.   Final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or inscribed on other
permanent plastic base on sheets to satisfy the requirements of the county
recorder and shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100'=1").
Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat
may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory
to the planning commission. The final plat shall show the following:
      1.   Name of subdivision.
      2.   Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal
description.
      3.   Scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1"=100') (shown graphically).
      4.   Date and north point.
      5.   Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angles and
linear dimensions.
      6.   Exact location, width, and name of all streets within and adjoining
the plat, and the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalkways.
Streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named
shall bear the names of the existing streets.
      7.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments (not less than 3), which shall be accurately described in
the plat.
      8.   Municipal, township, county, or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of subdivision by distances and angles.
      9.   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings, and
lengths of all arcs.
      10.   Location, dimensions and purposes for all easements.
      11.   All block and lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in
feet and hundredths.
      12.   Location and description of permanent monuments or bench marks.
      13.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property
owners.
      14.   Protective covenants which meet with the approval of the planning
commission shall be lettered on the final plat or attached thereto.
      15.   A summary on its face of all restrictions applicable to any part of
said subdivision relating to building restrictions, use restrictions, building
lines or otherwise.
   B.   Accompanying documents shall consist of:
      1.   Certification by a registered surveyor in the form set out in
section
4-7-6 of this title.
      2.   Notarized certifications, by owner or owners, and by mortgagor or
lienholder of record, acknowledging the plat and the dedication of streets and
other public areas.
      3.   An agreement executed by the owner and subdivider to make and
install the improvements provided for in chapter 6 of this title in accordance
with the plans and specifications accompanying the final plat.
      4.   A notice from the Wenona city council stating that there has been
filed with and approved by the Wenona city council the following:
         a.   A certificate by the city of Wenona engineer that all
improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval
have been made or installed in accordance with the specifications; or a bond
which shall:
            (1)   Run to the Wenona city council;
            (2)   Be in an amount determined by the city of Wenona engineer to
be sufficient in amount to complete the improvements and installations in
compliance with this title;
            (3)   Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do
business in the state of Illinois; and
            (4)   Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and
installations.
      5.   Evidence of a deposit with the city of Wenona in escrow, in cash, or
by maintenance bond, equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the estimated cost of
surface improvements to be held by the city of Wenona for a period of eighteen
(18) months after the final completion of such work as a guarantee against any
defect in the material or workmanship furnished in connection with such
improvement latent in character and not discernible at the time of the final
approval of such improvement, and to guarantee against any damage to such
improvements by reason of settling of ground, base or foundation thereof. After
the termination of such eighteen (18) month period such deposit shall be
refunded to the depositor, if no defects have developed; if defects have
developed, then the balance of such deposit after reimbursement of the city of
Wenona for any amounts expended by it in the curing of such defects.
      6.   A certificate from the proper collector thereof that he finds no
delinquent general taxes and all special assessments constituting a lien on the
whole or any part of the land to be subdivided have been satisfied/paid. (Ord.
070102C, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Streets
4-5-2: Alleys
4-5-3: Frontage Roads
4-5-4: Easements
4-5-5: Blocks
4-5-6: Lots
4-5-7: Public Spaces
4-5-1: STREETS:
   A.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
   B.   The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either provide for
the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in
surrounding areas or meet a particular situation where topographical drainage
or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impracticable.
   C.   Local residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
   D.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
highway or interstate highway, the planning commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys,
or such other treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
   E.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or
limited access highway right of way, the planning commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall be determined also with
due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations.
   F.   All street intersections should encourage safe traffic flow, and street
jogs with center offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall
not be approved.
   G.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty
degrees (60°).
   H.   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other requirements
of these regulations, and where the city of Wenona engineer finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half or partial street is adjacent to a
tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.
   I.   Dead end streets, designed to be so permanently (cul-de-sac), shall not
be longer than seven hundred feet (700') and shall be provided at the closed
end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least one
hundred feet (100'). Where an existing street shall be continued in the street
pattern of the proposed subdivision, a turnaround shall be provided in the
proposed subdivision.
   J.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of
the planning commission.
   K.   Street improvements shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   The full width of the right of way shall be graded to the required
section.
      2.   All unsuitable subbase material shall be removed and shall be
replaced with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
      3.   The centerline grade shall not be less than 0.36 percent, and shall
not exceed six percent (6%) on primary and secondary streets and the
percentages required in the table, "Minimum Standards For Street Design", in
section
4-6-4 of this title on minor streets and cul-de-sac streets.
      4.   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in centerline
gradient occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one
percent (1%) or less. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be
forty feet (40') for each one percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade,
but in no case shall such length be less than forty feet (40'). The length of
vertical curve on collector streets shall be fifty feet (50') for each one
percent (1%) of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case shall such length
be less than fifty feet (50').
      5.   All pavement thickness, including surface, base courses and subbase
courses, shall be designed in accordance with section 7, "Pavement Design", of
the "Design Manual" as prepared by the Illinois department of transportation,
bureau of design, and the latest revisions thereof. The minimum thickness for
residential streets shall be as specified therein. Design data shall be
submitted to the city of Wenona engineer together with copies of soils test
reports, at the time of plan submittal.
      6.   Pavements in or bordering industrial and/or commercial areas shall
be designed based upon projected traffic volumes and shall be constructed of
the following minimum thickness and materials:
         a.   Standard reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement having a
uniform thickness of ten inches (10"). Concrete for such pavement shall have a
minimum fourteen (14) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) pounds per square inch, shall contain not less than six (6) bags of
cement per cubic yard of concrete and shall contain not less then three percent
(3%) nor more than six percent (6%) entrained air. Slump shall be not less than
two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
         b.   Eight inch (8") thick bituminous aggregate mixture base course
and a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and surface course having a
minimum compacted thickness of three inches (3").
         c.   Ten inch (10") thick gravel or crushed stone base course
(aggregate base course, type B) having a wearing surface of bituminous concrete
binder and surface course, class 1, having a minimum compacted thickness of
three inches (3"). (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-5-2: ALLEYS:
   A.   Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts. The
planning commission shall refer any variations to the Wenona city council for
waiving this requirement, if provisions are made for service access, such as
off street loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the
uses proposed.
   B.   Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas except where
topographic or other conditions may necessitate their use.
   C.   The minimum right of way width of an alley, if necessary and if
provided, shall be twenty feet (20').
   D.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit vehicular
movement.
   E.   Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
shall provide adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by
the planning commission and city of Wenona engineer.
   F.   Alley pavement shall conform with specifications in subsection
4-5-1K of this chapter. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-5-3: FRONTAGE ROADS:
The complete design for frontage roads, including specifications and
designation of trafficways, driving lanes, paving widths, thickness, materials,
etc., shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval
prior to the issuance of building permits or the sale or lease of buildings or
land in planned developments. The minimum number of off street parking spaces
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the
city of Wenona. Frontage roads and parking spaces shall be designed in
accordance with other provisions of this title, but in no case shall the
minimum equivalent thickness be less than six inches (6") for Portland cement
concrete or eight inches (8") of gravel or crushed stone base course (aggregate
base course, type B) having a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and
surface course, class 1, having a minimum thickness of two and one-half inches
(21/2"), and also a minimum bituminous aggregate mixture of six inches (6")
compacted thickness with a similar two and one-half inch (21/2") bituminous
concrete binder and surface course is permissible. When a frontage road is to
be dedicated to public use, the specifications shall be in accordance with the
owner or lessee. To use the same private frontage road or parking lot, a trust
indenture shall be recorded before approval of the multi-family, commercial or
industrial subdivision.
A minimum distance may be required by the planning commission where deemed
necessary between points of ingress and egress where all property to be
subdivided is under one ownership on the effective date hereof. Where property
has frontage on a state or federal highway, the spacing and design of the
points of ingress and egress to the major highway shall be subject to approval
of the Illinois division of highways. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-5-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
provide for utilities where necessary, shall be designed to provide continuity
from block to block, and shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right of way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse. (Ord.
070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-5-5: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   The maximum length of blocks may be permitted up to one thousand eight
hundred feet (1,800'). Blocks over eight hundred feet (800') may require
crosswalk easements. Crosswalk easements not less than twelve feet (12') in
width shall be provided where deemed necessary by the planning commission. The
use of additional crosswalkways in any instance to provide safe and convenient
access to schools, parks, shopping areas, or other similar destinations may be
recommended by the planning commission. Minimum length of blocks shall be four
hundred feet (400'). (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-5-6: LOTS:
   A.   The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
   B.   Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of the
Wenona zoning ordinance, where applicable.
   C.   All side lot lines shall be at right angles to the straight street
lines, or radial to curved street lines unless a variation to this rule will
give better street and lot plan. All residential lots shall abut on a publicly
dedicated street or a permanent easement of access to public street not less
than twenty feet (20') in width.
   D.   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be prohibited in
residential districts, except where necessary to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries.
   E.   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
establishment of front building lines on both the front and side of the lots
adjoining the streets.
   F.   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream shall have
additional minimum width or depth, as required, to provide an adequate building
site and afford the minimum usable area required in the Wenona zoning ordinance
for front, rear, and side yards.
   G.   Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved road or street having a
radius of two hundred feet (200') or less, the minimum width of the frontage at
the lot may be measured at the building line.
   H.   The area of the street right of way shall not be included in
calculating the area of the lot to be in accordance with the minimum lot area
requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
   I.   Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. The depth of a
lot should not exceed three (3) times its average width. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-
2002)
4-5-7: PUBLIC SPACES:
   A.   Whenever in the judgment of the planning commission a park, recreation
area, school sites or other public space should be located in whole or in part
in the proposed subdivision, the planning commission shall request the
dedication of those spaces or shall require their reservation for a period of
one year following the date of final approval of the subdivision plat. In the
event a governmental agency concerned passes a resolution expressing its intent
to acquire the land reserved within the reservation period, the reservation
period shall be extended for an additional year.
   B.   Such dedication or reserved areas shall be shown on the plat by the
proper word "dedication" or "reservation" designating the public body to which
the land is dedicated or reserved. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Approval
4-6-2: Detailed Engineering Plans And Public Improvements
4-6-3: Monuments/Markers
4-6-4: Street Construction
4-6-5: Curbs, Gutters, Drainage
4-6-6: Sidewalks
4-6-7: Street Lighting Requirement
4-6-8: Water Supply, Fire Hydrants, And Sanitary Sewer System
4-6-9: Public Utilities
4-6-10: Street Signs
4-6-1: APPROVAL:
Before a subdivision shall be approved, the city of Wenona engineer shall
certify that the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and
specifications, together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all
ordinances of the city of Wenona and that they comply with the following:
Unless otherwise specified, all construction work shall be in accordance with
provisions of the current issue of the "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", adopted January 2, 1958, by the department of public
works and buildings, division of highways, of the state of Illinois, as the
same is amended from time to time, hereinafter referred to as the "standard
specification". Unless otherwise specified, design standards shall be specified
in the current issue of the above referenced publication and hereinafter
referred to as "highway standards". (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-2: DETAILED ENGINEERING PLANS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   No substantial deviations from the plans and specifications as
submitted under subsection
4-3-3B of this title and as approved by the city of Wenona engineer will be
allowed without written permission of the Wenona city council. Field changes
will be allowed by the city of Wenona engineer.
   B.   Prior to final approval of improvements, the subdivider shall submit
twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") reproducible plans showing the
works as actually built. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-3: MONUMENTS/MARKERS:
   A.   Permanent monuments shall be placed at all corners and at points of
tangency of curve lines along the boundary of the subdivision. Permanent
monuments shall be of concrete with minimum dimensions of four inches by four
inches (4" x 4") at top, six inches (6") at bottom, and thirty six inches (36")
long, with a copper dowel three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter, at least two
and one-half inches (21/2") in length, imbedded so that the top of the dowel
shall be flush with the surface and at the center of the monument.
   B.   All corner lots not marked by concrete monuments shall be marked by
galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least thirty six
inches (36") in length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The
top of the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the
ground.
   C.   In addition a minimum of one permanent bench mark shall be established
for each twenty (20) acres, or major fraction thereof, subdivided and at a
location designated by the city of Wenona engineer. This monument shall be of
concrete with a minimum dimension of four inches by four inches (4"x4") at top,
six inches (6") at bottom, and forty eight inches (48") long with a brass plate
on which shall be inscribed the number and elevation of the bench mark. (Ord.
070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-4: STREET CONSTRUCTION:
All new streets dedicated or platted after the effective date hereof shall be
improved with roadway paving in accordance with the table entitled "Minimum
Standards For Street Design", of this section. Also, concrete curbs shall be
installed on all new streets and thoroughfares.
   MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
               Secondary And
               Collector     Local                        In        In
 Major         Thoroughfares Residential Cul-De- Marginal Business  Industrial
 Thoroughfares And Multi-    Streets     Sac     Access   Districts Districts
               Family
               Thoroughfares
                            Secondary And
                            Collector     Local                        In        In
              Major         Thoroughfares Residential Cul-De- Marginal Business  Industrial
              Thoroughfares And Multi-    Streets     Sac     Access   Districts Districts
                            Family
                            Thoroughfares
Right of way  80–100 feet 90 feet       80 feet     80 feet 40 feet  80–100  80–100
width                                                                  feet      feet
Pavement
width (back   48–72 feet  40 feet       40 feet     40 feet 24 feet  40 feet   40 feet
to back of
curb)
Minimum
radius of
horizontal    500 feet      400 feet      150 feet    150     400 feet 500 feet  500 feet
curves (road                                          feet
centerline
dimension)
Vertical
curves (min.
sight
distances
measured                                              200
between       500 feet      400 feet      200 feet    feet    200 feet 500 feet  500 feet
points 4.5
feet above
the
centerline of
the roadways)
Minimum
tangents
between                                               100
reserve       100 feet      100 feet      100 feet    feet    100 feet 200 feet  200 feet
curves (road
centerline
dimension)
Maximum       6 percent     6 percent     6 percent   6       6        3 percent 6 percent
gradient                                              percent percent
Minimum       0.4 percent   0.4 percent   0.4 percent 0.4     0.4      0.4       0.4
gradient                                              percent percent  percent   percent
Minimum curb
tangents at   30 feet       25 feet       25 feet     25 feet 25 feet  30 feet   30 feet
street
intersections
 
Note: Pavement widths are measured back to back of curb.
(Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-5: CURBS, GUTTERS, DRAINAGE:
Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and shall be combination
(integral) concrete of the mountable type not less than eighteen inches (18")
in overall width. Curbs may be constructed integrally with the Portland cement
concrete pavement. Concrete for curb and gutter shall conform to that
hereinafter required for concrete sidewalk. Three (3) 5/8-inch reinforcing bars
ten feet (10') long shall be installed in all curb and gutter, centered over
each sewer and water trench crossed by the curb and gutter.
   A.   The dimensions of curb and gutter on residential streets shall be a
roll type two and three-fourths inches (23/4") in height above the gutter line.
The width of the combined curb and gutter shall be eighteen inches (18"). The
width from gutter line to back of curb shall be eight inches (8"). The gutter
shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") below the edge of the gutter flag. The
thickness of the gutter flag shall equal the thickness of the adjacent street
improvement.
   B.   The dimensions of curb and gutter on commercial or industrial streets
shall be in conformance with the following specifications of the state of
Illinois standard design, combination concrete curb and gutter, type B - 6.12.
The curb shall be a vertical face type six inches (6") in height above the
gutter line. The width of the combined curb and gutter shall be eighteen inches
(18"). The width of curb from gutter line back of curb shall be six inches
(6"). The gutter shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") below the edge of the
gutter flag. The thickness of the gutter flag shall be equal to the thickness
of the adjacent street pavement. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-6: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete to a thickness of
four inches (4"). Concrete for such pavement shall have a minimum fourteen (14)
day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per
square inch, shall contain not less than five and one-half (51/2) bags of
cement per cubic yard of concrete and shall contain not less than three percent
(3%) nor more than six percent (6%) entrained air. Slump shall be not less than
two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
Sidewalks may be constructed within ninety (90) days of the date of the
occupancy permit for any lot in the subdivision. However, all sidewalks must be
constructed within eighteen (18) months of the date of approval of the final
plat. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-7: STREET LIGHTING REQUIREMENT:
Street lighting improvements shall be installed to serve all properties within
the subdivision. Such improvements shall be of individual service or of the
multiple circuit type and shall consist of standards, luminaries, cable conduit
under driveways and/or streets, controllers, handholes, and all other
miscellaneous work and equipment necessary for an integrated system of
streetlights.
   A.   There shall be at least one standard luminary at each intersection and
interior of each cul-de-sac, and spacing of standards shall not exceed three
hundred feet (300') in residential areas. In commercial and/or manufacturing
areas, spacing and location of standards shall be approved by the Wenona city
council.
   B.   Lighting standards shall be prestressed and centrifugally cast
concrete, complete with butt base, and shall have a water polish finish,
complete with bracket and handhole. Heights of standard and length of bracket
shall be as follows:
      1.   Residential areas: Standard, twenty three feet (23'); bracket arm,
eight feet (8').
      2.   Commercial, industrial and manufacturing areas: Standard, thirty
feet (30') with the length of the bracket arm as approved by the Wenona city
council.
   C.   Luminaries shall be of the mercury vapor type with constant wattage
type ballasts. Size and life shall be as follows:
      1.   Residential area: One hundred seventy five (175) watt with average
life of three thousand (3,000) hours.
      2.   Commercial, industrial, and manufacturing areas: Two hundred fifty
(250) watt or four hundred (400) watt with average life of three thousand
(3,000) hours as approved by the Wenona city council.
   D.   Cable on multiple circuit systems shall be not less than no. 8 wire and
shall be buried at least thirty inches (30") below finished grade. Cable shall
be installed in a two inch (2"), schedule 40, PVC conduit with two inch (2")
fiber bushings where such cable crosses beneath existing or proposed pavements,
driveways, or sidewalks. No underground cable splices shall be permitted. (Ord.
070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-8: WATER SUPPLY, FIRE HYDRANTS, AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
No subdivision shall be approved without water supply and sewage treatment
facilities in accordance with the following minimum standards or the posting of
surety bonds guaranteeing said improvements. Before recommending approval of
subdivision, the planning commission will consider the availability of sanitary
sewer facilities, or lack thereof.
Determinations shall be made with the advice of the city of Wenona engineer,
the Marshall County health department, and the state of Illinois health
department, and the following shall be the minimum requirements:
   A.   Where public water supply and sanitary sewers and sewage treatment
facilities are available, the facilities shall be designed and installed to
connect to the public sewer and water system with approval by the city of
Wenona engineer in accordance with the following requirements, regardless of
the size of the lots in the subdivision:
      1.   Water: Water mains, hydrants, and services shall be provided to
serve all lots and to provide for the reasonable expansion of the system. Water
mains shall be designed using the criteria of the state of Illinois department
of public health. All valves (except hydrant auxiliary valves) shall be
enclosed in valve boxes. Fire hydrants shall be located so as to be within four
hundred feet (400') of all homes and shall be of manufacture approved by the
city of Wenona with auxiliary valves and boxes.
      2.   Sewer: Sanitary sewers and services of approved design and capacity
with a minimum earth cover of three feet (3') shall be provided to serve all
lots and to provide for reasonable expansion of the system. Sanitary sewers
shall be designed using the criteria of the Illinois department of public
health. Sanitary sewers manholes shall be located at points which will minimize
the possibility of submergence in storms; their number and location to be
approved by the city of Wenona engineer.
      3.   Standards And Specifications Of Design For Required Land
Improvements: Designs, dimensions, materials, and methods of construction of
improvements shall conform to the following general requirements:
         a.   For storm drainage, section 600 of the "Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction" adopted by the state of Illinois, division of
highways, latest edition thereof;
         b.   For public water supply and sanitary sewer system and/or sewage
treatment works, "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois", the latest edition thereof, as prepared by the Illinois Society
of Professional Engineers, the Consulting Engineers Council of Illinois, the
Illinois chapter of the American Public Works Association, the Illinois
Municipal League, and the Associated General Contractors of Illinois;
         c.   For subgrade preparation of streets, section 200 of the "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition thereof;
         d.   For base course of streets, section 300 of the aforementioned
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition
thereof;
         e.   For surface course of streets, section 400 of the aforementioned
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition
thereof;
         f.   For curbs and gutters, section 600 of the aforementioned
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition
thereof; and
         g.   For sidewalks and crosswalks, section 600 of the aforementioned
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition
thereof.
      4.   Sanitary Sewerage Collection System:
         a.   Public or community sanitary sewerage systems, including sewer
stub terminals to the lot line of each lot shall be installed to serve each lot
in a subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions containing no lots less than
one acre in area and located in unincorporated areas within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the city of Wenona may be served with
individual sewage disposal systems, provided that percolation tests indicate
that individual sewage disposal units will operate successfully.
         b.   The minimum size diameter of sanitary sewers shall be eight
inches (8") and shall be installed to serve all individual properties within
the subdivision. They shall be constructed of extra strength vitrified clay
pipe having premoulded plastisol joints (no bel), ASTM specification no. C-700,
or of material meeting the approval of the city of Wenona engineer, and with
the approval of the Wenona city council. All sewers shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the said stated "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", latest edition. The subdivider
shall be responsible for obtaining all construction and operating permits as
required by the state of Illinois. Completed sewers shall be inspected by
television camera or similar monitoring device before final acceptance by the
city of Wenona. All sewer design, plans, and specifications shall be submitted
to the planning commission and the city of Wenona engineer for approval and
file.
         c.   Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than required to
serve only the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plat is required by
the Wenona city council to serve future growth in the vicinity of the
subdivision, the subdivider shall bear the total cost of said improvements.
Subsequent subdividers and property owners using sanitary sewer lines with
larger capacity than required to serve a particular subdivision shall
compensate the original subdivider for his additional expense by paying him the
difference in cost between the size required for the original subdivision and
the larger size required by the Wenona city council pursuant to an agreement
entered into between the subdivider and the city of Wenona. All subdividers
shall pay the city of Wenona all connection fees computed on a lot charge or
acreage charge as provided by ordinance.
         d.   The city of Wenona shall pay all costs involved for televising
the sanitary sewer system.
         e.   The subdivider shall be responsible to install any lift stations
if required.
         f.   All sanitary sewer manholes shall be constructed of precast
concrete, or of an alternate material as approved by the city of Wenona
engineer. All manholes shall have iron steps attached. All manholes installed
shall not exceed intervals of four hundred feet (400').
         g.   The mainline sanitary sewer system shall be located no more than
four feet (4') behind the back of curb unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission.
      5.   Storm Sewer System And Storm Water Management:
         a.   An adequate system of storm drainage shall be constructed and
installed, consisting of natural watercourses, storm sewers and other necessary
facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements. The
minimum size diameter of roadway storm sewers shall be twelve inches (12").
         b.   Storm draining inlets shall be placed in street gutters at
intersections and elsewhere as required by the terrain, but shall not be spaced
more than four hundred feet (400') along the gutter, unless approved by the
city of Wenona engineer.
         c.   Storm sewer capacities shall be determined by the rational method
for a 5-year storm event. Computations will be required to show that the
streets or other surface drainage facilities are capable of safely conveying
the 100-year storm runoff without damage if the storm sewer is plugged or
otherwise nonoperable. The runoff coefficient (C factor) shall be determined by
the character of the land to be drained and shall conform to accepted standard
engineering practices. Street grades and lot and block drainage shall be
established so as to permit positive drainage.
         d.   Any outfall storm sewer that drains into an existing open ditch
or natural watercourse shall have a reinforced, concrete headwall and a
concrete apron for erosion control at least ten feet (10') in radius from the
center point of the outfall, or as determined by the size of sewer, velocity of
flow, and topography.
         e.   Storm water shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer system
and no connection between the storm and sanitary systems will be permitted at
any time before, during, or after construction. Existing drain tiles which are
encountered during construction shall be connected to storm sewers or shall be
restored to operating condition.
         f.   Where installation of storm sewer lines of larger capacity than
required to serve only the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plat is
required by the Wenona city council to serve future growth in the vicinity of
the subdivision, the subdividers and property owners using storm sewer lines
with larger capacity than required to serve a particular subdivision shall
compensate the original subdivider for his additional expense by paying him the
difference in cost between the size required for the original subdivision and
the larger size required by the Wenona city council pursuant to an agreement
entered into between the subdivider and the city of Wenona.
         g.   Storm sewer materials shall be made of materials as approved by
the city of Wenona engineer. All inlets, catch basins, or manholes shall be
made of precast reinforced concrete with steps, unless permission is granted by
the city of Wenona engineer to use alternate materials. All storm sewer inlet
grates and frames in the curb and gutter shall be all type 3 frame and grate
standard as described in the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         h.   (1)   Storm Water Detention; Required: A combination of temporary
storm water storage and controlled release of storm water runoff shall be
required for all nonresidential developments of two (2) or more acres in area,
for all multiple- family developments of two (2) or more acres in area, and all
single-family developments of five (5) acres or more in area.
            (2)   Storm Water Release Rate: The release rate of storm water
from all development requiring detention shall not exceed the storm water
runoff rate from the project area in its natural, undeveloped state. A release
rate of not greater than that calculated from a 5-year rainfall with a runoff
of fifteen one- hundredths (0.15) will be acceptable. The minimum size of the
discharge outlet shall be four inches (4").
            (3)   Capacity Of Bypass: Storm sewer systems, streams and channels
shall have an adequate capacity of bypass through the development for the flow
from all upstream areas for a 100-year storm design frequency, assuming that
the land is in fully developed state under present zoning and/or land use
proposed under the comprehensive plan. The bypass flow rate shall be computed
utilizing a runoff coefficient of not less than thirty five one- hundredths
(0.35). An allowance, equivalent to the reduction in flow rate provided, will
be made for upstream detention in which such upstream detention and release
rate has previously been approved by the city of Wenona and has been
constructed.
            (4)   Storage Volume; Additional Detention:
               (A)   The live detention storage to be provided shall be
calculated on the basis of a type II, 100-year, twenty four (24) hour rainfall,
as published by the Illinois state water survey (ISWS) circular 172 for this
area. The detention volume required shall be that necessary to temporarily
store the runoff of the 100-year, twenty four (24) hour rainfall from the fully
developed drainage area tributary to the reservoir, less the volume discharged
during the same duration at the approved release rate.
               (B)   In the event the downstreams and channels are inadequate
to receive the release rate hereinabove provided, then the allowable release
rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the existing receiving
downstream storm sewers, streams, and channels, and additional detention, as
determined by the city of Wenona engineer, shall be required to store that
portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers, streams,
and channels.
            (5)   Plans, Specifications, And Calculations:
               (A)   Plans, specifications, and calculations for storm water
detention facilities as required herein, shall be submitted to the planning
commission and city of Wenona engineer for approval prior to the commencement
of construction.
               (B)   The method to be used for calculating the volumes of water
to be stored and/or released shall be technical release (TR) 55, by the soil
conservation service, U.S. department of agriculture.
               (C)   All information and data required and submitted shall be
prepared and bear the seal of an Illinois licensed professional engineer.
         i.   The completed storm sewer system shall be inspected by television
camera or other similar monitoring device before final acceptance of the system
by the city of Wenona; such cost shall be the responsibility of the city of
Wenona. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-6-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   All utility lines for telephone, electric service, and TV cable service
shall be placed in the rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.
   B.   Where telephone and electric service lines are placed underground
entirely throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cables shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict
with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be
located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (Ord. 070102C, 7-
1-2002)
4-6-10: STREET SIGNS:
The subdivider shall purchase and install street name signs which conform to
the standards of the city of Wenona. The signs shall be placed at the northwest
and southeast corners of each street intersection. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
4-7-1: Enforcing Officer
4-7-2: Inspection At Subdivider's Expense
4-7-3: Building Permits
4-7-4: Occupancy Permit
4-7-5: Variations And Exceptions
4-7-6: Certificates For Approval Of Final Plat
4-7-7: Penalties
4-7-1: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The provisions of this title shall be administered by the planning commission
in lieu of the Wenona city council, except as specifically provided in this
title. The city of Wenona engineer is hereby designated and authorized to
enforce the provisions of this title under the direction of the planning
commission. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-7-2: INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER'S EXPENSE:
All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this title
shall be inspected during the course of construction by the city of Wenona
engineer or a duly designated deputy. All fees and costs connected with such
inspection and in reviewing the plans and specifications for such improvements
shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-7-3: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued providing for improvement of any lot in a
subdivision until the plat of subdivision and the plans and specifications for
public improvements have been approved by the city of Wenona building inspector
and/or engineer. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-7-4: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No certificate of occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official
for the use of any structure within any subdivision approved for platting or
replatting until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready
to service the property, and roadways providing access to the subject lot or
lots have been constructed. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-7-5: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   When the subdivider can show that a provision of these regulations, if
strictly adhered to, would cause unnecessary hardship, and when in the opinion
of the planning commission, because of topographical or other conditions
peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of
such provisions, the planning commission may recommend a variance or
modification to the Wenona city council. The subdivider shall apply, in
writing, for such variance or modification of the action. Any variance or
modification, thus authorized, shall be attached to and made a part of the
final plat.
   B.   In any instance where the city of Wenona has granted approval of a
preliminary plat of subdivision prior to the effective date hereof and where
the subdivision design or subdivision improvements as shown on said preliminary
plat are less restrictive than the requirements of this title, the subdivider
may apply, in writing, to the Wenona city council for permission to proceed
with the subdivision as originally planned. The Wenona city council, upon
review of the preliminary plat as originally submitted, may then grant such
permission. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-7-6: CERTIFICATES FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The Wenona city council shall, upon motion and majority vote, approve
the final plat and authorize the city of Wenona mayor and city clerk to sign
the original drawing of the final plat. The certificates on the final plat
shall be in the following form with the signatures of the president of the
county commissioners and the county clerk when the plat covers land within the
unincorporated one and one-half (11/2) mile fringe area:
      1.   Under the authority provided by Chapter 24, Illinois Revised
Statutes, 1948, enacted by the State Legislature of the State of Illinois and
ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Wenona, Illinois, this
plat was given approval by the City of Wenona and must be recorded within four
(4) months of the date of approval by the Wenona City Council; otherwise it is
null and void.
      2.   Each final plat submitted to the city of Wenona for approval shall
carry a certificate signed by an Illinois registered land surveyor in
substantially the following form:
         I, (name), hereby certify that I am an Illinois Registered Land
Surveyor in compliance with the laws of the State of Illinois and that this
plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on (date); that all
monuments shown thereon actually exist, and material is accurately shown.
               SEAL       
                  Signature
               Illinois Land Surveyor No.       
         3.   Each final plat submitted to the city of Wenona for approval
shall carry a deed of dedication in substantially the following form:
   We the undersigned, (names), owners of the real estate shown and described
herein, do hereby lay off, plat, and subdivide said real estate in accordance
with the within plat. This subdivision shall be known and designated as (name).
All streets, alleys and public open spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated,
are hereby dedicated to the public. Building setback lines are hereby
established as shown on this plat, between which lines and the property lines
of the streets, there shall be erected or maintained no building or structure.
There are strips of ground, (number) feet in width shown on this plat and
marked "easement" reserved for the use of public utilities for the installation
of water and sewer mains, ducts, lines, and wires, subject at all times to the
proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved. No permanent or other
structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land, but owners
of lots in this subdivision shall take their titles subject to the rights of
the public utilities, and to the rights of the owners of other lots in this
subdivision.
(Additional dedications and protective covenants or private restrictions would
be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the recommendation of the
planning commission or Wenona city council; important provisions are those
specifying the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential
use, the minimum habitable floor area.)
The foregoing covenants (or restrictions) are to run with the land and shall be
binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until January 1,
20      (twenty-five (25) year period is suggested) ; at which time said
covenants (or restrictions) shall be automatically extended for successive
periods of ten (10) years unless indicated otherwise by negative vote of a
majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by these covenants
(or restrictions) in whole or in part, which said vote will be evidenced by a
petition in writing signed by the owners and duly recorded. Invalidation of any
one of the foregoing covenants (or restrictions) by judgement or court order,
shall in no way affect any of the other various covenants or restrictions,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction together with the right to
cause the removal by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation thereof, is hereby dedicated to the public,
and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and
to their heirs and assigns.
   WITNESS our Hands and Seals this       day of               , 20    
State of Illinois
Marshall County
Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared, (name), (name), (name) and each separately and severally
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary
act and deed, for the purposes therein expressed.
WITNESS my Hand and Notarial Seal this       day of                , 20     
________________________
Notary Public
      4.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as
may be required by the planning commission or the Wenona city council in these
enforcement regulations. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
4-7-7: PENALTIES:
All persons, firms, or corporations violating any of the provisions of this
title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 070102C, 7-1-2002)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 0
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-0-1: Part Time Police Officers
5-0-1: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   Employment: The city of Wenona may employ part time police officers
from time to time as they deem necessary.
   B.   Duties: A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
general orders of the Wenona police department, but the number of hours a part
time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB.
   C.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time officer must meet
the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   D.   Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the
discretion of the city's corporate authorities, shall not have any property
rights in said employment, and may be removed by the city's corporate
authorities at any time. Part time police officers shall comply with all
applicable rules and general orders issued by the police department. (Ord.
060412B, 6-4-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Offenses Against Property
5-1-1-1: Public And Private Property
5-1-1-2: Trespass To City Property
5-1-2: Offenses Against Public Peace
5-1-2-1: Assault
5-1-2-2: Disorderly Conduct
5-1-2-3: Disturbing Lawful Assemblages
5-1-2-4: Fighting
5-1-2-5: Unnecessary Noises
5-1-2-6: Vagrancy
5-1-3: Offenses Against Public Safety
5-1-3-1: Advertisement By Samples
5-1-3-2: Articles On Windows
5-1-3-3: Dangerous Places Guarded
5-1-3-4: Explosives
5-1-3-5: Fireworks
5-1-3-6: Hitchhiking
5-1-3-7: Interference With Police Department
5-1-3-8: Intoxicating Liquors
5-1-3-9: Narcotics; Hypnotic Drugs
5-1-3-10: Report Of Treatment Of Wounds
5-1-3-11: Throwing Missiles
5-1-3-12: Weapons
5-1-3-13: Smoking In Elevators
5-1-4: Offenses By Children
5-1-4-1: Obtain Liquor; Identification Card
5-1-4-2: False Statements
5-1-4-3: Procure Unlawful Services Of Others
5-1-5: Offenses Involving Children
5-1-5-1: Assault On Child
5-1-5-2: Curfew
5-1-5-3: Indecent Exposure In Child's Presence
5-1-5-4: Purchase For Minor
5-1-5-5: Wrongs To Children
5-1-6: Offenses Involving Morals
5-1-6-1: Gambling
5-1-6-2: Obscene Publications
5-1-6-3: Prostitution
5-1-6-4: Solicitation Of Drinks
5-1-6-5: Vulgar Language
5-1-7: Mob Action And Civil Disobedience
5-1-7-1: Curfew
5-1-7-2: Proclamation
5-1-7-3: Duration
5-1-7-4: Police Order
5-1-8: Sale And Possession Of Tobacco
5-1-1: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY:
5-1-1-1: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Whoever shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface,
injure or destroy any property of the city or the property of any private
person or corporation therein, shall be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   Whoever shall, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
premises, post, paint, put up, stick or place any handbill, placard, show bill
or notice upon any building or fence, gate or railing, or any part of any
building, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
twenty dollars ($20.00); provided, this subsection shall not apply to officers
who may post notices as provided by law or ordinance.
   C.   No person shall fasten in any way any showcard, poster or other
advertising device upon public or private property unless legally authorized to
do so. Any and all posters, placards and signs placed on private property
advertising said sale shall be removed immediately after said sale.
   D.   Whoever shall cover, mutilate, deface, tear down, destroy or injure in
any manner any poster, bill, advertisement or legal notice lawfully upon any
billboard or other place within the city, within ten (10) days after the same
shall have been posted, or when such poster or notice is dated, until after the
date of the happening of the event of which the notice is given, shall be fined
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00).
   E.   No person shall place or erect upon any public way or passageway to any
building an obstruction of any type unless duly authorized or required for the
purpose of safeguarding the public.
   F.   No person shall move, disturb or take any earth, stone or other
material from any public street, alley, park or other public ground.
   G.   Whoever, without authority from the owner, shall within this City cut,
injure, remove or destroy any fruit, ornamental or shade tree, or the boxing
around same, or any fence, railing, gate, post, sign, curbstone, hydrant or out
building upon any public ground, lawn, sidewalk or private premises against the
consent of the owner or occupant thereof, or shall trespass upon any private
premises or public grounds, or injure, take away or destroy any tree, shrub,
fruit, plant, vegetable or other thing which may be therein for ornament or
utility, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty
five dollars ($25.00).
   H.   Whoever shall wilfully or heedlessly change, remove or destroy any
stone, stake or post set or placed to mark the corner of any lot or parcel of
ground, street or alley, or to show the grade of any street, alley or sidewalk
within the City shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
fifty dollars ($50.00).
   I.   No person shall solicit for sale, rent or purchase any property by
making representations that such property has been, or is about to be, reduced
in value by reason of the race, religion or national origin of a person who has
moved, or may move, into the vicinity of that property. (1994 Code)
5-1-1-2: TRESPASS TO CITY PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon land of the City or any
building on such land, after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice
from the City or its representative that such entry is forbidden, or to remain
upon such land or in such building after receiving notice from the City or its
representative to depart, and to thereby interfere with another person's lawful
use or enjoyment of such building or land.
A person has received notice from the City or its representative if he has been
notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written
notice forbidding such entry to him or a group of which he is a part, has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof. (1994 Code)
5-1-2: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE:
5-1-2-1: ASSAULT:
A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in
conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
No person shall assault another with a lethal weapon, instrument or thing with
intent to inflict upon the person of another any bodily injury, where no
considerable provocation appears, or where the circumstances of the assault
show malice. (1994 Code)
5-1-2-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not
conversation thereby ensues; or
   C.   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of the City a false
alarm of fire, knowing, at the time of such transmission, that there is no
reasonable ground for believing such fire exists; or
   D.   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing, at the time of such transmission,
that there is not reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive
is concealed in such place; or
   E.   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing, at
the time of such transmission, that there is no reasonable ground for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   F.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it. (1994 Code)
5-1-2-3: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES:
No person shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious
worship, or any other lawful assemblage or gathering, by making a noise or by
lewd or indecent behavior or profane discourse within the place of assemblage,
or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. (1994
Code)
5-1-2-4: FIGHTING:
No person shall fight another person except in boxing exhibitions duly
authorized and licensed by law. (1994 Code)
5-1-2-5: UNNECESSARY NOISES:
   A.   Disturb Peace: No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others; nor permit any building or premises owned by him, or in his
possession or control, to be used or rented for any use which will disturb or
destroy the peace of the neighborhood.
   B.   Sound Advertising from Aircraft:
      1.   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any aircraft for
any purpose in or over the City with sound amplifying equipment in operation.
      2.   Sound amplifying equipment, as used herein, shall mean any machine
or device for the amplification of music, the human voice, or any other noise
or sound, except that it shall not be construed as including warning devices on
authorized emergency aircraft or any horns or other warning devices used only
for traffic safety purposes. (1994 Code)
5-1-2-6: VAGRANCY:
The following persons shall be deemed "vagrants":
   A.   Abroad at Unusual Hours: One who wanders about the streets, alleys or
other public ways or places, or who is found abroad at late or unusual hours in
the night without any visible or lawful business and not giving a satisfactory
account of himself; or
   B.   Begging: One wandering abroad and begging, or who goes about from door
to door of private homes or commercial or business establishments or places
himself in or upon any public way or public place to beg or receive alms for
himself; or
   C.   Loitering; Police Order to Disperse: It shall be unlawful for any
person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone or in
consort with others, in a public place in such manner so as to:
      1.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
      2.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction
or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any
business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any
such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress
and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in this
subsection, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that
person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or
disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty
of a violation of this subsection.
   D.   Unlawful Occupancy: One wandering abroad, and occupying, lodging or
sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other building
or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car, or other vehicle
without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person entitled
to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during the hours
of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of himself; or
   E.   One who by law is declared a vagrant, whether embraced in any of the
foregoing classifications, or not. (1994 Code)
5-1-3: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY:
5-1-3-1: ADVERTISEMENT BY SAMPLES:
No person shall distribute, cast, throw or place, or cause to be distributed,
cast, thrown or placed, in, upon or along any of the streets, alleys or public
places of the City, or upon the porches or yards of private residences therein,
or within any dwelling or building in the City, any samples of merchandise or
medicinal preparations for the purpose of advertising or making known, in a
general or promiscuous manner, any business, occupation, preparation, medical
treatment, medicine, or any merchandise whatsoever. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-2: ARTICLES ON WINDOWS 1 :
No person shall place any moveable article on any window ledge or other place
abutting a street, alley or other public place in such a manner that the same
is in danger of or can fall onto the street, alley or other public place from a
height greater than four feet (4'). (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 7-2-28 of this Code.
5-1-3-3: DANGEROUS PLACES GUARDED:
Whoever shall leave open any coal hole, cellar door, vault, well, excavation,
ditch or other hole upon or adjoining any street, alley or sidewalk within the
City without securing or protecting the same so as to prevent persons or
animals from falling therein, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00). (1994 Code)
5-1-3-4: EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Storage: No person shall keep or store any dynamite, nitroglycerin,
TNT, gunpowder or guncotton in any quantities, except for medical or laboratory
purposes, and for such purposes no more than five (5) pounds shall be stored in
any one building or premises.
   B.   Rules of State Fire Marshal: All explosives kept or stored in the City
shall be kept or stored in accordance with the rules enforced by the State Fire
Marshal with respect to the same. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-5: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Use Prohibited: No person shall cast, throw, light or fire any squib,
cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol or cartridge, or other
combustible firecrackers or fireworks of any kind.
   B.   Sale and Display Prohibited: No person shall exhibit, or have in his
possession with intent to give away, sell or offer for sale, fireworks of any
kind.
      1.   The prohibition of this subsection shall not apply to the sale,
storage or use of railroad torpedoes or other signalling device or the use of
flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies.
      2.   This prohibition shall not apply to prevent any public demonstration
or display of fireworks of any kind conducted under proper police supervision
after application made, and permit issued, by the Chief of Police for such
demonstration. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-6: HITCHHIKING:
No person shall hitchhike, "thumb rides" or go upon the public streets and
highways for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of a vehicle.
(1994 Code)
5-1-3-7: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Resisting Officer: No person shall resist any police officer or any
person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge, or apparent
discharge, of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the
discharge of his duty.
   B.   Assisting in Escape: No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any
person in the custody of a police officer, or a person duly empowered with
police authority to escape, or to attempt to escape from such custody.
   C.   Impersonating an Officer: No person other than an official police
officer shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card,
or any other insignia of office like, or similar to, or a colorable imitation
of, that adopted and worn or carried by the police officers of the City. (1994
Code)
5-1-3-8: INTOXICATING LIQUORS:
   A.   Manufacture: No person shall manufacture any intoxicating liquors on
any premises owned or controlled by him for sale or gift.
   B.   Accepting Orders: No person, other than a licensed retailer, shall
solicit or take any order or orders for the purchase of intoxicating liquors.
   C.   Handling: No person shall carry on or about his person, or engage or
employ any other person to so carry, any intoxicating liquor for the purpose of
selling, bartering, exchanging, giving away, or illegally delivering the same.
   D.   Search and Seizure: Any officer having personal knowledge or reasonable
information that intoxicating liquors are being kept in any place, in violation
of the law, upon issuing of a search warrant by the court, shall search such
suspected place; and if such officer finds intoxicating liquor upon the
premises, he shall seize the same, together with the vessels in which it is
contained, all implements, furniture, fixtures and vehicles used in connection
with illegally keeping, bargaining, selling, exchanging, giving away or
carrying the same, and shall arrest any person in charge of such place, or
aiding, in any manner, in carrying on the business conducted in such place.
   E.   Consumption on Licensed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person
to consume alcoholic liquor in any public place other than in or upon premises
operated for the sale of alcoholic liquor under and pursuant to a license
authorizing such sale from the City.
   F.   Transporting Alcoholic Liquor1: It shall be unlawful for any person to
transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor upon his person on any
street, alley or other public place within the City except in an unopened
original package or container.
   G.   Possession of Alcoholic Liquor in Motor Vehicle: No person shall
transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger
area of any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken.
   H.   Intoxication: It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an
intoxicated condition in or on any street, alley or other public place in the
City. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-9: NARCOTICS; HYPNOTIC DRUGS:
   A. Unlawful Possession: No person shall sell, give away, use or possess for
any purpose whatever any narcotic drug, except as provided herein.
   B.   Unlawful Association: No person shall establish, contribute to,
support, maintain, become an inmate of, or in any way be connected with any
building, or part thereof, or place of any description whatever, or permit such
building, or part thereof, or place of any description whatever, owned by or
under the control of such person, to be used for the manufacture, preparation,
sale, storage, smoking or use of any narcotic drug, except as provided herein.
   C.   Distribution by Licensed Practitioner:
      1.   Physicians: A licensed physician, dentist or veterinarian shall be
permitted to dispense or distribute narcotic drugs to a patient in the course
of his professional practice only, and such licensed practitioner shall not be
permitted to possess narcotic drugs for any other purpose.
      2.   Pharmacists: A licensed pharmacist shall be permitted to dispense or
distribute narcotic drugs to patients under and in pursuance of written
prescriptions issued by any licensed physician, dentist or veterinarian, and
such licensed pharmacist shall not be permitted to possess narcotic drugs for
any other purpose.
      3.   Record of Distribution: All instances of professional distribution
of narcotic drugs as provided for herein shall be recorded in suitable form,
and filed and preserved in a manner so as to be readily accessible for
inspection by any law enforcement officers of the City.
      4.   Refill Prohibited: No prescription for narcotic drugs shall be
refilled.
   D.   Possession by Patient: No patient shall be permitted to possess
narcotic drugs except those distributed or dispensed to him in accordance with
a prescription or prescribed medical treatment.
   E.   Seizure of Narcotic Drugs: All narcotic drugs in the possession of any
person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be seized by, confiscated
by, and forfeited to the Chief of Police, who shall make proper disposition
thereof.
   F.   Seizure of Vehicle: Any vehicle from which seized drugs are removed,
the vehicle being owned by the person convicted of a violation of this Section,
shall be seized by, confiscated by, and forfeited to the Chief of Police and
subsequently sold, at public auction to the highest bidder, in the manner
provided by law.
   G.   Exempted Persons: The provisions of this Section restricting the
possession and control of narcotic drugs shall not apply to common carriers or
warehousemen engaged in lawfully transporting or storing such narcotic drugs,
or to any employee of such common carrier or warehouseman within the scope of
his employment, or to public officers or employees in the performance of
official duties requiring possession or control of narcotic drugs, or to
persons aiding such officers or employees in the performance of such duties.
(1994 Code)
5-1-3-10: REPORT OF TREATMENT OF WOUNDS:
Every physician or surgeon duly admitted to the practice of medicine or surgery
in the State of Illinois, whenever he shall treat any person in the City for a
wound inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind, shall notify the
Police Department within one hour of the time when he renders such professional
service or is called upon to render the same. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-11: THROWING MISSILES:
   A.   Whoever shall throw or cast any stone, brick, club, snowball or other
missile at or against any tree, electric light or window glass or pane in any
store, house or other building, or in or upon any street, alley or other public
place or any private premises within the City, shall be fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00).
   B.   No person shall throw any stone, snowball or any other missile at any
person in any public or private way. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-12: WEAPONS:
   A.   Carrying Concealed Weapons: No person shall wear under his clothes or
concealed about his person, or display in a threatening manner, any dangerous
or deadly weapon, including, but not by way of limitation, a pistol, revolver,
sling shot, knuckles of lead, brass or other material, a Bowie knife, a knife
resembling a Bowie knife, or any knife with a switchblade or device whereby the
blade or blades can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle,
or other mechanical contrivance.
   B.   Sale of Switchblade Knives Prohibited: No person shall sell, offer for
sale, or display any knife or knives having the appearance of a pocketknife,
the blade or blades of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on
the handle, or other mechanical devices.
   C.   Possession of Dangerous or Deadly Weapons: No person shall have in his
possession, except within his own domicile, or carry or use, a revolver or
pistol of any description, shotgun or rifle, or any airgun, B-B gun, gas
operated gun or spring gun, or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as
a "peashooter", "slingshot" or "beany", or any bow made for the purpose of
throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether
such instrument is called by any name set forth above or by any other name.
      1.   Exception for Licensed Premises: The prohibition of subsection C
above shall not apply to licensed shooting galleries or in private grounds or
premises under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or
operated in such manner as not to endanger persons or property; and further,
provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
concealed carrying of any type of gun whatsoever, when unloaded and properly
cased, to or from any range or gallery, or to or from an area where hunting is
allowed by law.
      2.   Exception for Authorized Officials: The prohibition of this
subsection shall not be construed to forbid United States marshals, sheriffs,
constables and their deputies, any regular, special or ex-officio police
officer, or any other law enforcement officer from carrying or wearing, while
on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their
duties.
   D.   Display and Sale of Specified Weapons: No person engaged in business
shall display or place on exhibition in any show window, or other window facing
upon any street, any pistol, revolver or other firearm with barrel less than
eighteen inches (18") in length, or any brass or metal knuckles, or any club
loaded with lead or other weight, or any blackjack or billy.
   E.   Sales to Intoxicated Persons and Minors: No person shall purchase from
or sell, loan or furnish any weapon in which any explosive substance can be
used to any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, or to
any person in a condition of agitation or excitability, or to a minor under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
   F.   Records Required: Every person engaged in the sale, rental or exchange
of any weapon described herein shall keep a record of each such weapons
purchased, sold, rented or exchanged at retail.
   G.   Forfeiture of Weapons: Every person convicted of a violation of this
Section shall forfeit to the City such dangerous weapon so concealed or
displayed.
   H.   Report of Sales: Every day before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon, each person engaged in the business of selling pistols, revolvers,
daggers, stilettos, billies, derringers, Bowie knives, dirks and other deadly
weapons, which can be concealed on the person, shall file with the Chief of
Police a legible and accurate report of each sale made during the preceding
twenty four (24) hours, containing the following information:
      1.   Name, address and age of purchaser,
      2.   Date of sale,
      3.   Number, description and sale price of weapon,
      4.   Permit number, and
      5.   Reason for purchase. (1994 Code)
5-1-3-13: SMOKING IN ELEVATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or match, or any spark, or flame; or to ignite any fire
producing device in any elevator in the City.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or party controlling any elevator
in the City to display a "No Smoking" sign in the elevator. Failure to display
a "No Smoking" sign shall be considered a violation of this Section.
Any person violating any provisions of this Section shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. (1994 Code)
5-1-4: OFFENSES BY CHILDREN:
5-1-4-1: OBTAIN LIQUOR; IDENTIFICATION CARD:
Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic
liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.
If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that
a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the nonage
of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such a sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof
of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the
identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification
card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person
shall purchase, accept delivery or have alcoholic liquor in violation of this
Section. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under twenty one
(21) years of age is forbidden, except that a person at least nineteen (19)
years of age may consume beer and wine. (1994 Code)
5-1-4-2: FALSE STATEMENTS:
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall make false statements, or
furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card,
identification card or note or other document issued to a person other than the
one presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited
places, or for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of
prohibited articles, including, but not limited to, alcoholic liquor. (1994
Code)
5-1-4-3: PROCURE UNLAWFUL SERVICES OF OTHERS:
No person shall engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for
remuneration or not, to procure for such minor any article which the minor is
forbidden by law to purchase. (1994 Code)
5-1-5: OFFENSES INVOLVING CHILDREN:
5-1-5-1: ASSAULT ON CHILD:
No person shall assault any child under sixteen (16) years of age, or take
indecent and improper liberties with the person of such child, or entice,
allure or persuade such child into any room, office or any other place for the
purpose of taking any immodest, immoral or indecent liberties with such child,
or take any such liberties with the person of such child at any place. (1994
Code)
5-1-5-2: CURFEW:
   A.   Children On Streets At Night: No person under the age of eighteen (18)
years shall be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street
or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a
parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least twenty one (21)
years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a
business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than eighteen (18) years of age to perform:
   Between 11:01 P.M. Friday and 6:00 A.M. Saturday.
   Between 11:01 P.M. Saturday and 6:00 A.M. Sunday.
   Between 10:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive and 6:00 A.M. on the
following day.
(Ord. 100311, 10-3-2011)
   B.   Permitting Child To Violate Curfew: No parent, legal guardian or other
person shall knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate
subsection A of this section. (1994 Code)
5-1-5-3: INDECENT EXPOSURE IN CHILD'S PRESENCE:
No person shall, in the proximity of any child under sixteen (16) years of age,
indecently expose himself with intent to assault or ravish such child. (1994
Code)
5-1-5-4: PURCHASE FOR MINOR:
No person shall procure for any minor any article which the minor is forbidden
by law to purchase. (1994 Code)
5-1-5-5: WRONGS TO CHILDREN:
No person having the care, custody, control or confidence of, or influence
over, any child shall wilfully cause or permit the life of such child to be in
danger, or the health of such child to be injured, or the morals of such child
to be impaired; or shall wilfully cause or permit such child to be placed in
such a situation, business or occupation that his life, health or morals shall
be endangered; or shall wilfully abandon such child, or torture, torment,
cruelly punish or wilfully or negligently deprive such child of necessary food,
clothing or shelter, or in any other manner injure such child unnecessarily.
(1994 Code)
5-1-6: OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALS:
5-1-6-1: GAMBLING:
   A.   Participation Prohibited: No person shall engage in a game of chance
prohibited by the statutes of the state of Illinois or provisions of this code.
   B.   Possession Of Materials: No person shall have in his possession any
evidence of illegal gambling in the nature of policy or pool tickets, slips,
checks or memoranda of any combination or bet, or any policy wheel, dice,
implement, apparatus or material of any form of illegal gambling or lottery,
except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles
authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois.
   C.   Owner Of Premises: No person, being the owner or person in control of
the premises, shall knowingly permit the use or occupancy thereof for such
gambling activities as are prohibited by Illinois statutes. (1994 Code)
5-1-6-2: OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS:
No person shall sell, offer for sale, exhibit or give away any publication or
other article, including, but not limited to, writings, pictures, photographs,
photographic film, phonograph records, other sound recordings, and sculptures,
which are obscene as judged with reference to ordinary persons of the age of
the person to whom the sale or exhibition is made.
A thing is "obscene" if, considered as a whole, its predominant appeal is to
prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex, and
if it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or
representation of such matters. (1994 Code)
5-1-6-3: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   Committing: No person shall commit, or offer or agree to commit, a lewd
act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   B.   Securing: No person shall secure, or offer another, for the purpose of
committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion.
   C.   Meretricious Display: No person shall make a meretricious display in or
near any public place, any place frequented by the public, or any place open to
the public view.
   D.   Transportation: No person shall knowingly transport any person to any
place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or
moral perversion.
   E.   Permitting: No person shall knowingly receive, or offer or agree to
receive, any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a
lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion, or to knowingly permit
any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose.
   F.   Directing: No person shall direct, or offer to direct, any person to
any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or
prostitution or moral perversion. (1994 Code)
5-1-6-4: SOLICITATION OF DRINKS:
No female person shall frequent or loiter in any tavern, cabaret or nightclub
with the purpose of soliciting money to purchase drinks. No proprietor or
operator of any such establishment shall allow the presence in such
establishment of any woman who violates the provisions of this Section. (1994
Code)
5-1-6-5: VULGAR LANGUAGE:
No person shall use vulgar, profane or indecent language on any public street
or other public place, or in any public dance hall, club, dance, skating rink
or place of business open to public patronage. (1994 Code)
5-1-7: MOB ACTION AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE:
5-1-7-1: CURFEW:
Whenever the Mayor determines that an emergency exists as a result of mob
action or other civil disobedience, causing danger of injury to, or damages to,
persons or property, he shall have power to impose, by proclamation, any or all
of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the
City:
   A.   A curfew upon all or any portion of the City, thereby requiring all
persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the
public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided, however, that
physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility
personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and City authorized or
requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such
curfew;
   B.   Order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the
City for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be
limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline
or firearms;
   C.   Designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic; and
   D.   Call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the City to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the City. (1994 Code)
5-1-7-2: PROCLAMATION:
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective upon its
issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. (1994 Code)
5-1-7-3: DURATION:
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section
5-1-7 shall terminate after forty eight (48) hours from the issuance thereof,
or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer
exists, whichever occurs first; provided however, that such emergency may be
extended for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by the
mayor. (1994 Code)
5-1-7-4: POLICE ORDER:
The chief of police shall have authority to temporarily close any and all
streets, alleys and other public ways in the city to the public whenever, in
his opinion, it is necessary in order to maintain the peace of the community.
(1994 Code)
5-1-8: SALE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO:
   A.   Sale Of Tobacco To Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to sell, buy for, furnish, exchange or give away any cigarette,
cigars or tobacco in any form to children under the age of eighteen (18) years
of age within the corporate boundaries of the city of Wenona.
   B.   Possession Of Tobacco By Minors: No minor under eighteen (18) years of
age shall have in his or her possession any cigar or cigarette or tobacco in
any of its forms.
   C.   Exemptions Of Possession Of Tobacco By Minors: It shall not be a
violation of this section for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to
possess tobacco while in the presence of his or her parents or guardian or in
the performance of a religious ceremony or while participating in a theatrical
performance.
   D.   Penalty: Any person who violates this section is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense,
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the second offense and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the third and subsequent offenses. If fine is not paid to the
city of Wenona on or before the due date given on the ordinance citation, the
fine will be double the amount indicated on the ordinance citation.
   E.   Parents Or Guardian To Be Responsible For Payment Of Minor's Fine:
Parents and or legal guardians of the minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years old who has been issued an ordinance citation for possession of tobacco
by a minor within the corporate boundaries of the city of Wenona will be
responsible for such payment of the fine and any and all court costs associated
in the prosecution of the ordinance citation. (Ord. 090407A, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-2-1: General Provisions
5-2-1-1: Animals At Large
5-2-1-2: Unwholesome Premises
5-2-1-3: Location Restriction
5-2-1-4: Driving Animals
5-2-1-5: Loud Noises
5-2-1-6: Dangerous Animals
5-2-1-7: Impounding
5-2-2: Kennels And Pet Shops
5-2-2-1: Animal Welfare Act Adopted
5-2-2-2: Definitions
5-2-2-3: License Required; Fee
5-2-2-4: Revocation Of License
5-2-2-5: Consent Of Neighboring Owners
5-2-2-6: Enclosed Premises
5-2-2-7: Health And Sanitary Conditions
5-2-2-8: Inspection
5-2-2-9: Exemption
5-2-2-10: Penalty
5-2-3: Dogs
5-2-3-1: Definitions
5-2-3-2: License And Rabies Inoculation Required
5-2-3-3: License And Fees
5-2-3-4: Running At Large
5-2-3-5: Disturbing Peace
5-2-3-6: Nuisances And Sanitation
5-2-3-7: Regulation Of Dangerous And Vicious Dogs
5-2-3-8: Dog Bites
5-2-3-9: Owner Responsible
5-2-3-10: Duties Of Poundkeeper
5-2-3-11: Fees For Impounding And Keeping
5-2-3-12: Dogs Impounded; How Redeemed
5-2-3-13: Public Notice
5-2-3-14: Licensed Dogs Impounded
5-2-3-15: Penalty
5-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
5-2-1-1: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
No person, being the owner or having possession of any horse, mule, ox, cow,
sheep, goat, swine or goose, or any fowls shall permit them to run at large
within the city, except as otherwise provided in this code. It shall further be
unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the city for
the purpose of grazing or feeding.
Any owner or person in charge of any animal described in this section and
section
5-2-1-6 of this chapter who shall permit the same to run at large in violation
of the provisions of the said sections shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each animal
of any of the species named in said sections, for each time it is permitted to
be or run at large, together with the costs of impounding and the expense of
sustenance for such animal or animals when impounded. (1994 Code)
5-2-1-2: UNWHOLESOME PREMISES:
No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is, or may
be kept, to become unclean or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to keep any
live swine or pigs in the city. (1994 Code)
5-2-1-3: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
It shall be unlawful to keep or have any goats anywhere in the city, or any
cattle, horses or chickens within three hundred feet (300') of any residence,
other than the residence of the persons so keeping or having such animals,
anywhere in the city. (1994 Code)
5-2-1-4: DRIVING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or drive away any such animal from
any enclosed lot or tract of ground, or from any stable or other building where
such animal is not a trespasser, or from outside the city limits into the city
limits, with the intent that such animal may be impounded. (1994 Code)
5-2-1-5: LOUD NOISES:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by
loud noises at any time of the day or night. (1994 Code)
5-2-1-6: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
No person, being the owner or keeper thereof, shall permit any dangerous,
unruly, fierce or mischievous animal to run at large in the city, to the
danger, annoyance or damage of any other person. (1994 Code)
5-2-1-7: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to maintain and
operate a place for a city pound, for the purpose of impounding dogs and other
animals.
It shall be the duty of all police officers to seize and impound any and all
animals running at large in the city, and all dogs running at large.
   B.   Any person inconvenienced or injured, or who may be in danger of being
injured, either in person or property, by reason of the unlawful running at
large within the city of any animal as hereinbefore mentioned, may either drive
or convey the same to the city pound, whereupon it shall be the duty of the
police chief to take and impound the same, or such person may take up and
confine such animal in some safe and convenient place, and notify the police
chief or some police officer thereof, as soon as practicable, and the officer
so notified shall forthwith take charge of such animal and impound the same.
(1994 Code)
5-2-2: KENNELS AND PET SHOPS:
5-2-2-1: ANIMAL WELFARE ACT ADOPTED:
The regulations relating to the animal welfare act of the state of Illinois,
adopted from time to time are adopted by reference as part of this chapter,
particularly chapter 8, section 318 of said act. (1994 Code)
5-2-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "kennel" and "pet shop" shall be construed to include any
establishment for the raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs, cats,
birds, mice, rats or other small animals for hire or profit or where more than
four (4) dogs and/or cats are harbored or kept. Dogs and cats under the age of
six (6) months are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 020606, 2-
6-2006)
5-2-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel or pet shop anywhere in the city
without first securing a license as hereinafter provided. Application for such
license shall be made upon the form provided by the city clerk. The fee to be
paid for such license shall be forty five dollars ($45.00) for an annual
license. (Ord. 020606, 2-6-2006)
5-2-2-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license may be revoked by the mayor at any time during the life of such
license for any violation by a licensee of the ordinance provisions relating to
the license, the subject matter of the license, or to the premises occupied.
Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. (1994 Code)
5-2-2-5: CONSENT OF NEIGHBORING OWNERS:
The consent of all adjoining or neighboring owners whose property is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the property of the proposed licensee is
required as a prerequisite to the conduct of any kennel or pet shop. Said
consents must be obtained by securing the necessary signatures to a written
consent petition. Such petition should be filed with the city clerk when
signed.
Consent once given and filed shall not be withdrawn, and such petition need not
be renewed for the continuous conduct of the same business, whether by the same
proprietor or not.
Each consent when filed shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the person
securing the signatures that each signature appearing therein was properly
secured and written on; and that the petition contains the necessary number of
signatures required by ordinance. (1994 Code)
5-2-2-6: ENCLOSED PREMISES:
Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a kennel or
pet shop shall be enclosed with either a solid nontransparent wall or fence of
link-seave steel wire or combination thereof with a minimum height of seven
feet (7') from the ground level, excepting for entrances and exits. The fence
or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind, excepting one
sign of the licensee not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in size. (1994
Code)
5-2-2-7: HEALTH AND SANITARY CONDITIONS:
Every place used as a kennel or pet shop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain thereon
for more than twenty four (24) hours. All animals shall be humanely treated,
and any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and treated. (1994
Code)
5-2-2-8: INSPECTION:
The department of agriculture shall periodically inspect each such place of
business to determine whether the provisions of this code regulating the health
and sanitation applicable thereto are being complied with. (1994 Code)
5-2-2-9: EXEMPTION:
All persons or other business entities holding a valid license for the
operation or maintenance of a kennel or a pet shop by the state of Illinois on
the effective date of this section
5-2-2 shall be exempt from the provisions hereof as long as said license
remains in full force and effect. (1994 Code)
5-2-2-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this section
5-2-2 shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (1994 Code)
5-2-3: DOGS:
5-2-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AT LARGE: When an animal is off the premises of his owner and not under the
control of a responsible person.
DOG: Includes all members of the canine family three (3) months or more of age,
and also pet foxes and wolves.
OWNER: A person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors a
dog, or who has a dog in his care or who acts as its custodian, or who
knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
(1994 Code)
5-2-3-2: LICENSE AND RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED:
   A.   No dog shall be permitted to be or remain in the city without being
licensed as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Every owner of a dog four (4) months or more of age not confined at all
times to an enclosed area shall cause such dog to be inoculated against rabies
by a licensed veterinarian pursuant to section 8 of the animal control act, 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8. (Ord. 011717, 1-17-2017)
5-2-3-3: LICENSE AND FEES:
All dogs kept in the city shall be registered as to sex and breed of the dog,
name and address of the owner, name and address of keeper of dog (if different
from the owner's name and/or address) and proof of current vaccination against
rabies as required by section 8 of the animal control act, 510 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8. On or before May 1 of each year, each owner shall obtain
a license for said dog and shall pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each
dog. After May 1, a twenty five dollar ($25.00) late fee shall be imposed. It
shall be the duty of said owner to cause such license tag to be securely
attached around the dog's neck and kept there at all times during the license
period which shall be from January 1 through December 31. Lost tags must be
replaced at the cost of one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 011717, 1-17-2017)
5-2-3-4: RUNNING AT LARGE:
No dog shall be permitted to run at large in the city at any time. It shall be
the duty of the registered owner of every dog to keep same safely and securely
muzzled. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-5: DISTURBING PEACE:
No person owning any dog shall suffer or permit such dog to disturb the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood by barking, making other loud or unusual noises,
or by running through or across cultivated gardens or fields. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-6: NUISANCES AND SANITATION:
   A.   Any dog found in the city either without a license or running at large
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded as hereinafter
provided.
   B.   Every owner or person attending a dog or other animal shall be in
violation of this chapter if said animal defecates upon any property, public or
private, other than the property of the owner or keeper of the dog, unless the
person has immediate control of a means for the removal of the excrement as
well as a depository for the removal of the excrement to a receptacle located
upon property owned or possessed by the owner or keeper or such property owned
by the person attending said animal or any public receptacle reasonably
available. (Ord. 011717, 1-17-2017)
5-2-3-7: REGULATION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
 
                        Any person approved by the LaSalle County Board, the
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Marshall County Board or the State of Illinois to
                        perform duties to effectuate the Animal Control Act,
                        510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
BITE:                   To seize or cut with the teeth or jaws.
                        A securely locked pen, kennel or structure designed and
                        constructed for the keeping of a vicious dog and shall
                        be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
                        with the standards set out in this section. Such pen,
                        kennel or structure must be at least six feet (6') in
                        height and have secure sides and a secure top attached
                        to the sides. All structures used to confine registered
                        vicious dogs must be locked with a key or combination
                        lock when such animals are within the structure. Such
                        structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached
                        to the sides of the structure or the sides of the
CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE:  structure must be embedded in the ground no less than
                        two feet (2'). All structures erected to house vicious
                        dogs must comply with all zoning and building
                        regulations of the city. All such structures must be
                        adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and
                        sanitary condition. All such structures must be closer
                        to the principal structure or residence than to the
                        rear yard property line as measured from the nearest
                        parts of each, or at least ten feet (10') from rear and
                        side yard property lines. If the enclosure is a room
                        within a residence, it cannot have direct ingress from
                        or egress to the outdoors unless it leads directly to
                        an enclosed pen and the door must be locked.
              (1)   Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or
              custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or
DANGEROUS     custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a
DOG:          serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a
              person or a companion animal; or
              (2)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
              serious physical injury.
FIGHT:        A prearranged conflict between two (2) or more animals but does not include a
              conflict that is unorganized or accidental.
INVESTIGATING An animal control officer, or his or her supervisor or designee, or a law
OFFICER:      enforcement officer.
K-9 PATROL    A dog used by law enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes and
DOG OR POLICE activities.
DOG:
              A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the collar or
LEASH:        harness of a dog and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such dog under
              control.
              A device constructed of strong, soft material or metal to prevent a dog from
MUZZLE:       biting any person or animal. The muzzle must be made in a manner which will not
              cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
NIP:          To pinch or squeeze with teeth or jaws without breaking of skin or tissue.
              Any person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors a dog, or
OWNER:        who has it in his or her care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits
              a dog to remain on any premises occupied by him or her.
 
 
                  The failure to confine a vicious dog as required by this
                  section or the unrestrained freedom of a dog in or upon any
RUNNING AT LARGE: of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, school grounds or
                  other public grounds within the city's corporate limits, even
                  when such dog is in the company of the owner or other person
                  but is not attached to a leash or other restraining device.
                  A dog that, without justification, attacks a person or other
VICIOUS DOG:      domestic animal and causes serious physical injury or death
                  or any individual dog that has been found to be a "dangerous
                  dog" upon three (3) separate occasions.
 
   B.   Regulation Of Dangerous Dogs:
      1.   Investigation: If an investigating officer learns about a dog's
behavior that has made a reasonable person believe that the dog posed a serious
and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person
or a companion animal, or if a dog has bitten a person or other domestic animal
without justification, the investigating officer must conduct an investigation
and determine, in writing, whether that dog should be declared "dangerous."
      2.   "Dangerous Dog" Determination:
         a.   An investigating officer must conduct an investigation and make a
written finding that the dog is a "dangerous dog" as defined by this section.
The investigation shall include, but is not limited to:
            (1)   Sending notice to the dog's owner within ten (10) business
days that an investigation has been initiated and affording the owner an
opportunity to meet with the investigating officer prior to the making of a
determination;
            (2)   Gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence;
            (3)   Interviewing witnesses; and
            (4)   Making a written report.
         b.   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if an investigating officer
determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
            (1)   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was
committing a crime or offense upon the owner of the dog or was committing a
willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property occupied by the
owner of the dog;
            (2)   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring;
            (3)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was
attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
            (4)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting
itself, its owner, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
         c.   The statement of a certified applied behaviorist, a board
certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant
to the determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified pursuant to
the provisions of this section.
         d.   No dog shall be deemed "dangerous" if it is a professionally
trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties or if it is a guide dog for the
blind or hearing impaired or a support dog for the physically handicapped,
provided an attack or injury to a person or other domestic animal occurs while
the dog is performing duties as expected.
         e.   No dog shall be deemed a "dangerous dog" unless shown to be a
"dangerous dog" by a preponderance of evidence.
         f.   An investigating officer shall provide notice of his or her
determination that a dog is dangerous by causing such notice to be sent
immediately to the dog's owner by personal service or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested. The delivery of the notice shall be
deemed to be sufficiently given on the date it is delivered in person or three
(3) calendar days after being deposited for delivery in the United States mail
with proper postage prepaid. If the dog is determined to be a "dangerous dog,"
notice of the owner's right to appeal the determination shall be delivered to
the owner together with the notification that the dog is a "dangerous dog."
      3.   Owner's Obligations: After a dog has been determined to be
dangerous, the owner may be instructed to comply with any or all of the
following requirements.
         a.   No dangerous dog shall be permitted to leave the premises of its
owner when not under control by a leash no longer than four feet (4') or by
another recognized control method.
         b.   An investigating officer shall order the dog to be spayed or
neutered and microchipped, if not already, within fourteen (14) calendar days
of delivery of the written report to the owner. The owner shall be responsible
for all costs associated with spaying or neutering and microchipping.
         c.   An investigating officer may order the dog to be evaluated by a
certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist or
another recognized expert and to complete a training program. The owner of the
dangerous dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with evaluations
and training.
         d.   An investigating officer may order direct supervision of the
dangerous dog by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older whenever the dog
is on public premises.
         e.   An investigating officer may order a dangerous dog to be muzzled
whenever it is on public premises.
      4.   Impoundment: If an owner fails to comply with the requirements of
this section, a law enforcement officer shall impound the dog and the owner
shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine plus impoundment fees to the
animal control agency impounding the dog. A dog found to be a dangerous dog
shall not be released to the owner until the owner pays all fines and fees and
complies with the requirements of this section, including, but not limited to,
proper leash length, spaying or neutering, and microchipping. An owner of a
dangerous dog which has caused an injury to a person resulting in the
impoundment of the dog shall be entitled to redeem the dog in accordance with
510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13, as amended.
   C.   Regulation Of Vicious Dogs:
      1.   Investigation: If an investigating officer learns that a dog (a) has
attacked a person or other domestic animal without justification and has caused
serious physical injury or death; or (b) has a propensity to attack people or
other domestic animals without provocation; or (c) has posed a serious and
unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or
a companion animal upon three (3) separate occasions; or (d) has bitten and/or
nipped a person or other domestic animal without justification upon three (3)
separate occasions, the investigating officer must conduct an investigation and
determine, in writing, whether that dog should be declared "vicious."
      2.   "Vicious Dog" Determination:
         a.   An investigating officer must conduct an investigation and make a
written finding that the dog is a "vicious dog" as defined by this section. The
investigation shall include, but is not limited to:
            (1)   Sending notice to the dog's owner within ten (10) business
days that an investigation has been initiated and affording the owner an
opportunity to meet with the investigating officer prior to the making of a
determination;
            (2)   Gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence;
            (3)   Interviewing witnesses; and
            (4)   Making a written report.
         b.   A dog shall not be declared vicious if an investigating officer
determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
            (1)   The threat, injury or death was sustained by a person who at
the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner of the dog or was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property
occupied by the owner of the dog;
            (2)   The threatened, injured or killed person was abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring or has in the
past abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring;
            (3)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was
attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
            (4)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting
itself, its owner, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
         c.   The statement of a certified applied behaviorist, a board
certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant
to the determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified pursuant to
the provisions of this section.
         d.   No dog shall be deemed a "vicious dog" unless shown to be a
vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence. No dog shall be declared vicious
based solely on its breed.
         e.   An investigating officer shall provide notice of his or her
determination that a dog is vicious by causing such notice to be sent
immediately to the dog's owner by personal service or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested. The delivery of the notice shall be
deemed to be sufficiently given on the date it is delivered in person or three
(3) calendar days after being deposited for delivery in the United States mail
with proper postage prepaid. If the dog is determined to be a "vicious dog,"
notice of the owner's right to appeal the determination shall be delivered to
the owner together with the notification that the dog is a "vicious dog."
      3.   Owner's Obligations: After a dog has been determined to be vicious,
the owner shall comply with the following requirements.
         a.   Confinement:
            (1)   Confinement Indoors: No vicious dog may be kept on a porch,
patio or in any part of a residence or structure that would allow the vicious
dog to exit the residence or structure on its own volition. No vicious dog
shall be kept in a residence or structure when the windows are open or when
screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the vicious
dog from exiting the residence or structure.
            (2)   Confinement In An Exterior Yard: No person shall confine a
vicious dog in an exterior area unless such dog is confined in a confinement
structure constructed and maintained as set forth in this section.
            (3)   Confinement On A Leash: No person shall permit a vicious dog
to go outside a confinement structure, residence or other structure unless the
vicious dog is securely restrained with a leash no longer than four feet (4')
in length and with a muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on
a leash unless a person is in physical control of the leash. No leash
restraining any vicious dog shall be attached to any inanimate object
including, but not limited to, trees, posts, stakes and buildings.
            (4)   Exceptions: A vicious dog may be allowed out of confinement
when:
               (a)   It is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care
for the vicious dog;
               (b)   In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the
dog's life is threatened; or
               (c)   To comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a
leash not exceeding four feet (4') in length, and shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its
residence.
         b.   Spaying/Neutering: If a dog is deemed to be "vicious," the
investigating officer shall order the dog to be spayed or neutered and
microchipped, if not already, within ten (10) calendar days. The dog's owner
shall be responsible for all costs associated with spaying or neutering and
microchipping.
         c.   Signage: The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent
place on the premises where the dog is to be kept a sign which is readable by
the public from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') using the
words "Beware of Dog-Vicious Dog." A similar sign shall be posted on any
confinement structure.
         d.   License:
            (1)   Application: After a dog has been declared vicious, within
forty eight (48) hours of delivery of such notice, the owner or custodian shall
file an application for a license to possess a vicious dog with the city clerk
on a form prescribed and provided by the city. The application for such license
shall be accompanied by all of the following:
               (a)   Verification of the owner's identity and current address
by providing a photostatic copy of the owner's driver's license or state
identification card;
               (b)   Proof of ownership or custody of the vicious dog;
               (c)   A copy of the current immunization and health record of
the vicious dog prepared by a veterinarian licensed to practice in Illinois;
               (d)   A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage in an
amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) providing
coverage for any injury, damage or loss caused by the vicious dog;
               (e)   Two (2) photographs of the vicious dog to be licensed
taken not less than one (1) month before the date of the application. One
photograph shall provide a front view of the vicious dog and one photograph
shall show a side view of the vicious dog; and
               (f)   An annual license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
            (2)   Investigation Of Premises: Upon receipt of an application,
the city clerk shall forward such application to the police department which
shall cause an inspection of the premises on which the vicious dog shall be
kept to determine that all provisions of this section relating to keeping of a
vicious dog have been complied with by the applicant. Upon completion of the
inspection, the police department shall notify the city clerk in writing of the
results of its inspection and recommendation as to whether the application
should be approved or denied. The failure of an applicant to comply with a
police officer's request to conduct an investigation of the premises shall be
grounds for the rejection of an application.
            (3)   Approval Or Denial Of Application: Upon receipt of the
results of the police department inspection, the city clerk shall notify the
applicant of the approval or denial of the license application. In the event
that the license application is denied, the notification shall be provided in
writing and the reasons for such denial shall be stated. Upon approval of the
license application, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.
            (4)   Reporting Requirements Of A Licensee: Any person holding a
license pursuant to this section shall report the incidence of any of the
following events to the city police department or city clerk:
               (a)   The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any vicious
dog, within forty eight (48) hours of such event;
               (b)   The escape from confinement or theft of any vicious dog,
immediately upon discovery of the escape or theft;
               (c)   The biting or nipping of any person or animal by a vicious
dog, immediately upon discovery of the occurrence;
               (d)   The birth of any offspring of a vicious dog, within forty
eight (48) hours of the birth of the offspring;
               (e)   The permanent removal of any vicious dog from the
corporate limits of the municipality, within forty eight (48) hours of such
removal by surrender of the license to the city clerk.
            (5)   Renewal Of License: The owner shall submit a written
application on an annual basis and comply with all requirements set forth in
this section, including an inspection of the premises and payment of an annual
license fee.
            (6)   Revocation Of License: In addition to any other penalty
provisions of this section, a license granted pursuant to this section shall be
automatically revoked upon any violation by the licensee of any provision of
this section.
         e.   Impoundment: If an owner fails to comply with the requirements of
this section, a law enforcement officer shall impound the dog and the owner
shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine plus impoundment fees to the
animal control agency impounding the dog. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall
not be released to the owner until the owner pays all fines and fees and
complies with the license and confinement structure requirements of this
section. An owner of a vicious dog which has caused an injury to a person
resulting in the impoundment of the dog shall be entitled to redeem the dog in
accordance with 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13, as amended.
   D.   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a determination under this section that
a dog is a "dangerous dog" or "vicious dog" shall have to file a complaint
against the city in the Circuit Court of Marshall County, Illinois, within
twenty one (21) calendar days of receipt of notification of the determination,
for a de novo hearing on the determination. The proceeding shall be conducted
as a civil hearing in accordance with the Illinois Rules of Evidence and the
Code of Civil Procedure, including the discovery provisions. After hearing both
parties' evidence, the court may make a determination of "dangerous dog" if the
city meets its burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence or the court
may make a determination of "vicious dog" if the city meets its burden of proof
by clear and convincing evidence. The final order of the Circuit Court may be
appealed pursuant to the civil appeals provisions of the Illinois Supreme Court
Rules. In the event that a civil suit to appeal the determination of an
investigating officer is not taken within twenty one (21) calendar days, the
owner shall be deemed to have acquiesced in the finding or decision and the
matter shall be deemed concluded.
   E.   Fighting Prohibited: No person shall fight or bait, conspire to fight
or bait, or keep, train, or transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting,
any dog.
   F.   Penalties: Upon conviction of a violation of any section or subsection
of this section, the court shall assess a fine of not less than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each day that a violation occurs. In addition, the court may assess court costs
and attorney's fees incurred by the city against any person in violation of
this section. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 051517B, 5-15-2017)
5-2-3-8: DOG BITES:
Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of said dog shall immediately notify
the police department which shall order the dog held on the owner's premises or
shall have it impounded for a period of ten (10) days. The dog shall be
examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the ten
(10) day period. If at the end of the ten (10) days, a veterinarian is
convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from
quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. If the dog dies in the
meanwhile, its head shall be sent to the state department of health for
examination for rabies. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-9: OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all times
and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises of the property
of the owner or keeper, unless the dog is under complete control of a
responsible person. Within the lot lines of the premises occupied by a dog's
owner, a dog shall be in a fenced in area, or shall be on a leash which shall
restrain the dog a distance of at least fifteen feet (15') away from any city
sidewalk or alley, or shall be kept inside a fenced and secure enclosure. (Ord.
020606, 2-6-2006)
5-2-3-10: DUTIES OF POUNDKEEPER:
The poundkeeper is hereby charged with the duty of impounding all dogs running
at large in violation of the provisions of this section. He shall be a special
police officer and shall be and is hereby authorized to make all necessary
arrests in carrying out the provisions of this section. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-11: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING AND KEEPING:
The fees and charges for taking up, impounding, keeping and disposing of
impounded animals shall be determined by the veterinarian in charge. (1994
Code)
5-2-3-12: DOGS IMPOUNDED; HOW REDEEMED:
The owner of any dog impounded hereunder may redeem the same by paying all the
costs, charges and penalties assessed, if any, that have accrued up to the time
of making the redemption, and when the same are paid to said poundkeeper, it
shall be his duty and he shall release the dog from said pound and deliver him
to the owner thereof. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-13: PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   Immediately after impounding any dog hereunder, it shall be the duty of
the poundkeeper to enter upon the records of the pound in a book to be kept by
him for such purpose, the date of impounding, a description of the dog
impounded, and a record as to whether or not such dog has been licensed and
tagged as required by the ordinances of the city.
   B.   Public notice of the impounding of such dog shall be given by posting
one copy of the description of such dog and date of impounding at the pound and
one copy of such notice on the bulletin board at either the city post office or
the city hall. Any such dog not redeemed by the owner thereof within three (3)
days after the posting of such notice by the poundkeeper shall be and he is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The poundkeeper shall immediately
thereafter kill or destroy such dog. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-14: LICENSED DOGS IMPOUNDED:
It shall be the duty of the poundkeeper to cause notice to be served by mail
upon the registered owner of any licensed dog impounded under the provisions of
this section
5-2-3, such notice to be mailed at least two (2) days prior to the posting of
the notices of impounding hereinbefore provided. (1994 Code)
5-2-3-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
5-2-3 shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED, INOPERATIVE, UNLICENSED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Inoperable, Unlicensed/Unregistered And/Or Abandoned Vehicles Declared
Nuisance
5-3-3: Storage Of Unlicensed/Unregistered Vehicles
5-3-4: Duty To Dispose
5-3-5: Notice
5-3-6: Hearing
5-3-7: Notify Municipality
5-3-8: Towing Abandoned Vehicles
5-3-9: Towing From Private Property
5-3-10: Record Of Vehicles Towed
5-3-11: State Record Search
5-3-12: Unknown Owner; Notify State
5-3-13: Reclamation Of Vehicle
5-3-14: Public Auction; Sale Of Abandoned Vehicles
5-3-15: Sale Without Notice; Exception
5-3-16: Report Disposal Of Vehicle
5-3-17: Disposition Of Funds
5-3-18: Nonliability For Damages
5-3-19: Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle
incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle that has not been
moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted
1 .
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of
age or older.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the city.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which for a period of at least
fourteen (14) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle or, in the event a vehicle
is the subject of an agreement for conditional sale or lease thereof, with the
right of purchase upon the performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee, lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purposes of this chapter.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street or highway whether subject to or exempt from
registration; excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-101.05.
5-3-2: INOPERABLE, UNLICENSED/UNREGISTERED AND/OR ABANDONED VEHICLES DECLARED
NUISANCE:
   A.   The mayor and city council finds and declares that inoperable,
unlicensed and/or unregistered and/or abandoned vehicles constitute a safety
hazard and a public nuisance; are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of the general public by harboring disease, providing breeding places for
vermin, inviting plundering, creating fire hazards and presenting physical
dangers to children and others, and produce scenic blight which degrade the
environment and adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance and
continuing development of the city.
   B.   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
      1.   A motor vehicle which is kept within a building when not in use; or
      2.   An operable antique vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age; or
      3.   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, or on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the sale of new or used automobiles; or
      4.   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power, in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations, for a period of not more than fourteen (14) days from the
date said vehicle became operable 1 . (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-40-3.
5-3-3: STORAGE OF UNLICENSED/UNREGISTERED VEHICLES:
No person shall accumulate, store or allow any unlicensed or unregistered
vehicle in the open upon any public or private property within the city for a
period exceeding seven (7) days. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-4: DUTY TO DISPOSE:
Any person not exempted under subsection
5-3-2B of this chapter shall dispose of any inoperable, unlicensed and/or
unregistered and/or abandoned motor vehicle owned by him or under his control
or located upon property owned or occupied by him upon written notice received
from the city clerk commanding the disposition of the motor vehicle. (Ord.
061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-5: NOTICE:
   A.   If the inoperable, unlicensed and/or unregistered and/or abandoned
vehicle displays current license or registration plates or decals from which
the last known owner may be determined in a reasonably expeditious manner,
notice, as set forth herein, shall be sent to the last registered owner of such
motor vehicle and to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
motor vehicle is located.
   B.   All notices provided by this section shall be sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid. Notice to one owner
of said vehicle or one owner or occupant of said property shall be considered
notice to all owners or occupants. Refusal to accept delivery of said notice
shall be deemed acceptance for purposes of this section. The date of notice for
purposes of this section shall be the day after the date said notice was
deposited with the United States postal service. In the alternative, notice
provided herein may be personally served by the Wenona police department upon
said owner or an occupant of the same household above the age of fourteen (14)
years old, in which case the date of notice shall be the date of said personal
service.
   C.   Such notice by the city clerk to remove said inoperable, unlicensed
and/or unregistered and/or abandoned vehicle shall be substantially in the form
set forth below:
   NOTICE TO REMOVE VEHICLE
   TO:   NAME:       DATE:    
      ADDRESS:    
   A Motor Vehicle described as
      MAKE:    
      YEAR:    
      COLOR:    
with registration plates number                 is registered in the name(s) of
                               with the State of                     . This
vehicle is located at                                outside of an enclosed
building and is deemed to be an Inoperable, Unlicensed and/or Unregistered and/
or Abandoned Vehicle under an Ordinance of the City of Wenona. You are hereby
notified that such Vehicle must be removed, disposed of or placed in an
enclosed building within seven (7) days after the date of this notice as
indicated above. You may request a hearing on the matter of whether the above
described vehicle is an Inoperable, Unlicensed and/or Unregistered and/or
Abandoned Vehicle in violation of the Ordinance by submitting a written request
for such a hearing to the City Council of the City of Wenona addressed as set
forth below, within seven (7) days of the date of this notice. In the event
that you submit such a request for a hearing, a hearing date will be set and
you will be advised of the time, date and place of such hearing at least three
(3) days in advance of the date of such hearing. Pursuant to the Ordinance you
may request an extension period at any such hearing. The City Council shall,
upon good cause being shown, grant an extension of not more than thirty (30)
days if the owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the property upon
which such Motor Vehicle is located submits to the City Council an affidavit
that the Motor Vehicle is being held for sale or expeditious repair as defined
by subsection 5-3-2B or 5-3-6B of the Ordinance. To request a hearing, hand
deliver or mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a request for such
a hearing in writing to the City of Wenona, P.O. Box B, 226 S. Chestnut,
Wenona, Illinois 61377. If you fail to request a hearing within seven (7) days
of the date of this notice, and you do not remove, dispose of, or place the
vehicle in an enclosed building within the specified period, or within any
extension granted by the City Council after a hearing, such vehicle is subject
to being towed and impounded and you may be charged with a violation of the
Ordinance and subject to a fine of not more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars
($750.00) for such violation. In addition, the costs of towing and storage will
be assessed against you.
(Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-6: HEARING:
   A.   The person or persons, or the designated agent thereof, to whom the
notice as specified by this chapter is directed, shall have the right to a
hearing before the city council on the matter of whether the motor vehicle
cited in such notice is an inoperable, unlicensed and/or unregistered and/or
abandoned vehicle in violation of this chapter. To obtain such a hearing, any
such person must first submit a written request for such a hearing by hand
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the City
of Wenona, 226 S. Chestnut, P.O. Box B, Wenona, IL 61377, within seven (7) days
of the date of any such notice. In the event that a hearing is so requested,
the city clerk shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, set a time, date and
place for the hearing before the city council and shall cause the person or
persons so requesting the hearing to be provided with written notice of the
time, date and place for the hearing at least three (3) days in advance of the
date thereof. All enforcement of this chapter shall be stayed pending said
hearing and determination by the city council.
   B.   The owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the property where
the vehicle is located may apply for an extension of time by making a written
request for a hearing as provided in subsection A of this section. Upon receipt
of any such application for an extension of time, the city council shall, upon
good cause being shown, grant an extension of not more than thirty (30) days,
if such person submits to the city council an affidavit that the motor vehicle
is being held for sale or expeditious repair. As used in this section,
"expeditious repair" shall mean:
      1.   That the necessary parts for repair have been ordered but are not
available for installation in the motor vehicle for reasons not within the
control of the owner of said motor vehicle; or
      2.   That the motor vehicle is scheduled to be repaired by a person whose
regular course of business includes the repair of vehicles, and the scheduled
repair date is within thirty (30) days; or
      3.   That the motor vehicle is in such condition of being inoperable as a
result of a vehicular accident, and the owner of such inoperable motor vehicle
or any third party to whom or from whom a claim for damages sustained in such
accident is anticipated is investigating or preparing a claim for such damages,
but in no event shall any such extension period exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord.
061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-7: NOTIFY MUNICIPALITY:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this state, not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the mayor when
the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city. Upon receipt of such
notification, the mayor shall authorize a towing service to remove and take
possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents
and maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or
any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is
disposed of as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-8: TOWING ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in the
city ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized
by order of the mayor.
   B.   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its
position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the
impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a towing service
may be authorized by order of the mayor.
   C.   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the mayor of the municipality, the owner of the vehicle
will be responsible for all towing costs. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-9: TOWING FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   In the event the notice provided for in section
5-3-5 of this chapter is not complied with, and except as provided in
subsection B of this section, the Wenona police department shall obtain a
warrant and shall cause the towing or removal of the motor vehicle from private
property.
   B.   In the event a request for hearing before the city council was properly
made and the city council determined by majority vote that the said vehicle is
an inoperable and/or unlicensed and/or unregistered and/or abandoned motor
vehicle for purposes of this chapter, then the city council shall set a
reasonable date by which said vehicle shall be disposed of or enclosed within a
building. Said date shall be no less than seven (7) days after the date of
hearing. In the event said vehicle is not disposed of or enclosed within a
building by the said date set by the city council, then the Wenona police
department shall obtain a warrant and shall cause the towing or removal of the
motor vehicle without further, prior notice thereof. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of said vehicle to deliver a written notice to the
city clerk and to provide documentation and/or demonstration of operability or
that the motor vehicle has been properly licensed and/or registered if said
vehicle has been put into operable and/or licensed and/or registered condition
prior to towing or removal of said vehicle. In the event no such written notice
is received by the city clerk prior to towing or removal, it shall be presumed
that said vehicle remains inoperable and/or unlicensed and/or unregistered and/
or abandoned and may be towed or removed in accordance herewith.
   C.   Whenever a motor vehicle is towed or removed by a towing service
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner of the motor vehicle and
the owner or occupant of the property upon which such inoperable motor vehicle
is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for all towing and
storage charges unless otherwise determined by the city council pursuant to
hearing as provided in section
5-3-6 of this chapter.
   D.   Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the city
clerk shall send notice to the registered owner of the vehicle and lien holder,
if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which
the vehicle was removed that said vehicle(s) has been impounded and stored for
violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of where the
vehicle(s) is towed and the costs incurred by the city for removal.
   E.   Any motor vehicle towed or removed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be stored and claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended, entitled
"Abandoned Lost, Stolen Or Unclaimed Vehicles". (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-10: RECORD OF VEHICLES TOWED:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the city
clerk shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color,
year of manufacture, manufacturer's name, manufacturer's series name, body
style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number
displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of
the city official authorizing the tow. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-11: STATE RECORD SEARCH:
When the city clerk or other city officials do not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by a
directed communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining
the required ownership information.
The city clerk will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois state
police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state police
for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois state police
files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the
national crime information center (NCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois
state police. The information determined from these record searches will be
used by the police department in sending a notification by certified mail to
the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held,
requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.
(Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-12: UNKNOWN OWNER; NOTIFY STATE:
When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration
files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if
applicable, the city clerk shall notify the Illinois state police for the
purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois state
police will be immediately forwarded to the city official having custody of the
vehicle for notification of owner. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-13: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department
proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until
all towing and storage charges have been paid. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-14: PUBLIC AUCTION; SALE OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
Whenever an inoperable, unlicensed, unregistered or abandoned, lost, stolen or
unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer,
remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as
provided herein, the city clerk having possession of the vehicle shall cause it
to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place
of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days
prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At
least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the city clerk shall cause a notice of
the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered
owner or other person known by the city clerk or towing service to be legally
entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete
description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any
legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been
returned by the postal authorities to the city clerk due to the addressee
having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration
records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice will not be
required. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-15: SALE WITHOUT NOTICE; EXCEPTION:
When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of an inoperable, unlicensed, unregistered or abandoned, lost or
unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by
any means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided
herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this chapter without notice
to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
the vehicle.
When an inoperable, unlicensed, unregistered or abandoned vehicle of more than
seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be
kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining
ownership; the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public
service or in person for a determination of disposition; and an examination of
the Illinois state police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted
information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit
of disposition information being received from the registered owner, the mayor
will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded
from this chapter. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-16: REPORT DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the city is reclaimed
by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle
is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter, a
report of the transaction will be maintained by the city clerk for a period of
one year from the date of the sale or disposal. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-17: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized by
the mayor to be towed away and disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the
proceeds of the public sale or disposition, after the deduction of towing,
storage and processing charges, shall be deposited in the municipal treasury.
(Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-18: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
Any city official, police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee
shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by
the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or
any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other
vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by
this chapter. (Ord. 061603, 6-16-2003)
5-3-19: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If court action is necessary, the violator
shall pay the city attorney fees and costs, if found guilty. (Ord. 061603, 6-
16-2003)
CHAPTER 4
SKATEBOARDING
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition
5-4-2: Yield Right Of Way
5-4-3: Operating On Right Hand Side
5-4-4: Single File
5-4-5: Traffic Control Devices
5-4-6: Traffic Regulations
5-4-7: Operation On Sidewalks
5-4-8: Hitching On Vehicles
5-4-9: Prohibited Areas
5-4-10: Careless Riding
5-4-11: Penalty
5-4-12: Confiscation Of Skateboards
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Skateboard" means any board or platform device having at least two (2) axles
with wheels on each end of a style commonly occurring on roller skates, or
other similar devices, with such device operated by a person propelling himself
or herself by pushing the device and riding upon the platform as the platform
coasts. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-2: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:
Any person operating a skateboard shall yield the right of way to any vehicle,
such as a motor vehicle or bicycle, or pedestrian including yielding the right
of way to any vehicle when approaching or crossing a driveway. (Ord. 060407B,
6-4-2007)
5-4-3: OPERATING ON RIGHT HAND SIDE:
While on a street, a person shall ride a skateboard as close as practicable to
the right hand curb or edge of the roadway. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-4: SINGLE FILE:
No person shall ride a skateboard on any street alongside another person riding
a skateboard, bicycle or motor vehicle unless overtaking and passing such
skateboard, bicycle or motor vehicle. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
Any person operating a skateboard shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-6: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The operation of a skateboard on a street shall be subject to all of the
provisions or laws of the state and the laws of the city, including those
applicable to the drivers of vehicles, except as to the latter, those
provisions that by their very nature have no application. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-
2007)
5-4-7: OPERATION ON SIDEWALKS:
No person shall operate a skateboard on a sidewalk:
   A.   So as to suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and move into
the path of a vehicle that is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   B.   Without giving an audible warning before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian.
   C.   At a speed greater than an ordinary walk when approaching or entering a
crosswalk, approaching or crossing a driveway or crossing a curb cut or
pedestrian ramp and a vehicle is approaching the crosswalk, driveway, curb cut
or pedestrian ramp. This subsection does not require reduced speeds for
skateboards either:
      1.   At places on sidewalks or other pedestrianways other than places
where the path for pedestrians or bicycle traffic approaches or crosses that
for motor vehicle traffic; or
      2.   When motor vehicles are not present.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, an operator of a
skateboard on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk has the same rights and duties as a
pedestrian on a sidewalk or in a crosswalk. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-8: HITCHING ON VEHICLES:
No person while operating a skateboard shall in any way attach themselves or
the skateboard to any moving motor vehicle. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-9: PROHIBITED AREAS:
No person shall operate a skateboard upon any city sidewalk, street, parking
lot or public area within the following designated areas:
   A.   On Chestnut Street between Second South Street and Second North Street;
   B.   On First South Street between Chestnut and Walnut Streets;
   C.   On First North Street between Chestnut and Walnut Streets;
   D.   On any city sidewalks within the city parks. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-10: CARELESS RIDING:
No person shall ride a skateboard in a careless manner. "Riding in a careless
manner" means the person rides a skateboard in a manner that endangers or would
be likely to endanger any person or property. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined:
Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense;
Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second offense;
One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third and subsequent offenses.
If the fine is not paid at Wenona city hall by the due date indicated on the
ordinance citation, and the matter is prosecuted by the city as an ordinance
violation, the fines shall be as follows:
Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense;
One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense; and
Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third and subsequent offenses. (Ord.
060407B, 6-4-2007)
5-4-12: CONFISCATION OF SKATEBOARDS:
Any skateboard used to violate this chapter may be impounded by any police
officer and held until the person using the device at the time of impoundment
is acquitted or provides proof that the fine has been paid, unless otherwise
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 060407B, 6-4-2007)
CHAPTER 5
IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Vehicles Subject To Impoundment
5-5-2: Notice Of Impoundment
5-5-3: Administrative Hearing
5-5-4: Administrative Fee And Other Charges
5-5-5: Abandoned Vehicles
5-5-1: VEHICLES SUBJECT TO IMPOUNDMENT:
A motor vehicle used in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any of
the following offenses is subject to impoundment:
                                                                                    720
A. An offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to     ILCS
   section 36-1 of the criminal code of 1961; or                                    5/
                                                                                    36-1
                                                                                    625
   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an intoxicating   ILCS
B. compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of section 11-   5/
   501 of the Illinois vehicle code; or                                             11-
                                                                                    501
                                                                                    720
   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to   ILCS
C. commit, a felony in violation of the cannabis control act; or                    550/
                                                                                    1 et
                                                                                    seq.
                                                                                    720
                                                                                    ILCS
D. An offense in violation of the Illinois controlled substances act; or            570/
                                                                                    1 et
                                                                                    seq.
                                                                                    720
                                                                                    ILCS
                                                                                    5/
                                                                                    24-
E. An offense in violation of section 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the criminal code  1,
   of 1961; or                                                                      24-
                                                                                    1.5
                                                                                    or
                                                                                    24-
                                                                                    3.1
   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor        625
   vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of the Illinois        ILCS
F. vehicle code provided, however, that a vehicle shall not be subjected to seizure 5/6-
   or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid parking or moving citation or  303
   due to the failure to comply with emission testing; or
   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting
G. to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined by the       
   cannabis control act or the Illinois controlled substances act; or
   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in         625
H. violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code provided that the period ILCS
   of expiration is greater than 1 year; or                                         5/6-
                                                                                    101
   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's   625
I. license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code,   ILCS
   or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license  5/6-
   or permit due to a person's age; or                                              101
   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been
J. issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges that the      
   driver violated the following sections of the Illinois vehicle code:
                                                                                    625
  1.   Section 6-101, requiring drivers to have licenses or permits,            ILCS
                                                                                    5/6-
                                                                                    101
                                                                                    625
  2.   Section 6-303, driving while a driver's license, permit or privilege to  ILCS
   operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, or                              5/6-
                                                                                    303
                                                                                    625
   3.   Section 11-501, driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug ILCS
  drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof; or         5/
                                                                                    11-
                                                                                    501
                                                                                    720
   An offense in violation of article 16 (theft and related offenses) of the        ILCS
K. criminal code of 1961.                                                           5/
                                                                                    Art.
                                                                                    16
 
Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject
to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a
facility designated by the city's police department. (Ord. 020612, 2-6-2012)
5-5-2: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   At the time the vehicle is towed, the police department shall notify or
make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying
himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is
found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of
the fact of the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an
administrative hearing.
   B.   The police department shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle
will remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing,
unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the city a
bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by this chapter and pays for
all towing and storage charges. (Ord. 020612, 2-6-2012)
5-5-3: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   A.   An impounded vehicle may be released pending the completion of an
administrative hearing if the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle or a
lienholder of record posts with the city a bond equal to the administrative fee
as provided by this chapter and pays for all towing and storage charges or
waives the right to a hearing and pays the administrative fee as provided by
this chapter and pays for all towing and storage charges.
   B.   The city shall provide the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle
and any lienholder of record notice of the administrative hearing. The notice
shall:
      1.   Be served upon the registered owner, lessee, and any lienholder of
record either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested
party's address as registered with the secretary of state;
      2.   Be served upon interested parties within ten (10) days after a
vehicle is impounded by the city; and
      3.   Set forth the date, time, and location of the administrative
hearing. An initial hearing, unless waived, shall be scheduled and convened no
later than forty five (45) days after the date of the mailing of the notice of
hearing.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney
licensed to practice law in Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years.
   D.   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment.
   E.   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer:
      1.   Any administrative fee posted to secure the release of the vehicle
shall be forfeited to the city; and
      2.   No vehicle shall be released to the registered owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until the administrative fee and all towing and storage
charges are paid.
   F.   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the administrative review law 1  and
shall be commenced by filing an action in the circuit court of the tenth
judicial circuit, Marshall County, Illinois, in accordance with section 3-104
of the code of civil procedure 2 .
   G.   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any administrative
fee imposed under this chapter or towing and storage charges which remains
unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking
judicial review under the administrative review law may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
020612, 2-6-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
2 2. 735 ILCS 5/3-104.
5-5-4: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE AND OTHER CHARGES:
   A.   An administrative fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) is imposed upon
the registered owner of an impounded motor vehicle or the agents of any such
owner.
   B.   The fee imposed in this section shall be collected by and paid to the
city. The fee imposed by this section is in addition to:
      1.   Any other penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the
underlying violations; and
      2.   Any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the person, firm, or
entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
The administrative fee shall be waived by the city upon verifiable proof that
the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded.
   C.   Towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to the
person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle. (Ord.
020612, 2-6-2012)
5-5-5: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A vehicle not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within
thirty five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written
decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord.
020612, 2-6-2012)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC, GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Vehicle Code Adopted
6-1-2: Through Streets
6-1-3: One-Way Streets Or Alleys
6-1-4: Stop Streets
6-1-5: Limited Load Streets
6-1-6: Posting Signs
6-1-1: VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the entire Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as authorized by 5/20-204 of such
code, the same as if such statute were set out at length in this chapter. (Ord.
100196, 7-1-1996)
6-1-2: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as through
streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle
shall stop at the entrance to the through street and shall yield the right of
way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are
approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard,
unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic control signal.
(1994 Code)
6-1-3: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated
as a one-way street or alley by ordinance in any direction other than that so
designated. (1994 Code)
6-1-4: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and
shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which
are within the intersection approaching so close as to constitute an immediate
hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer
on duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied
with. (1994 Code)
6-1-5: LIMITED LOAD STREETS 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets located
within the city when the gross weight of such vehicle shall exceed twenty
thousand (20,000) pounds, except for Chestnut Street.
And on any street where the weight of vehicles permitted on such street is
limited by ordinance, and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it
shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street,
except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load.
   B.   The city council, upon application made in writing, may grant to any
existing resident of the city who, upon the effective date of this chapter,
owned or utilized vehicles in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds within
the city, the privilege to operate said vehicles upon limited load streets as
set forth herein, to their personal residences or abodes. The exception shall
allow the use of the limited load streets in a manner allowing only the most
direct travel to and from the personal residences or abodes. The privilege may
be revoked by a majority vote of the city council in the event that the
exercise of the privilege creates or constitutes a nuisance, a hazard or a
condition dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the city. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 6-3-14 of this title.
6-1-6: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person designated by the mayor and city
council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all such through
streets, one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 2
RULES OF THE ROAD
SECTION:
6-2-1: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
6-2-2: Entering And Leaving Alleys
6-2-3: Driving Through Procession
6-2-4: Permits For Parades And Processions
6-2-5: Funeral And Other Processions
6-2-6: Limitations On Turning Around
6-2-7: Limitations On Backing
6-2-8: Emerging From Alley Or Private Driveway
6-2-9: Driving On Sidewalks
6-2-10: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
6-2-11: Riding On Handlebars Prohibited
6-2-12: Use Of Coasters, Roller Skates And Similar Devices
6-2-13: Riding On Running Boards
6-2-14: Lights On Parked Vehicles
6-2-15: Driving Under The Influence Of Liquor, Narcotic Drugs
6-2-16: Reckless Driving
6-2-17: Speed Restrictions
6-2-18: Driving On Right Side, Exceptions
6-2-19: Passing, Overtaking Vehicles
6-2-20: Turning At Intersections
6-2-21: Entering Through Highway Or Stop Intersection
6-2-22: Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
6-2-23: Unattended Motor Vehicle
6-2-24: Obstruction To Driver's View Or Driving Mechanism
6-2-25: Use Of Horn And Unnecessary Noises
6-2-26: Following Fire Apparatus
6-2-27: Crossing Fire Hose
6-2-28: Injurious Materials On Thoroughfares
6-2-29: Lamps On Bicycles
6-2-30: Accidents, Duties Of Drivers
6-2-31: Use Of Engine Brakes And Compression Brakes
6-2-1: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (1994 Code)
6-2-2: ENTERING AND LEAVING ALLEYS:
In all streets and alleys less than twenty feet (20') in width and within the
fire limits of the city, vehicles must enter streets and alleys running north
and south from the north end of such streets or alleys and in leaving shall
leave through the south end thereof. In streets and alleys running east and
west, all vehicles must enter from the west end of such streets and alleys and
in leaving shall leave through the east end thereof. (1994 Code)
6-2-3: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSION:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or police officers. (1994 Code)
6-2-4: PERMITS FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
No funeral, procession, or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons
or fifty (50) or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States army
or navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the police and
fire departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (1994 Code)
6-2-5: FUNERAL AND OTHER PROCESSIONS:
   A.   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by having the headlights of such vehicles lighted.
   B.   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right hand edge of the roadway as is practical and follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practical and safe. (1994 Code)
6-2-6: LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND:
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not, upon
any other street, so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety
and without interfering with other traffic. (1994 Code)
6-2-7: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection or over a
crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless such
movement can be made safely. (1994 Code)
6-2-8: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into a sidewalk
area extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (1994 Code)
6-2-9: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. (1994 Code)
6-2-10: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates,
or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any streetcar or
moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1994 Code)
6-2-11: RIDING ON HANDLEBARS PROHIBITED:
The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry
any other person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of any such vehicle nor
shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle. (1994 Code)
6-2-12: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when
and as authorized by ordinance of the City. (1994 Code)
6-2-13: RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon fenders, running boards,
hoods, tops, bumpers or outside steps of any vehicle. (1994 Code)
6-2-14: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked on a street during the time
between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise
and there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of two
hundred feet (200') upon such street, no lights need by displayed upon such
parked vehicle.
   B.   When, during said times or at any other time, there is not sufficient
light upon a street to reveal a person at a distance of two hundred feet
(200'), a parked vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall
exhibit a white light to the roadway side visible for a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear. Any lighted headlights upon a
parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. (1994 Code)
6-2-15: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR, NARCOTIC DRUGS:
It is unlawful and punishable as provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes 1
for any person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or any person who is
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to drive any
vehicle within the City. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
6-2-16: RECKLESS DRIVING:
   A.   Any person who drives any vehicle in such a manner as to indicate
either a wilful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is
guilty of reckless driving.
   B.   Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be punished as
provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes 2 . (1994 Code)
 
Notes
2 2. S.H.A. 625 ILCS 5/11-503.
6-2-17: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a greater speed than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
   B.   Where no special hazard exists, the following speeds shall be lawful,
but any speed in excess of said limits shall be prima facie evidence that the
speed is not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful:
      1.   Twenty (20) miles per hour in any business district;
      2.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour in any residence district.
   C.   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the foregoing prima
facie limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
   D.   In every charge of violation of this Section, the complaint, as well as
the summons or notice to appear, shall specify the speed at which the defendant
is alleged to have driven, and the prima facie speed applicable within the
district or at the location.
   E.   The foregoing provisions of this Section shall not be construed to
relieve the plaintiff in any civil action from the burden of proving negligence
upon the part of the defendant as the proximate cause of an accident. (1994
Code)
6-2-18: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE, EXCEPTIONS:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right
half of the roadway, except as follows:
   A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
   B.   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
   C.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereof.
   D.   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic. (1994
Code)
6-2-19: PASSING, OVERTAKING VEHICLES:
   A.   Passing Vehicles Proceeding in Opposite Direction: Drivers of vehicles
proceeding in the opposite direction shall pass each other to the right and
upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each
direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the
main-travelled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
   B.   Overtaking a Vehicle on the Left: The following rules shall govern the
overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to
those limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
      2.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   C.   When Overtaking on the Right is Permitted: The driver of a vehicle may
overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making, or about
to make, a left turn.
   D.   Limitations on Overtaking on the Left:
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side
is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance
ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without
interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction of any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking
vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within
one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
      2.   No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at
any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
         a.   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver's view along the highway is obstructed.
         b.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel, or when approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or
traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
         c.   Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to
the right, or a distinctive center line is marked. (1994 Code)
6-2-20: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Procedure: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall do so as follows:
      1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      2.   The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof, and after entering
the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
   B.   Vehicles Approaching or Entering Intersection:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
      2.   When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways
at the same time, the driver of a vehicle to the left shall yield the right of
way to the vehicle on the right.
      3.   The foregoing rules are modified at through highways and otherwise
as hereinafter stated in this Section.
   C.   Vehicles Turning Left at Intersection: The driver of a vehicle within
an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right of way to
any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said
driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by
this Section, may make such left turn,and the drivers of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall yield the right
of way to the vehicle making the left turn. (1994 Code)
6-2-21: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY OR STOP INTERSECTION:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this Chapter at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through highway, or
which are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection of said through
highway shall yield the right of way to the vehicle so proceeding into or
across the through highway.
   B.   The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop sign
as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or
more entrances thereto, although not a part of a through highway, and shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are
within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but may then proceed. (1994 Code)
6-2-22: APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right-hand edge or curb of such highway, clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highways. (1994 Code)
6-2-23: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE:
No person driving in or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and
removing the key, or when standing upon any perceptible grade, without
effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the highway. (1994 Code)
6-2-24: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are
in the front seat such number of persons exceeding three (3) as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No person in a vehicle shall ride in such a position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1994 Code)
6-2-25: USE OF HORN AND UNNECESSARY NOISES:
   A.   Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient
audible signalling device in efficient working condition. Such signalling
device shall be sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach
of a vehicle, but such horn and other signalling device shall not be sounded
for any purpose other than as a warning of impending danger to persons driving
other vehicles or to persons upon the street.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise.
   C.   No motor vehicle shall be operated upon any street, unless the same is
provided with a muffler in efficient and actual working condition and the use
of a cutout is forbidden. (1994 Code)
6-2-26: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than three
hundred feet (300'), or park such vehicle within six hundred feet (600') of any
fire apparatus that has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1994 Code)
6-2-27: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department or
Street Department when laid down on any street or private driveway without the
consent of a Department official in command. (1994 Code)
6-2-28: INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON THOROUGHFARES 1 :
   A.   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle upon such highway.
   B.   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same
or cause it to be removed.
   C.   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious material dropped upon the highway from such
vehicle. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 7-2-24 of this Code.
6-2-29: LAMPS ON BICYCLES:
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white
light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the
front, and with a lamp at the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear; except that a red reflector
may be used in lieu of a rear light. (1994 Code)
6-2-30: ACCIDENTS, DUTIES OF DRIVERS:
The provisions of this section shall be regulated by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes 1 . (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-401 et seq.
6-2-31: USE OF ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or
cause to be used or operated within the city of Wenona, Illinois, any engine
brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the
braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual
or explosive noise from such vehicle.
   B.   The usage of an engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so as to be
audible at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the motor vehicle shall
constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
   C.   It shall be an affirmative defense that the person operated or caused
to be used or operated such engine brake, compression brake or mechanical
exhaust device in circumstances where it was necessary to avoid injury or an
accident within city limits.
   D.   The city of Wenona, by and through its public works department and
police department, shall provide notice of the prohibitions set forth in this
section by posting clearly visible signs at all truck routes at or near the
entrance to the city, utilizing existing signposts approved by the Illinois
department of transportation on those routes over which said department has
jurisdiction, and by posting clearly visible signs as directed by the city
council on any street over which the city has jurisdiction.
   E.   Any person violating this section shall be subject to a penalty of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the first offense, one hundred twenty five
dollars ($125.00) for a second offense and one hundred seventy five dollars
($175.00) for a third and all subsequent offenses. In addition, all persons
violating this section shall pay all court costs associated with the
enforcement of this section. (Ord. 090208, 9-2-2008)
CHAPTER 3
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
6-3-1: Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-3-2: Private Property
6-3-3: Narrow Streets
6-3-4: Near Hazardous Or Congested Places
6-3-5: Adjacent To Schools
6-3-6: Obstructing Traffic
6-3-7: All Night Parking
6-3-8: Parking Restrictions; Designated Places, Time Limits
6-3-9: Loading Zones
6-3-10: Parallel, Angle Parking
6-3-11: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
6-3-12: Using Vehicle For Advertising Prohibited
6-3-13: Posting Signs
6-3-14: Oversize Vehicles; Driving, Parking
6-3-1: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stop, stand
or park in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or
traffic device:
      1.   In any intersection.
      2.   In any crosswalk.
      3.   Upon or between a safety zone and adjacent curb or within thirty
feet (30') of a point of a curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side.
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
      6.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the road for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
      7.   Within twenty five feet (25') of a fire hydrant.
      8.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station including a volunteer fire department station and on the
side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within seventy
five feet (75') of such entrance when signs are properly posted.
      11.   On any sidewalk or parkway.
      12.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking for any vehicle
with a gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds on either side of
any city roadway, street or alley not designated as a truck route.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is lawful. (1994 Code)
6-3-2: PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without
the consent of the owner of the property. (1994 Code)
6-3-3: NARROW STREETS:
When signs prohibiting parking are erected on narrow streets, no person shall
park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1994 Code)
6-3-4: NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
When signs are erected upon the approach to hazardous or congested places, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1994
Code)
6-3-5: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
When signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place. (1994 Code)
6-3-6: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street or alley
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet (10') of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic,
except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or, when necessary, in obedience to traffic
regulations, traffic signs or a police officer.
   B.   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   C.   No commercial vehicle shall stop, stand or park upon any street or
alley for a longer time than ninety (90) minutes at any time of any day or
night. (1994 Code)
6-3-7: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
When signs are erected on any street, no person shall park a vehicle on that
street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours
of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except
physicians on emergency calls, or authorized emergency vehicles. (1994 Code)
6-3-8: PARKING RESTRICTIONS; DESIGNATED PLACES, TIME LIMITS:
   A.   Parking Prohibited At All Times In Designated Places: When signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon
any of the streets or portions thereof so designated and specified on said
sign.
   B.   Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours In Designated Places: When
signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours as designated and specified on said signs on any day
except Sunday and public holidays.
   C.   Parking Time Limited In Designated Places: When signs are erected in
each block, giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a longer
time than that which is specified and designated on said sign on any day except
Sunday and public holidays. (1994 Code)
   D.   Restricted Parking On Specific Streets And In Certain Areas; Penalty:
      1.   The following streets shall be restricted to three (3) hour parking
and designated for "customer parking only":
         a.   The east and west sides of Walnut Street, between Second South
Street and First North Street, and
         b.   First South Street, between Chestnut Street and Walnut Street.
      2.   The parking spaces located in front of the city police station and
the parking area adjacent to the city water tower shall be restricted and
designated for "authorized vehicles only".
      3.   The following street shall be designated as an area with "no parking
from here to alley":
         a.   First South Street from the intersection with Walnut Street west
to the alley.
      4.   The penalty for a violation of this subsection D shall be a fine of
not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for each such violation. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
090704C, 9-7-2004)
6-3-9: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any
place designated by the mayor and city council as a loading zone and marked as
such, or in any of the following places:
   A.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   B.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sunday.
   C.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open for business. (1994 Code)
6-3-10: PARALLEL, ANGLE PARKING:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line, except as provided in the following subsections:
   A.   Upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles
shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
   B.   In places where and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading
of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation
of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge
loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting him such
privilege, and such permit shall be either in the possession of the driver or
in the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take or
discharge a load, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to violate
any of the special terms or conditions of any such special permit. (1994 Code)
6-3-11: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
   A.   Displaying it for sale.
   B.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
   C.   Storage.
   D.   Peddling merchandise on a business street. (1994 Code)
6-3-12: USING VEHICLE FOR ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate or park on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of advertising. (1994 Code)
6-3-13: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor and city
council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (1994 Code)
6-3-14: OVERSIZE VEHICLES; DRIVING, PARKING 1 :
   A.   Driving Of trucks On City Streets: It shall be unlawful for any
straight truck or truck tractor to pull any trailer over twenty feet (20') on
public streets or alleys except for Chestnut Street and Highview subdivision in
Wenona, Illinois.
   B.   Parking Within City Limits: It shall be unlawful to park truck
tractors, straight trucks, buses, trailers, house trailers, recreational
vehicles, special mobile equipment and boats on any city street, alley or city
owned property within the city limits of Wenona except as follows:
      1.   Tractors without trailers may be parked in front of their own
property, residence, or alongside of alleyways as long as the roadway shall be
left free for the passage of other vehicles, traffic control signs and signals
not obstructed, and sight lines at intersections not obstructed.
      2.   Tractors pulling trailers and straight trucks may be parked for one
hundred twenty (120) minutes or less on city property on the east side of
Chestnut Street between First North and Second North Streets.
      3.   In case of emergency situations or vehicle breakdowns; provided,
however, the disabled vehicle shall be moved within forty eight (48) hours;
tractors and trailers may be driven to and parked on premises of commercial
repair or maintenance businesses.
      4.   When the operator of the vehicle is actively engaged in deliveries,
lawn maintenance, construction or other trade activity upon the property or
abutting property. However, in any event, the roadway shall be left free for
the passage of other vehicles, traffic control signs and signals not
obstructed, and sight lines at intersections not obstructed.
   C.   Penalty For Violation Of Section; Continuing Violations: Whenever this
section is violated, the violator shall be punished by a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day any violation of any provision of this section or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 020397, 2-2-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 6-1-5 of this title.
CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Pedestrians Subject to Traffic Signals
6-4-2: Right of Way at Crosswalks
6-4-3: Crossing at Other Than Crosswalks
6-4-4: Use Right Half of Crosswalk
6-4-5: Soliciting Rides
6-4-1: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as
heretofore declared in this Title, but at all other places, pedestrians shall
be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions as
hereinafter stated. (1994 Code)
6-4-2: RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
   A.   Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if
need be, to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter.
   B.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk of an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (1994 Code)
6-4-3: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS:
   A.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   B.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
   C.   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway. (1994 Code)
6-4-4: USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the
crosswalk. (1994 Code)
6-4-5: SOLICITING RIDES 1 :
No person shall stand in the roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from
the driver of any private vehicle. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 5-1-3-6 of this Code.
CHAPTER 5
VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Penalties
6-5-2: Failure to Obey Notice of Summons
6-5-3: Owner Responsible for Illegal Parking
6-5-1: PENALTIES:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of
a violation of any provision of this Title shall be punished as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1994 Code)
6-5-2: FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE OF SUMMONS:
   A.   Any person who violates his written promise to appear given to an
officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of a misdemeanor,
regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally
arrested.
   B.   Any driver of a motor vehicle who wilfully neglects to answer to the
charge set forth in the notice affixed to such motor vehicle by a police
officer as provided by an ordinance of the City, is guilty of the charge for
which the notice was originally issued. (1994 Code)
6-5-3: OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR ILLEGAL PARKING:
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to
stand or be parked in any street in the City in violation of any of the
provisions of this Code regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. (1994
Code)
CHAPTER 6
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Golf Cart Regulations
6-6-1: GOLF CART REGULATIONS:
   A.   Golf Carts Allowed: Golf carts, as defined and qualified herein shall
be allowed on city streets under the conditions as stated herein.
   B.   Definitions:
    CITY STREETS: Any of the streets within the boundaries of the city of
Wenona, Illinois.
   GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course, to
include gator type vehicles.
   C.   Requirements: All persons wishing to operate a golf cart on the city
streets must ensure compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Any person who operates a golf cart on a street, highway, or roadway
shall be subject to show proof of current liability insurance.
      2.   Must obtain city of Wenona permit as specified in subsection D of
this section.
      3.   Must carry city of Wenona permit in golf cart.
      4.   Must have a current, valid Illinois driver's license issued in his
or her name by the secretary of state. Must hold valid driver's license and
must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and be able to operate a golf cart
upon any street, highway, or roadway.
      5.   No golf cart may be operated on a roadway unless equipped as
follows:
         a.   Brakes and brake lights.
         b.   Steering wheel apparatus.
         c.   Tires.
         d.   Rearview mirrors.
         e.   Approved "slow moving" emblem on the rear of the vehicle 1 .
         f.   Red reflector warning devices in the front and rear.
         g.   Headlights that emit a white light visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the front which must be illuminated when in
operation.
         h.   Taillamps that emit a red light visible from at least one hundred
feet (100') from the rear, which must be illuminated when in operation.
         i.   A golf cart shall have its headlight and taillamps lighted at all
times as required by section 12-201 of the Illinois vehicle code.
         j.   Windshield or eye protection.
         k.   Air horn of two hundred fifty feet (250') hearing distance.
         l.   Any additional requirements which may be required by the Illinois
vehicle code.
      6.   Must obey all traffic laws of the state of Illinois and the city of
Wenona.
      7.   Must be operated only on city streets, except where prohibited.
      8.   Must not operate on State Highway 17 (Elm Street) or State Highway
251 (Chestnut Street), however can cross at approved intersections.
      9.   Vehicle must not be capable of exceeding twenty five (25) miles per
hour and must observe posted speed limits.
      10.   A person operating or who is in actual physical control of a golf
cart as described herein on a roadway while under the influence of alcohol,
other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination
thereof is subject to the Illinois Compiled Statutes 2 .
      11.   Golf carts may not be operated on streets and highways and roads
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of transportation, State
Highway 17 (Elm Street) or State Highway 251 (Chestnut Street), except to cross
the street or highways at approved intersections.
   D.   Permits:
      1.   No person shall operate a qualified golf cart without first
obtaining a permit from the chief of police as provided herein. Permits shall
be granted for a period of one year. The cost of the permit is twenty five
dollars ($25.00). Proof of liability insurance coverage is to be provided to
the chief of police and the golf cart must be inspected and approved by the
chief of police.
      2.   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by
the city of Wenona and shall contain the following information:
         a.   Name and address of applicant;
         b.   Name of liability insurance carrier and policy number;
         c.   Serial number, make, model and description of golf cart;
         d.   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the city of
Wenona and its employees and agreeing to indemnify and hold the city harmless
from any and all future claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart
on the city of Wenona streets. Waiver is to be supplied by permittee and his/
her insurance company and must be turned in before permit can be issued;
         e.   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the golf cart to be operated pursuant to the permit;
         f.   Photocopy of valid driver's license.
      3.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
         a.   Vehicle must be inspected by the chief of police to ensure that
the vehicle is safe to operate on city streets and is in compliance with this
section and with the state of Illinois vehicle code.
         b.   Applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of the Illinois statutes regarding minimum liability insurance
for passenger motor vehicle to be operated on the roads of the state of
Illinois.
      4.   The city of Wenona may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder
upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this
section or there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate a qualified
golf cart on the designated roadways.
   E.   Violations: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be guilty of a petty offense and shall be punished by a fine of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). Any second or subsequent offense shall result in the
revocation of the permit for a period of not less than one year nor more than
three (3) years. To the extent that any violation of this section also
constitutes a violation of a criminal statute of the state of Illinois, then
the violator shall also be subject to criminal prosecution. (Ord. 040113A, 4-1-
2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-709.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-500 - 11-502.
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Water/Sewer Chairman
7-1-2: Superintendent of Water and Sewer
7-1-3: Duties of Water Collector
7-1-4: Water Fund
7-1-5: Water and Sewer Department Office
7-1-6: Employees; Compensation
7-1-7: Accounting System
7-1-8: Payrolls
7-1-9: Audit
7-1-10: Rules and Regulations
7-1-11: Water Service Connections Required; Application, Fee
7-1-12: Service Connections
7-1-13: Service Pipes
7-1-14: Separate Connections
7-1-15: Service Curb Cocks
7-1-16: Right to Shut Off Water
7-1-17: Temporary Mains
7-1-18: Application for Water Service
7-1-19: Responsibility in Turning on Water
7-1-20: Discontinuance of Use; Notice
7-1-21: Unnecessary Waste
7-1-22: Water Meters
7-1-23: Water Rates
7-1-24: Refund of Payment
7-1-25: Accounts; Responsibility for Payment
7-1-26: Lien; Foreclosure
7-1-27: Connections for Fire Protection
7-1-28: Contractors' Services
7-1-29: Supplying Others
7-1-30: Additional Sources of Supply
7-1-31: Information at Plumber's Risk
7-1-32: Inspection
7-1-33: Fire Hydrants
7-1-34: Cross-Connections
7-1-35: Penalty
7-1-36: After Hours Service Call Charges
7-1-1: WATER/SEWER CHAIRMAN:
The Water and Sewer Department of the City shall be under the supervision of
the Water/Sewer chairman. (1994 Code)
7-1-2: SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND SEWER:
The active supervision of the Water and Sewer Department of the City and of any
and all property pertaining thereto, shall be in the hands of the
Superintendent of Water and Sewer of the City, under the direction of the City
Mayor and the Water/Sewer chairman of the City. (1994 Code)
7-1-3: DUTIES OF WATER COLLECTOR:
All monies due the Water and Sewer Department from all purposes and sources,
including the collection of water rents or rates, shall be paid to the Water
Collector. The City Treasurer shall maintain separate accounts in which shall
be placed the interest and sinking fund monies and another account in which
shall be placed the depreciation funds and to provide for refunding outstanding
certificates payable out of water revenue. (1994 Code)
7-1-4: WATER FUND:
All revenue derived from the sale of water as herein provided shall be kept
separate and apart by the Treasurer of the City from the other revenue of the
City, and said monies shall be known as the Water Fund and shall be used
exclusively for Water and Sewer Department purposes; that is for the
maintenance, extension, improvement and operation of said Water and Sewer
Department, the retirement of the Water and Sewer Department bonds,
certificates, etc., and under no circumstances shall this revenue be diverted
to any other purpose, unless voted on by City Council. (1994 Code)
7-1-5: WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT OFFICE:
The office of the Water and Sewer Department for the transaction of business
shall be located in the area designated by City Council. (1994 Code)
7-1-6: EMPLOYEES; COMPENSATION:
   A.   The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint all other employees
necessary for the proper operation and management of the Water and Sewer
Department, subject to the approval of his acts and doings in making such
appointments by the City Council.
   B.   The salaries of all employees of the Water and Sewer Department shall
be fixed by the Mayor upon the advice and consent of the City Council and the
salaries of such employees shall be paid out of the Water Fund only. (1994
Code)
7-1-7: ACCOUNTING SYSTEM:
There shall be installed and maintained a proper system of accounts showing the
amount of revenue received and the application of the same. (1994 Code)
7-1-8: PAYROLLS:
All payrolls and all monies expended in the Water and Sewer Department shall be
under and by direction of the City Council, and such payroll or voucher drawn
against said account shall be drawn in like manner as all other vouchers
against the City, except, however, that such amount shall be paid only out of
the Water Fund. (1994 Code)
7-1-9: AUDIT:
The City Council shall cause a proper audit to be made by a competent auditor
at least once each year of the Water and Sewer Department, and the report of
such audit shall be open for inspection at all proper times to any taxpayer,
water user or any holder of bonds issued by the Water and Sewer Department.
(1994 Code)
7-1-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations shall be considered a part of the contract
with every person who takes water supplied by the City through the City Water
and Sewer Department, and every such person who takes water shall be considered
as having expressed his agreement to be bound thereby. (1994 Code)
7-1-11: WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED; APPLICATION, FEE:
   A.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now
located or could, by extension, be located a City water main or line is hereby
required at his expense, as hereinafter set forth, to install suitable water
service facilities thereon; and to connect such facilities directly with the
City water systems and mains.
   B.   Applications for water service connections must be made in writing to
the Water Collector by the owner or agent of the property to be served. Such
applications shall state official house number or numbers of the premises to be
served, size of pipe required and the approximate location where such service
shall enter the premises and shall accompany with said application a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each tap not greater than three-fourths
inch (3/4") size before such tap shall be made. Larger connections or road/
alley crossings shall be made at actual cost of labor and materials plus ten
percent (10%) for overhead expense and such taps or connections to the water
mains shall be then made by the employees of the City Water and Sewer
Department or the plumber engaged by the applicant. (1994 Code)
7-1-12: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
The laying of all water service connections and pipes, setting of water service
fixtures in streets and public grounds to be served by the City, shall be made
by the employees of the City Water and Sewer Department or by duly licensed
plumbers under supervision of the Water and Sewer Department. (1994 Code)
7-1-13: SERVICE PIPES:
   A.   Where Laid: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes
across lots or buildings to adjoining premises. All service pipes shall be laid
on streets, alleys or public grounds to the premises to be served, and enter at
the front or rear of the building nearest the main.
   B.   Construction:
      1.   That portion of the water service pipe from the water main to the
meter must be laid of copper, Type K, or plastic pipe of at least one hundred
sixty (160) pound test.
      2.   No water service pipe or tap for any building shall be less than
three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter.
      3.   Plumbers installing water service pipes shall close the curb shut-
off and leave it closed upon completion of their work and when pipes are laid
to the curb, only they shall close the end of the pipe or fitting with a tight
metal plug or cap.
   C.   Connections Between Different Services Prohibited: When there are two
(2) or more services on premises, the piping from each service must be kept
separate, and no connection made from one to the other.
   D.   Depth: Service pipes must be laid at least four feet (4') below the
surface of the ground. When pipes are laid in streets or grounds subject to
fixed grades, where the surface of the ground is higher than the established
grades, they shall be so laid that they will be at least four feet (4') below
the established grade, except in sandy soil formation, the City Council may
require pipes be laid to a depth of at least five feet (5') below the
established grade.
   E.   Maintenance: All service pipes and fixtures to and including shut-off
at the property line including the corporation cocks at the main shall be
installed and maintained at the expense of the City and any leaks in the same
shall be repaired by the City and the Water and Sewer Department shall have the
authority to shut off water for a reasonable time in order to make such
repairs. All water pipes and fixtures from the shut-off valve to the meter
shall be installed and maintained by the property owner. All repairs to service
pipes and fixtures from the shut-off valve to the meter shall be maintained and
paid at the expense of the owner and any leaks or other defects shall be
properly repaired by them. If not properly repaired, the water shall be turned
off until such repairs have been made and the expense therefor shall be charged
against such owner and must be paid before the water shall be turned on again.
   F.   Breakage: The City shall not be held responsible by reason of the
breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, water coil, or for failure in the
supply of water.
   G.   Abandoned Pipes: All service pipes that may become useless because of
laying of larger or other new services or because water will no longer be used
through them may be permanently closed off at the water main at the expense of
the owner of the premises and so reported to the Water Collector. No plumber or
owner of property shall disconnect or remove water supply fixtures or piping
from any premises served by the City Water and Sewer Department or alter the
same in such a way as to make the service connection unnecessary for the
premises without permanently closing off the connections at the water main and
reporting the same to the Superintendent of Water and Streets.
If a service pipe or connection which is not being used is found to be leaking,
the City Water and Sewer Department may, without notice, repair or turn off the
same and charge the expense thereof to the owner of property for which the
connection was made. (1994 Code)
7-1-14: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
There shall be separate service pipes laid from the main to each building
wherever there is a water main laid in front or rear of such building. The mode
of entry should be at the discretion of the Water and Sewer Department. Where
services are laid to premises where there are no water mains available for
direct connections, a small temporary main will be permitted to be laid as
hereinafter provided under Section
7-1-17. In all cases each building served must have an independent service
shut-off. (1994 Code)
7-1-15: SERVICE CURB COCKS:
   A.   A curb stop box and shut-off for controlling the supply of water to
consumers shall be placed on every service. When connections are made in
streets or avenues, the stop box shall be placed twelve inches (12") outside
the sidewalk line on the street side; and when made in alleys, it shall be
placed twelve inches (12") outside the lot line. The cover of said stop box
shall be maintained at the same height as the sidewalk or the surrounding
ground. Where area walls or curb lines prevent the location of stop box and
shut-off at the point indicated, they shall be placed immediately within the
area wall or curb line. All stop boxes must be set on a line drawn at right
angles to the main through the service corporation or connection in the main.
   B.   Every service pipe must also have a stop and waste placed in the
building within nine inches (9") of the point where the pipe enters the
building. Said stop must have a handle or wrench attached to turn the same, and
be kept in working order at all times so that the water may be shut off by the
occupant of the premises. There shall also be a gate valve placed on the outlet
side of the water meter not more than three feet (3') from the meter, so that
the meter can be taken out or replaced without draining the pipe system in the
building.
   C.   All stop cocks on the line of service must have round ways of the same
diameter as the pipe with which they are placed and with proper handles for
turning on and off, and of a make and pattern approved by the Water Collector.
   D.   Whenever a meter cannot be set on the premises without danger of
freezing, difficulty of reading or other cause inimical to the Water and Sewer
Department service, the Water Collector may demand the installation of an
outside meter box and shut off; type to be designated by him.
In lieu of the stop box herein described, the Superintendent of Water and
Streets may demand the installation of an outside meter box and shut off; type
to be designated by him.
The stop box used shall be of a design approved by the Superintendent of Water
and Streets, and must have an unobstructed opening at least two inches (2") in
diameter and fitted with a substantial cover on which shall be marked the word
"Water" in raised letters.
   E.   The outside shut-off and stop box shall be under the sole control of
the City Water and Sewer Department and no one except an employee or person
specially authorized by the City Water and Sewer Department shall open the
cover of such box, or turn on or off water; provided, however, that licensed
plumbers may turn on or off water for testing plumbing or making repairs, but
whenever so used, the shut-off must be left closed if found closed, and open if
found open, by the plumber who uses it. (1994 Code)
7-1-16: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The City may, when necessary, without notice, shut the water off in its mains
for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes, and no
claims shall be made against the City by reason of the breakage of any service
pipe or service cock, or from any other damage that may result from shutting
off water for repairing, laying or relaying mains, hydrants, or other
connections. The City Water and Sewer Department shall give notice of shutting
off water if conditions are such that it is possible to do so.
When water is shut off for making repairs in premises having water heat-coils
in heaters, consumers should turn off the water at the basement shut-off and
open a faucet in the hot water pipe and leave it open until water is turned on
in order to protect piping and fixtures from excessive pressures from hot water
or steam. (1994 Code)
7-1-17: TEMPORARY MAINS:
   A.   Pipe laid temporarily in the streets where there are no water mains
must be laid in the line where water mains will be laid in the future, and if
under four inches (4") in size the service pipe must be of copper Type K or
plastic at least one hundred sixty (160) pound test from the main to the meter
and from meter to the premises to be served. The location of the meter shall be
designated by the Water Collector.
   B.   Temporary mains shall be laid at the expense of the party to be served
through service.
   C.   The permit for any temporary main shall provide that the size of such
main shall be designated by the Water and Sewer Department subject to the
approval of the City Council and shall be of a size as to allow other party
connections to be made to such main if requested by intervening property owners
or to allow any further extension which may be deemed necessary by the Water
and Sewer Department.
   D.   The Water and Sewer Department shall determine on a just and equitable
basis any amount due the original party granted a permit to lay such main,
whenever any future permit for connection on such main is granted by the Water
and Sewer Department and shall be paid by party requesting such connection to
party who laid such main under original permit.
   E.   However, if at any future time, the City deems it necessary to extend
its regular water service for the purpose of fire protection on any street or
alley service and paralleling such temporary main, then all consumers being
served by such temporary main shall abandon their service connection with such
temporary main and establish a new connection with the regular City main so
installed.
   F.   All service connections with regularly laid City water mains shall be
made before the beginning of any paving constructed on any street or alley so
designated by the City Council to be paved. All property owners abutting such
street or alley designated to be paved shall, upon being notified of such
improvement, immediately establish such connections with the water main serving
said street or alley ordered paved; provided, however, if such connection to
water main is not made when requested, the City may, at its discretion, make
such necessary connection before paving said streets or alleys and charge the
cost of same to the abutting property owners served by said mains.
   G.   No permit shall be granted for the opening of any pavement for the
purpose of making water connections until a period of two (2) years has elapsed
after such paving. (1994 Code)
7-1-18: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
   A.   Application for water must be made by the owner of the premises to be
served or his authorized agent to the superintendent of water and sewer at the
city office, stating the street and number and when such water is desired and
shall be made upon blanks furnished by the water and sewer department for this
purpose.
   B.   If the meter is to be installed in a new or remodeled building or
structure, the applicant must have no outstanding water and sewer bills, and if
all charges for water and sewer previously furnished such applicant, and all
other charges due for services furnished or to be furnished at such premises by
the water and sewer department have been paid, and if a suitable place is
provided for the meter, then the superintendent of water and sewer shall cause
a meter to be set and the water to be turned on to the stop inside the basement
where the owner or occupant may turn on the water into the piping system and
fixtures of the premises. (1994 Code)
   C.   No person, either owner or tenant, who, in changing his residence from
one location to any other location served by the water and sewer department,
shall be given water service until any and all delinquent water rentals which
are charged against him at a former place of residence shall have been paid in
full. No water at a new location shall be turned on, and, if so, shall be
turned off until settlement of such delinquent water rental at a former
location is made. A charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be made for turning
on water and renewing service. (Ord. 110397, 11-3-1997)
   D.   Proper records and accounts of each consumer shall be made in the water
and sewer department office. (1994 Code)
7-1-19: RESPONSIBILITY IN TURNING ON WATER:
In turning on water, the city or the water and sewer department shall not be
responsible for any damage that may occur by reason of improper fixtures, open
or improper connections or for any other causes. (1994 Code)
7-1-20: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE; NOTICE:
Owners or consumers desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give notice
thereof, in writing, to the superintendent of water and sewer at the city
office who shall then cause the water to be turned off and/or the meter
removed. Water rents or charges for services shall be made until such notice is
given. When water service is discontinued, all water rentals for such service
shall become due and payable. When water service is again desired after having
been discontinued, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made and
collected before turning on water and renewing service. (Ord. 110397, 11-3-
1997)
7-1-21: UNNECESSARY WASTE:
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets
closed when not in actual use. If unnecessary waste of water takes place, the
water and sewer department reserves the right to cut off the supply. The city
reserves the right to prohibit the use of water for yard sprinklers, elevators
and large consumers of water when in the judgment of the city it shall be
necessary to do so. (1994 Code)
7-1-22: WATER METERS:
   A.   Meters Required:
      1.   All water furnished consumers shall be metered. All meters shall be
furnished and set by the water and sewer department, but owners must provide
suitable location in piping system for same. Meters shall be placed on service
pipe not to exceed two feet (2') from the wall where such pipe enters the
premises. There shall be a stop and waste between the meter and the wall and a
suitable place provided for the meter so as to keep it dry and clean and
readily accessible at all times to the meter reader and inspectors of the water
and sewer department. A gate valve shall also be placed on the pipe on the
outlet side of each meter not more than three feet (3') from the meter. All
valves and fittings necessary to comply with these requirements and to provide
connection to meter, except a coupling or flange at each end of the meter,
shall be provided by the owner of premises to be served.
      2.   For services larger than two inches (2") in diameter, the Water and
Sewer Department reserves the right to install two (2) or more meters of
smaller size. Where meters are so placed, each meter shall have a valve or
shut-off on both inlet and outlet pipe in addition to the basement shut-off.
      3.   Where a service pipe larger than two inches (2") in diameter is
used, the plumber shall call at the office of the Water and Sewer Department
for instructions regarding the fittings and space to be provided for the water
meters.
      4.   In case that two (2) or more meters are desired for measuring water
to different tenants in the same building from one service connection, they
shall be so placed that no one of them shall measure water which has passed
through another one.
      5.   Each residential home, apartment, private dwelling and place of
business, heretofore erected, established or structurally modified must be
equipped with a water meter furnished by the City.
      6.   All dwellings and buildings which are divided into apartments or
have an apartment in them shall have one of the following:
         a.   One water service into building with meter and shutoff for each
apartment and all will be billed separately; or
         b.   One water service into building with one water meter. The bill
will be the responsibility of owner/manager of the building and will be sent to
same. In this case minimum water and sewer rate will be charged for each unit,
plus any excess usage will be billed as used.
   "Apartment" will be defined as a unit having a bath and kitchen.
      7.   Meters shall be installed in a location that will be of easy access.
   B.   Owners to Protect Meters:
      1.   The owner or occupant of premises where a meter is installed shall
be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or hot water and
from other injury or interference from any person. In case of any injury to the
meter, or in case of its stoppage or imperfect working, he shall give immediate
notice to the office of the Water and Sewer Department. In all cases where
meters are broken or damaged by negligence of owners or occupants of premises,
or by freezing, hot water, or other injuries, except ordinary wear and tear,
the necessary repairs to the meter shall be made by the Water and Sewer
Department and the cost of such repairs paid for by such owner or occupant, and
in case payment thereof is neglected or refused, the water supply shall be
turned off and shall not be turned on until full payment has been made,
together with five dollars ($5.00) for turning on the water again. Damaged
meters may be repaired by the Water and Sewer Department without first giving
notice thereof to the owner of premises served by such meter.
      2.   No one shall in any way interfere with the proper registration of a
water meter, and no one except an authorized employee of the Water and Sewer
Department shall break a seal of a meter; provided, however, that the
Superintendent of Water and Sewer may grant written permits to licensed
plumbers in case of emergency to break such seal for draining pipes or stopping
water leaks.
      3.   Wherever a water meter is installed on a water service in premises
that are to be remodeled, removed or destroyed, or where the service is
discontinued so that the water meter is no longer needed, the owner of such
premises shall give notice to the Superintendent of Water and Sewer to remove
such meter, and free access to such meter must be provided at least twenty four
(24) hours after notice is given so that the meter may be removed. The owner of
the premises shall be held responsible for the meter until such written notice
is given, and if the meter is covered or lost, he shall be required to pay for
the same at the actual value.
   C.   Testing Meters:
      1.   In case there is doubt as to the accuracy of a water meter on the
part of the consumer, he may have the meter tested by the Water and Sewer
Department, at which test he may be present or have a representative present if
he so desires, and if the meter is found to register within two percent (2%) of
being correct, a charge of two dollars ($2.00) will be made to pay for a part
of the labor for making such tests. If the meter is found to measure more than
two percent (2%) incorrectly, no charge shall be made for making the test. If
the meter should be found to over-register more than two percent (2%), there
shall be a proportional deduction made from the previous water bill. A water
meter shall be considered to register satisfactorily when it registers within
two percent (2%) of accuracy.
      2.   If upon investigation and testing of the meter the consumer is
dissatisfied with the bill as then rendered, he may, within five (5) days after
the investigated or corrected bill is rendered to him, file with the mayor or
the city council a complaint, in writing, setting up the grounds of his
complaint. Within five (5) days of the receipt of said complaint, the city
council shall pass on said bill and complaint, and the decision of a majority
of said council shall be final.
      3.   Penalty for nonpayment of a bill in the time required by this
chapter shall attach unless decision is in favor of the consumer. (1994 Code)
7-1-23: WATER RATES:
   A.   The water rents or rates shall be established by the city council and
increased by three percent (3%) annually. The rates shall be collected for all
water consumption and water service rendered by the city for which each service
shall be by metered registration. (1994 Code; amd. Ord. 030512, 3-5-2012)
   B.   All water bills are due and payable fifteen (15) days after being sent
out. Any and all bills not paid on time shall be delinquent and charged a ten
percent (10%) penalty. (1994 Code)
   C.   Fifty (50) days after a bill has become delinquent the water may be
shut off from the premises and when so shut off shall not be turned on again
until all water rents and all other charges due for service to the consumer,
including a fifty dollar ($50.00) reconnection charge, have been paid. Water
will be turned on only during regular working hours. (Ord. 030606, 3-6-2006)
7-1-24: REFUND OF PAYMENT:
No refunds or discounts on water rentals shall be made on account of the
premises having been vacant or no water used, unless water has been shut off by
the water and sewer department upon written request of the owner or consumer.
(1994 Code)
7-1-25: ACCOUNTS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT:
Water service accounts shall be kept in the name of the owner of the property
served, and only such owner shall be recognized as the consumer.
The owner of the premises served shall be held responsible for the payment of
all water rentals and all other proper charges in connection with water service
to the owner's premises. Payments will be accepted from tenants if tendered by
them, but accepting payments from tenants shall not subsequently relieve the
owner of the premises from the responsibility of paying water rentals or other
service charges when due. (Ord. 030512A, 3-5-2012, eff. 4-1-2012)
7-1-26: LIEN; FORECLOSURE:
In addition to any other remedy provided herein for the enforcement or
collection of any water tax or rent, all such rates or rents shall be a lien
upon the premises and real estate upon and for which the same is used or
supplied. Any such lien shall attach when the water bill becomes delinquent and
may be endorsed together with the costs and penalties by foreclosure in equity
in any court having jurisdiction in the same manner and with like force and
effect as the foreclosure of the liens of mortgage and trust deeds. (1994 Code)
7-1-27: CONNECTIONS FOR FIRE PROTECTION:
Service connections which are to be used exclusively for supplying water to
extinguish fire may be granted upon the following conditions:
   A.   Application for such connection shall be made, in writing, by the owner
of the premises to be served, or his legal representative, on a form furnished
by the water and sewer department, which shall include the provisions of this
section.
   B.   The applicant must furnish with the application a complete and correct
drawing or set of drawings, showing the location of the premises to be
supplied, together with location of all valves, pipes, hydrants, tanks,
sprinkler heads, and other appurtenances on the premises, the plans to remain
the property of the water and sewer department. The applicant shall also agree
to furnish the water and sewer department with drawings showing revisions to
piping and appurtenances whenever the same are made.
   C.   All fire service connections shall be installed by the water and sewer
department from the street main to a point just inside the wall of the building
or to the lot line where buildings are set back from the lot line. The owners
shall pay the cost of the labor and materials for such extensions, and ten
percent (10%) additional to cover overhead expense. All repairs to the service
pipe between street main and the building shall be done by the Water and Sewer
Department at the expense of the owner.
   D.   The Water and Sewer Department shall limit the size of fire protection
services where the street mains are of such size as to make it necessary in
order to protect public interest. If more than one service is installed to the
same premises, the piping system of one shall not be connected with the other
except by special permission from the City Council upon recommendation of the
Superintendent of Water and Streets.
   E.   No water shall be drawn from the fire service pipes for any purpose
whatever except for the extinguishment of fires, and no connection shall be
made between the fire service pipe system and the regular water supply of the
premises, and valves on those outlets, drain cocks, etc., placed on the pipe
system shall be a style that can be sealed by the Inspector of the Water and
Sewer Department, and when any such valve or cock is opened, the owner or
occupant of the premises shall notify the Water and Sewer Department so that
the same can be resealed at once. This subsection is not to be construed as
prohibiting a reasonable use of water for fire drills, draining of a system to
prevent freezing or other reasonable use in connection with proper fire
protection.
   F.   All fire protection systems supplied with water from the City service
shall be supplied exclusively with such water and no connection shall be
allowed with any other system drawing its supply from any other source whereby
the City water supply may be contaminated by the failure to close valves, or
leaking check valves, etc., and no auxiliary or secondary suction pipe to any
fire pump taking water from any contaminated source will be permitted.
   G.   Any fire protection system using water from any other source than the
City service shall be kept entirely separate from any such system supplied from
the City service.
   H.   All fire services shall be subject to inspection by the Inspector of
the Water and Sewer Department who will visit all premises having fire services
from time to time, and the owners or tenants shall give the Inspector all
reasonable facilities for making the inspection, and any information concerning
the same that he may require.
Care will always be taken that inspections will be made with as little
inconvenience to the owners or occupants as possible.
   I.   In any case when the owners or occupants of any premises are found to
be using water from a fire service for other purposes than fire protection, the
water shall be shut off from the same until the offenders shall give reasonable
assurance before the City Council that the offense will not be repeated, and a
charge of ten dollars ($10.00) will be required for turning on the water after
it has been shut off for this cause.
A second violation of this rule will be considered sufficient cause for cutting
the service off at the main and refusing to reconnect same while the offender
occupies the premises.
   J.   Failure to pay the cost of installing the fire service or any
subsequent repairs thereto, within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the
bill, will be sufficient cause for turning off the water from the supply.
The City may require the owner of the premises supplied to furnish and install,
at his expense and under the direction of the Superintendent of Water and
Streets, an approved water meter and to keep the same in accurate operating
condition. (1994 Code)
7-1-28: CONTRACTORS' SERVICES:
When a temporary service is desired by contractors and builders for water to be
used on construction work, they shall make application to the Superintendent of
Water and Sewer and deposit with the Water and Sewer Department, the sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for a swing meter to be used on such services; provided,
however, that in lieu of a cash deposit, the application may be signed by three
(3) freeholders of the City as sureties who will guarantee payment of such
water service charges and the return of the meter in good order.
The charges for such water service shall be at the same rate as other services,
including minimum monthly charges. No one shall use water that is not measured
by a meter furnished by the Water and Sewer Department.
All swing meters shall be returned to the meter room of the Water and Sewer
Department office before November 1 of each year for reading and testing. A
penalty of five dollars ($5.00) per month shall be charged for swing meters
that are not returned as above specified. (1994 Code)
7-1-29: SUPPLYING OTHERS:
No consumer shall supply water to other persons, nor suffer them to take water
except by special permission from the Superintendent of Water and Sewer or his
agents. Where such permission is granted, the owner of the service from which
the water is taken shall be responsible for payment of the rates. (1994 Code)
7-1-30: ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF SUPPLY:
On premises where water is supplied from two (2) sources, the City water being
one of them, the piping system for City water must be entirely separated from
that of the other source. If other than City water is to be furnished premises
previously supplied with City water, the owner or his plumber must give notice
at the office of the Water and Sewer Department when he will make this change
and must also cut off the City water at the corporation cock and disconnect the
service pipe.
Premises now having direct connection between the City water supply and another
supply shall forthwith disconnect the same. (1994 Code)
7-1-31: INFORMATION AT PLUMBER'S RISK:
Such information as may be obtained from the records, maps, employees, etc., of
the Water and Sewer Department relative to the location of water mains and
service pipes, will be furnished to licensed plumbers and interested parties;
but the Water and Sewer Department does not guarantee the accuracy of the same.
(1994 Code)
7-1-32: INSPECTION:
The Superintendent of Water and Sewer or other officer or employee of the Water
and Sewer Department shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to enter the
premises or buildings of consumers for the purpose of reading meters and to
examine the water pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which water is used.
The Water and Sewer Department reserves the right to set or remove a meter,
whenever it is deemed advisable so to do. (1994 Code)
7-1-33: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   No person, except members of the Fire Department or Department of
Streets and Public Improvements of the City or officers or employees of the
Water and Sewer Department of the City shall open any hydrant belonging to the
Water and Sewer Department between November 15 and March 1 of any year.
   B.   No person, except members of the Fire Department or Department of
Streets and Public Improvements of the City or officers or employees of the
Water and Sewer Department acting in the regular performance of their duties
shall open any hydrant belonging to the Water and Sewer Department at any time
without a permit in writing signed by the Superintendent of Water and Sewer.
(1994 Code)
7-1-34: CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section the following definitions
shall apply:
    BACKFLOW: Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
   CROSS-CONNECTION: A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances in
which a backflow could occur.
   SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe, but shall not be less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
   SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including but not limited to water systems from ground or
surface sources not meeting the requirements of Act No. 98 of the Public Acts
of 1913, as amended, being sections 325.201 to 325.214 of the Compiled Laws of
1948, or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated,
processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an
approved storage facility.
   SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water
supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain
water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is
unprotected against backflow.
   WATER UTILITY: The Wenona Water and Sewer Department.
   B.   Cross-Connections Prohibited: Cross-connection of the public water
supply system and any other water supply system or source including but not
limited to the following are prohibited:
      1.   Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
      2.   By submerged inlet.
      3.   Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
      4.   Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or a chemical contaminant.
      5.   Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank
or vessel which may contain a contaminant.
   C.   Local Cross-Connection Control Program: The City shall develop a
comprehensive control program for the elimination and prevention of all cross-
connections, and removal of all existing cross-connections and prevention of
all future cross-connections.
   D.   Corrections and Protective Devices: Any user of Wenona water shall
obtain written approval from the Water and Sewer Department of any proposed
corrective action or protective device before using or installing same. The
total time allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall be
contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time required to
obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has not been removed
within the time as hereinafter specified, the City shall physically separate
the Wenona water supply from the on-site piping system in such manner that the
two (2) systems cannot be connected by any unauthorized person.
   E.   Piping Identification: When a secondary water source is used in
addition to the Wenona water supply, exposed water and secondary water piping
shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that
each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety. It will be necessary to
protect the water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to
the Water and Sewer Department.
   F.   Private Water Storage Tanks: A private water storage tank supplied from
the water supply system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is
designed and approved for potable water usage.
   G.   Elimination of Existing Cross-Connections: Within one year from the
effective date of this Section all existing cross-connections to the water
supply system shall be eliminated. The expenses of such elimination shall be
that of the owner of the property on which such cross-connection exists.
   H.   Inspection: The City Water and Sewer Department or any representative
thereof shall have the authority to inspect any premises to determine the
presence of an existing cross-connection and to order the elimination of such
cross-connection.
   I.   Discontinuance of Water Service: The Water and Sewer Department is
hereby authorized to discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any
person owning any property where a cross-connection in violation of this Code
exists. The Water and Sewer Department may take such other precautionary
measures as necessary to eliminate any danger of the contamination of the water
supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
cross-connection has been eliminated. (1994 Code)
7-1-35: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (1994 Code)
7-1-36: AFTER HOURS SERVICE CALL CHARGES:
A charge of two hundred dollars ($200.00) will be assessed for service calls
after normal business hours. The charge shall be billed to the consumer’s
account and be due and payable on the next water bill. (Ord. 091922, 9-19-2022)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Grade of Sidewalks
7-2-2: Sidewalks Conform to Grade
7-2-3: Materials for Construction of Sidewalks
7-2-4: Width, Incline of Sidewalks
7-2-5: Special Ordinances Regarding Sidewalks
7-2-6: Removal of Earth; Fine
7-2-7: Excavation; Bond Required
7-2-8: Filling Excavations
7-2-9: Leaving Excavations Unprotected
7-2-10: Encroachments, Obstructions Prohibited
7-2-11: Fencing Street
7-2-12: Telegraph Poles and Wires
7-2-13: Removal of Encroachments
7-2-14: Exception to Encroachments; Permit Required
7-2-15: Pedestrian Walkway During Sidewalk Obstruction
7-2-16: Liability for Damages
7-2-17: Barbed Wire Fences
7-2-18: Exhibitions, Parades; Obstructing Public Ways
7-2-19: Display of Goods
7-2-20: Peanut and Candy Stands; License Required
7-2-21: Newspaper or Periodical Stands; License Required
7-2-22: Hauling Offensive Matter
7-2-23: Throwing Offensive Matter
7-2-24: Glass and Similar Injurious Materials Prohibited
7-2-25: Gates and Doors, Swinging Over Sidewalks
7-2-26: Awnings
7-2-27: Cellar Doors, Openings in Sidewalks
7-2-28: Objects on Windowsills
7-2-29: Trees; Planting, Trimming
7-2-30: Sidewalks Kept Free of Snow and Ice
7-2-31: Alleys and Gutters Kept Clean
7-2-32: Animals on Sidewalks or Lawns
7-2-33: Drains Across Sidewalks Prohibited
7-2-34: Painting on Sidewalk
7-2-35: Spitting on Sidewalk
7-2-36: Bicycles on Sidewalk
7-2-37: Driveway Across Curb Prohibited
7-2-38: Tires With Rough, Sharp or Uneven Edges
7-2-39: Mixing Mortar on Paved Streets
7-2-40: Burning Material on Streets
7-2-41: Destruction of Street Signs, Traffic-Control Devices
7-2-42: Stakes on Pavement
7-2-43: Defective or Dangerous Sidewalks, Nuisance
7-2-44: Abatement of Dangerous Sidewalks
7-2-45: Sidewalk Reimbursement Program
7-2-1: GRADE OF SIDEWALKS:
Whenever any sidewalk is to be laid upon or along any street or other public
place within the corporate limits of the City, the person about to build or lay
such walk shall first make application to the Mayor and City Council, and shall
ascertain the correct grade for such walk, which grade shall be established by
ordinance before the construction of such sidewalk, and such sidewalk shall
then be laid to such grade as established. The Mayor and City Council shall
establish the grade for all sidewalks, and the same shall conform as nearly as
may be to the grades of the streets on which the same are located. (1994 Code)
7-2-2: SIDEWALKS CONFORM TO GRADE:
No person shall construct or lay, or cause to be constructed or laid, any
sidewalk where no grade has been established by ordinance, without having first
obtained a grade therefor from the Mayor and City Council; nor shall he
construct or cause to be constructed any sidewalk contrary to any grade which
may have been or may hereafter be established by the Mayor and City Council.
(1994 Code)
7-2-3: MATERIALS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS:
All sidewalks constructed upon or along any street or other public place within
the corporate limits of the City shall be constructed of concrete. (1994 Code)
7-2-4: WIDTH, INCLINE OF SIDEWALKS:
All sidewalks shall not be less than four feet (4') in width. The inside line
of all walks shall be on the property line. All sidewalks shall be so
constructed as to have an incline toward the gutter of the street of at least
eight-hundredths of one foot (.08') to each four feet (4') of width. (1994
Code)
7-2-5: SPECIAL ORDINANCES REGARDING SIDEWALKS:
When any such sidewalk shall be ordered laid by the City Council, a special
ordinance shall be passed prescribing in what manner the cost of such
improvement shall be paid, which shall be either by general taxation, special
taxation or special assessment, and such ordinance shall conform to the statute
prescribing the method of procedure under the manner of payment adopted. (1994
Code)
7-2-6: REMOVAL OF EARTH; FINE:
Any person who shall, for any private purpose, dig, remove or carry away any
earth, gravel or sod from any street, alley or public ground within the City,
without the express permission of the City Council, shall be fined not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each
offense; and any officer of the City who shall use, sell or dispose of any
earth, gravel or sod from any such place, for his own private gain or benefit,
shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (1994 Code)
7-2-7: EXCAVATION; BOND REQUIRED:
No person, unless authorized by the City Council, shall make any excavation in
any street, alley or other public place within the City without first obtaining
permission so to do from the Mayor or City Council.
Applicants for excavation work shall provide the City with an indemnifying bond
issued by a company approved and authorized to issue bonds by the State of
Illinois or other form of financial security acceptable to the City in an
amount of:
   A/   Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for work affecting street and alleys
and related rights-of-way; and
   B.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for work affecting sidewalks.
A posted bond. may be used by the City to complete work if the work is not
completed in a timely manner or causes damage to any public property. (1994
Code; amd. Ord. 032023, 3-20-2023)
7-2-8: FILLING EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   No gravel or any other fill shall be dumped or spread on any City
street by anyone other than the Street Department.
   B.   Any person making or causing to be made any excavation in any street,
alley or other public place within the City shall, without unnecessary delay,
cause the same to be refilled, flushed with water and firmly tamped so that it
shall not settle or cave. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the
provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (1994 Code)
7-2-9: LEAVING EXCAVATIONS UNPROTECTED 1 :
Any contractor for any public work, or any officer or other person making any
excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the City
who shall leave the same open and unprotected by lights or otherwise in the
nighttime, so as to endanger the safety of persons or animals, shall be fined
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each offense. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 5-1-3-3 of this Code.
7-2-10: ENCROACHMENTS, OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED 1 :
   A.   In General: The streets, alleys and sidewalks of the City shall be kept
free and clear of all encumbrances and encroachments, and shall be for the use
of the public and shall not be used or occupied in any way other than as
provided in this Chapter.
   B.   Buildings:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place, or cause to
be erected or placed, any building, fence, bridge, archway or any other
structure or enclosure, extending into or across or encroaching upon any
street, alley or sidewalk within the City without a written permit from the
Mayor therefor; nor shall in any case encumber or obstruct more than one-third
(1/3) of such street, alley or sidewalk; nor shall such obstruction continue in
any case longer than may be necessary in the diligent erection of such
building.
      2.   No person shall remove or cause to be removed any building through
or along any street, alley or other public place within the City, without first
having applied to and obtained the consent of the City Council, and such
application shall be in writing and shall set forth the exact route proposed to
be traversed in moving such building. Such building shall, upon such consent
being given, be moved along the route mentioned in such application, and shall
not be permitted to unnecessarily encumber any street, alley or other public
place, for a longer time than may be necessary for its diligent removal, and
such person shall promptly repair any damage thereby done to any street, alley,
crossing, public ground, wires, building or other property.
   C.   Obstruction, Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct
or cause to be obstructed any street or alley within the City with any goods,
merchandise, fuel or other articles he may be receiving or delivering longer
than may be necessary in the diligent removal of same, except as authorized by
ordinance.
   D.   Obstruction, Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct
or cause to be obstructed more than three feet (3') of the outer edge of any
sidewalk with any goods, merchandise, fuel or other articles he may be
receiving or delivering; nor shall he permit the same to remain on any sidewalk
longer than may be necessary for the diligent removal thereof, nor in any case
to exceed twenty four (24) hours. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See Chapter 3 of this Title for additional regulations concerning
  encroachments.
7-2-11: FENCING STREET:
Any person who shall make or cause to be made or shall maintain any enclosure,
fence or building of any kind extending upon, over or across any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place within the City shall be fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, and
every week after the first conviction that such fence or building so remains
shall be deemed a separate offense. (1994 Code)
7-2-12: TELEGRAPH POLES AND WIRES:
Any person who shall set or cause to be set any telegraph, telephone or other
pole upon any street, alley or other public place within the City, or shall
string or hang any wire along or across any such street, alley or other public
place, unless authorized so to do by the City Council, shall be fined not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense. (1994 Code)
7-2-13: REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Whenever the owner of such obstruction or encroachment as provided in
Sections
7-2-10,
7-2-11 and
7-2-12 shall fail to remove the same, such obstructions shall be deemed a
nuisance; provided, that the City Council may order and direct the
Superintendent of Water and Streets to take down and remove such obstruction or
encroachment, after due notice to such owner, and the cost and expense thereof
shall be recoverable in the name of the City against such owner.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose or resist the execution
of the order of the Superintendent in such regard. If the owner cannot readily
be found for the purposes of such notice, as provided in subsection A of this
Section, such obstruction shall be removed as therein provided. (1994 Code)
7-2-14: EXCEPTION TO ENCROACHMENTS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
The preceding Sections
7-2-10,
7-2-11,
7-2-12 and
7-2-13 shall not apply to any owner or agent of real property or any contractor
or builder or other person who first obtains a written permit therefor issued
by the City Council; provided, however, that except in case of necessity, no
such permittee shall encumber or obstruct more than one-third (1/3) of any
street, alley or sidewalk; provided, that no such obstruction continues in any
case longer than may be necessary in the diligent and prompt execution of the
work. (1994 Code)
7-2-15: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY DURING SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION:
   A.   Every person permitted to in any way block, obstruct or excavate in or
upon any sidewalk as provided in Section
7-2-14 of this Chapter, shall provide and construct a suitable temporary
sidewalk or walkway which shall be safe for passage and convenient for users.
   B.   Whenever any repair, remodeling, demolition or moving operations are
being conducted with respect to any building or structure adjacent to any
sidewalk, the permittee shall provide a pedestrian walkway as provided in
subsection A; provided, that in addition, suitable overhead canopy shall be
provided for the protection of pedestrians from falling objects and materials.
(1994 Code)
7-2-16: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
Any person who shall place, leave or erect, or cause to be placed, left or
erected any encroachment or obstruction in or upon any street, alley or
sidewalk within the City shall in all cases be liable to the City as private
persons for all injuries or damages arising therefrom. (1994 Code)
7-2-17: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a person to build, erect, use or maintain any
fence or barrier consisting of what is known as "barbed wire", or of which
barbed wire is a part, along the line of or in or upon or along any street,
alley or sidewalk, or through or around any public park, land or lot.
   B.   Where any such barbed wire is used contrary to the provisions of this
Section, the same shall be removed upon written notice of the Superintendent of
Water and Streets. Any person owning, building or controlling such fence who
shall fail to remove such fence, or the barbed wire thereof, upon notice, shall
be guilty of a violation of this Chapter and upon conviction shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each
offense, and a further penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for every day that he
shall continue to maintain such fence after the first conviction. (1994 Code)
7-2-18: EXHIBITIONS, PARADES; OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public
street, alley or sidewalk within the City for the purpose of, or to give or
cause to be given in any show window or in or upon any premises immediately
abutting upon any public street, alley or sidewalk, any exhibition, show,
performance, game, amusement, parade or public speaking, which is designed or
intended to or which in fact does collect or attract a sufficient number of
persons to interfere with the passage of the public along such street, alley or
sidewalk.
   B.   Participants: Any person participating in any such exhibition, parade,
public speaking, etc., shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.
   C.   Discontinuance: If such exhibition, parade 1 , public speaking, etc.
results in the collection or attraction of a sufficient number of persons to
interfere with passage of the public along such public way, any member of the
Police Department shall have the power and it shall be his duty to enter such
premises and cause such exhibition, etc., to be discontinued forthwith, and to
cause any performer, figure, apparatus or other thing of any nature whatsoever
engaged in or used in or about such exhibition, etc., to be removed from such
premises forthwith.
   D.   Approval: Nothing contained herein shall limit the authority of the
Mayor, with approval of the City Council, to waive the provisions of this
Section with regard to any person or group of persons who demonstrate peaceful
intentions and a genuine respect for the law. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  6-2-4 of this Code for permits to allow parades.
7-2-19: DISPLAY OF GOODS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, set or hang out, or display over
or upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the City any goods, wares or
merchandise, or any showcase or fixture for displaying same, except within
three feet (3') of the building or premises owned or occupied by him; provided,
that no display of fruits, groceries, vegetables or other foods intended for
human consumption shall be exposed for sale or advertisement within the City at
a height of less than twenty four inches (24") above the level of the ground or
any public walk. (1994 Code)
7-2-20: PEANUT AND CANDY STANDS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose for sale from any stand,
cart or wagon erected or placed upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the
City any candies, peanuts or the like without having first obtained a license
to so do as provided in
Title 2, Chapter 1 of this City Code. (1994 Code)
7-2-21: NEWSPAPER OR PERIODICAL STANDS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use sidewalks within the City for the
sale of newspapers or other periodicals, except those carried on the person or
sold from stands to be located on the curb line and not to exceed a depth of
four feet (4') and a width of six feet (6') along the line of the curb. Such
stands shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
B. No such newspaper stands shall be maintained or operated unless the owner
thereof shall have first obtained a license from the City as provided in
Title 2, Chapter 1 of this City Code. The City shall not issue any such license
unless the party making application shall have the consent in writing of the
abutting owner, occupant or lessee. (1994 Code)
7-2-22: HAULING OFFENSIVE MATTER:
Any person who shall haul any hay, straw, ashes, dirt, filth or other offensive
matter along or across any street, alley or other public place within the City
and permit or suffer any part thereof to escape from any wagon or vehicle in
which the same is being hauled or conveyed and fall and remain upon any such
place, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty
dollars ($20.00) for each offense. (1994 Code)
7-2-23: THROWING OFFENSIVE MATTER:
   A.   Any person who shall throw, place or leave or cause to be thrown,
placed or left any ashes, dirt, filth, rubbish, slops or any obstruction or
encumbrance in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within
the City shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each offense, and every day that such ashes or other
matter so remain after notice to remove the same by the Mayor or any police
officer shall be deemed a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who shall throw, place or deposit any paper, rags, fruit
peelings or other offensive matter or thing in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place within the City shall be fined not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty five dollars ($25.00). (1994 Code)
7-2-24: GLASS AND SIMILAR INJURIOUS MATERIALS PROHIBITED 1 :
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or leave, or to
cause to be thrown, deposited or left, upon any street, alley or sidewalk
within the City any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, cans or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
   B.   It shall be the duty of any person who throws or drops, or permits to
be thrown or dropped, upon any street, alley or sidewalk any glass, etc., or
other injurious substance to immediately remove the same or cause it to be
removed.
   C.   It shall be the duty of any person removing a wrecked or damaged
vehicle from any street, alley or sidewalk to remove any glass, etc., or other
injurious substance dropped thereupon from such vehicle. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 6-2-28 of this Code.
7-2-25: GATES AND DOORS, SWINGING OVER SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain or operate any gate or door opening or
swinging upon or over any sidewalk, unless such gate or door is so hung as to
be self-shutting. (1994 Code)
7-2-26: AWNINGS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or operate any awning,
unless the same shall be at least eight feet (8') above the sidewalk level, in
the clear, including all curtain drops, nor shall the same be supported by any
posts, rods or braces extending below a height of eight feet (8') above the
sidewalk level. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-14; power of City to regulate and prevent awnings
  over sidewalks.
7-2-27: CELLAR DOORS, OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS 1 :
   A.   Every cellar door, basement entrance or other like aperture or opening
over any vault , cistern or coal hole, and every well, ditch or other like pit
or hole on or adjoining any sidewalk within the City shall be covered with a
substantial grate or plate, and the construction of all such vaults and coal
holes under the public ways shall be subject to the direction and supervision
of the Superintendent of Water and Streets.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave open or permit to be left
open any such grate or plate over any cellar, vault, etc. without securing or
protecting the same, so as to endanger the safety of persons or animals passing
thereupon.
   C.   Construction: Such grates or plates as provided for in subsection A
must be made of steel or iron having a rough surface and rabbited into or made
flush with the sidewalk. No portion or feature of such cover shall project
above or form a depression below the finished surface of the sidewalk in which
such cover is placed. Such covers shall be capable of supporting a load of not
less than three hundred (300) pounds per square foot of area. Provided, that no
sidewalk to accommodate cellars, or vaults beneath shall be constructed without
a permit therefor issued by the City Council and all such work shall be
performed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water and Streets. (1994
Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See also Section 5-1-3-3 of this Code.
7-2-28: OBJECTS ON WINDOWSILLS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, railing
or balcony top or porch, or any other projection from any house or other
building within the City any flower pot, wooden box, bowl, pitcher or other
article or thing whatsoever, unless the same shall be securely and firmly
fastened or protected so as to render it impossible for any such object to fall
into any street, alley or sidewalk. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section 5-1-3-2 of this Code.
7-2-29: TREES; PLANTING, TRIMMING:
Any person owning or maintaining any trees or shrubs extending upon or across
any sidewalk or public way between the property line and the curb line shall
keep the same trimmed. (1994 Code)
7-2-30: SIDEWALKS KEPT FREE OF SNOW AND ICE:
Every owner or occupant of any dwelling house or other building, or proprietor
or lessee of any enclosed lot or premises, and every person having the charge
or control of any church, hall or public building within the City shall, during
the winter season whenever there is a fall of snow, and by ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. on every morning thereafter, clear the sidewalks in front of or adjoining
such house, building or premises from snow and ice, and keep the same
conveniently free therefrom. In case the snow and ice are so congealed as not
to be removed without difficulty or injury to the pavement, such person shall
strew the same with ashes, sand, salt or sawdust; and shall in addition at all
times keep such sidewalks clear and free from dirt, filth, weeds or other
obstructions so as to allow pedestrians the safe and unobstructed use of the
same; and every owner, occupant or other person aforesaid who shall permit or
allow such sidewalks to be or remain covered with snow, or other obstructions,
contrary to the provisions of this Section, shall be deemed guilty of
maintaining a nuisance; provided, however, that no person shall be obliged to
clear any such sidewalk on Sunday or during the continuance of any snow storm.
(1994 Code)
7-2-31: ALLEYS AND GUTTERS KEPT CLEAN:
It shall be the duty of every person owning, occupying or in control of any lot
or parcel of land adjoining any public or private alley within the City to keep
the same clean and in an unoffensive condition, and also to keep the gutter in
front of such premises free from filth or other offensive matter that may
prevent the free flow of water therein. (1994 Code)
7-2-32: ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS OR LAWNS 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, ride or drive any horse, cow,
mule or other like animal upon, over or across any sidewalk or lawn, within the
curb line of any sidewalk within the City, except at the entrance to such
building or lot, where no suitable crossing is provided; or for any person to
permit any such animal, or any vehicle attached thereto, to be or remain upon
any such sidewalk or lawn. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Title 5, Chapter 2 of this Code for animal regulations.
7-2-33: DRAINS ACROSS SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any building or
premises to permit water to fall or drain from any such building or premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him so as to spread over or across any
sidewalk adjoining the same. (1994 Code)
7-2-34: PAINTING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to put paint upon any sidewalk within the
City. (1994 Code)
7-2-35: SPITTING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalks within
the City. (1994 Code)
7-2-36: BICYCLES ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle on any sidewalk within
the City, except where specifically permitted or required by law. (1994 Code)
7-2-37: DRIVEWAY ACROSS CURB PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or maintain an entrance or driveway
for horses or vehicles from the paved street into his premises crossing the
curb. But all such driveways from public streets into private premises shall be
made by placing curbing on each side of such driveway, with rounded corners.
(1994 Code)
7-2-38: TIRES WITH ROUGH, SHARP OR UNEVEN EDGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain over or across any
street, alley or sidewalk within the City any tractor, road roller, steam
shovel, concrete mixer, excavating machine, traction engine or other vehicle of
which any tire is worn or is not smooth or has sharp, uneven surfaces, cleats,
spikes or projections of any kind attached thereto, or which has a tire of less
than three inches (3") in width that will cause damage to the road or pavement.
(1994 Code)
7-2-39: MIXING MORTAR ON PAVED STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to mix mortar or to deposit or drop the
same on any paved street, alley or sidewalk within the City. Any person who
shall wilfully violate the provisions of this Section, or who shall fail or
neglect to remove within twenty four (24) hours any mortar accidentally dropped
upon any such paved street, alley or sidewalk, upon notice from the
Superintendent of Water and Streets or any member of the Police Department,
shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter. (1994 Code)
7-2-40: BURNING MATERIAL ON STREETS:
No leaves or any other material shall be burned on blacktop or oil-base
streets. (1994 Code)
7-2-41: DESTRUCTION OF STREET SIGNS, TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, deface, scratch, climb or in any
other manner injure, attempt to deface or alter the direction of any street
sign or traffic-control device within the City. (1994 Code)
7-2-42: STAKES ON PAVEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive iron or other stakes in any brick,
stone, asphalt, concrete or other pavement within the City, except as otherwise
expressly permitted by the Superintendent of Water and Streets or provided for
by ordinance. (1994 Code)
7-2-43: DEFECTIVE OR DANGEROUS SIDEWALKS, NUISANCE:
Every sidewalk in the City which is so much worn or out of repair as to
endanger the safety or persons passing over the same, is hereby declared to be
a nuisance; and any person who shall suffer or permit such nuisance to exist in
front of or adjoining premises owned by him, shall be subject to a penalty of
one dollar ($1.00) for every day that he shall allow the same to remain, after
being notified in writing by the Superintendent of Water and Streets or the
Police Chief to remedy or abate said nuisance. (1994 Code)
7-2-44: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS SIDEWALKS:
The owner or occupant of any lot or premises, where any holes or loose planks
or other defects are permitted or allowed to be and remain in and about the
sidewalks in front of or adjacent to his premises, as referred to in Section
7-2-43 hereof, is hereby required to repair such defects and abate such
nuisances without delay; and in default thereof, it shall be the duty of the
Superintendent of Water and Streets to abate the same; and if any person shall
recover any judgment against the City because of injury resulting from such
defects or nuisance, the owner or occupant of the premises where such injury
was sustained shall be liable in an action of debt, for the full amount of the
damages and costs so recovered against the City. (1994 Code)
7-2-45: SIDEWALK REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM:
The City will reimburse property owners for the replacement or rehabilitation
of public sidewalks. The City will, as its cost of the improvement, reimburse
property owners ten dollars ($10.00) per linear foot of the documented cost of
the concrete for the eligible portion of the improvement. The City's fiscal
year total funds available for this sidewalk reimbursement program will be
determined by the City Council as stated in the City's annual appropriation
ordinance. The following conditions govern the sidewalk reimbursement program.
   A.   The length of a reimbursable sidewalk replacement shall be at least one
building lot in length or eighty (80) continuous linear feet. The grade, width,
incline, and materials of sidewalks shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter. Adequate barricades and traffic control shall be provided by the owner
or contractor during construction of sidewalks.
   B.   Requests for sidewalk cost reimbursements will not be considered in
connection with new building construction or to circumvent the requirements of
the subdivision regulations set forth in title 4 of this code.
   C.   Funds will be available for reimbursement each fiscal year on a first-
come, first-served basis. Property owners requesting reimbursement for sidewalk
materials shall file a written application in the form provided by the City
with the City Clerk. Applications will be reviewed by the Superintendent of
Streets and Alleys; in the absence of the Superintendent, applications will be
reviewed by the Chairman of the Streets and Alleys Committee.
   D.   Property owners must arrange for the installation of sidewalks through
their own labor or contracted labor. Reimbursement will not be made unless the
sidewalk is inspected and approved by a city inspector after it is formed and
before it is poured, and inspected and approved again after final finishing.
   E.   To insure equitable distribution of sidewalk reimbursement funds, no
more than fifty percent (50%) of each year's annual appropriation for sidewalk
reimbursements shall be used in commercial and industrial zones. Any amount of
the annual appropriation for sidewalk reimbursements may be used in residential
zones.
   F.   Sidewalks on private property and driveway aprons are not eligible for
reimbursement under this program. (Ord. 091619, 9-16-2019)
CHAPTER 3
ENCROACHMENTS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY 1
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Encroachments Unlawful
7-3-3: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 2 of this Title.
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
In order to facilitate improvements, it is necessary for the City to adopt
provisions regulating encroachments on the rights of way for improvements in
accordance with the following definitions:
CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: The area lying between the project right-of-way
limits and the platted street limits within which the City, by concurrence in
the establishment of the project right-of-way lines, will permit the State to
enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of any
kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is placed,
located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project right of
way or the roadway right of way where no project right-of-way line has been
established.
PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway. The permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas within the project right-of-way lines
established jointly by the City, State, and the Federal Highway Administration,
which will be free of encroachments except as hereinafter defined.
ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee
simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect. (1994 Code)
7-3-2: ENCROACHMENTS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected, to retain
or cause to be retained, any encroachment (hereinabove defined) within the
limits of the project rights of way or roadway rights of way where no project
right-of-way lines have been established. (1994 Code)
7-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating this Chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which
a violation continues or exists. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER VEGETATION
SECTION:
7-4-1: Title
7-4-2: Purpose And Intent
7-4-3: Definitions
7-4-4: Tree Commission; Establishment, Composition, Appointment Of Members,
Duties
7-4-5: City Arborist; Establishment, Duties
7-4-6: Permits
7-4-7: Public Nuisances
7-4-8: Interference With Arborist
7-4-9: Violation And Penalty
7-4-10: Appeal
7-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WENONA TREE ORDINANCE OF
WENONA, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within
Wenona, Illinois.
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of the city council of Wenona that the terms
of this chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
      1.   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants within the city; and
      2.   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of Wenona from property damage, caused or
threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs,
or other plants located within the community. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this section:
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR WENONA: A manual,
the title of which hereinafter shall be "Arboricultural Specifications Manual",
prepared by the arborist pursuant to this chapter containing regulations and
standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants upon city owned property.
ARBORIST: The city arborist of Wenona, Illinois.
CITY OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the city limits of Wenona, Illinois, and
owned by the city in fee simple absolute, or implied or expressly dedicated to
the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or for public easements.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except
lawn grass and flowers less than twenty four inches (24") in height. (Ord.
070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-4: TREE COMMISSION; ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS,
DUTIES:
   A.   Establishment: The Wenona tree commission (hereinafter "tree
commission") is hereby established. Its functions and duties are limited to
those set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Composition: The tree commission shall be composed of eight (8)
commissioners. Five (5) commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with the
approval of the council. These five (5) commissioners shall serve without pay
and shall reside within the city of Wenona, Illinois. The remaining three (3)
commissioners shall be ex officio and shall not vote. For example, the three
(3) ex officio commissioners shall be the director of public works, the
director of parks and recreation of Wenona park district or his/her
representative, and the arborist. Subject to the exceptions in subsection C of
this section, each commissioner of the tree commission shall serve for a term
of three (3) years.
   C.   Appointment Of Members: One of the five (5) commissioners initially
appointed to the tree commission, who is not an ex officio member, shall serve
for a term of one year; two (2) of the five (5) commissioners initially
appointed shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Term shall start on a
common date. Determination of the length of terms of the five (5) commissioners
initially appointed shall be by lot. The mayor shall designate the chairperson
of the tree commission.
   D.   Expiration Or Vacation Of Terms: Within thirty (30) days following the
expiration of the term of any appointed commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council, and the successor
shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Should any commissioner resign or be
removed from the tree commission, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor
and shall serve for the unexpired period of the vacated term. A member of the
tree commission may be removed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of
the council.
   E.   Duties: The tree commission shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Within a reasonable time after the appointment of the tree
commission, upon call of the chairperson of the tree commission, the tree
commission shall meet and adopt rules of procedure for regular and special
meetings to fulfill the duties imposed upon it by this chapter.
      2.   The tree commission shall advise and consult the arborist on any
matter pertaining to this chapter and its enforcement. The topics under which
this advice and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to,
any of the following:
         a.   Amendments to this chapter, and alterations or revisions to the
"Arboricultural Specifications Manual", and alterations or revisions of the
urban forestry plan;
         b.   Policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance and removal of
trees, shrubs and other plants within the city;
         c.   Allocation of funds to the arbor division, and expenditures of
funds by the arbor division;
         d.   Establishment of educational and informational programs;
         e.   Development of policies and procedures regarding the arborist's
duties; and/or
         f.   Issuance of permits required by this chapter;
      3.   The tree commission, upon the request of any person who disagrees
with the decision of the arborist, shall hear all issues of the disputes which
arise between the city arborist and any such person whenever those issues
involve matters or the interpretation or enforcement of the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual", the urban forestry plan, or of the disputes regarding
the issuance of permits or the abatement of nuisances. The decision of a
majority of the appointed members of the tree commission with regard to such
dispute shall be binding upon the arborist. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the jurisdiction of any court of law with respect to such
disputes. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-5: CITY ARBORIST; ESTABLISHMENT, DUTIES:
   A.   Establishment: The position of arborist is hereby established.
   B.   Duties: The arborist shall perform the following duties:
      1.   The arborist, with the assistance of the tree commission, shall
develop and, each subsequent year, update the urban forestry plan. The plan
shall outline urban forestry program activities for a minimum of the next five
(5) years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry activities to be
undertaken by the city, the reasons for those activities, the possible funding
source(s), the means of accomplishing the activities, the alternatives
available to the city to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date of
completion, and the consequences if the activity is not completed. Activities
may include, but are not limited to, street tree inventory, planting, tree
removal, beautification projects and educational projects.
      2.   The arborist, with the assistance of the tree commission, shall
develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual". This manual shall contain regulations and standards for
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants upon
city owned property.
      3.   The arborist shall cause the urban forestry plan and the
"Arboricultural Specifications Manual", and all revisions and amendments to it,
to be published and promulgated and shall cause three (3) copies of the manual,
and all revisions and amendments to it, to be available for public inspection
at the office of the city clerk. Notice that such information is available for
public inspection shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within Marshall County at least one weekday of each of four (4) consecutive
weeks immediately following the initial availability of the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual" or revisions or amendments thereto. The "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual" and any revisions and additions thereto shall become
effective on the tenth day following the final publication in a newspaper of
general circulation required under this subsection B3.
      4.   The arborist shall make available to any interested person copies of
this chapter, information about the activities of the tree commission, copies
of the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual" and copies of the urban forestry
plan.
      5.   The arborist shall administer the urban forestry plan, this chapter
and the provisions of the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual".
      6.   The arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including
the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs and other plants located on city
owned property conform with the urban forestry plan, the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual" and this chapter.
      7.   The arborist shall issue such permits as are required by this
chapter and shall obtain as a condition precedent to the issuance of such
permits the written agreement of each person who applies for such permits that
he or she will comply with the requirements of this chapter, the urban forestry
plan and with the regulations of the manual and shall have the right to inspect
all work performed pursuant to such permits. If the arborist finds that the
work performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the
urban forestry plan or with the regulations or standards of the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual". The arborist shall provide written notice of his/her
finding to the permit applicant.
         a.   The notice shall contain a copy of section V(b)(5) of this
ordinance; and
         b.   The permit shall be nullified and shall be void; and
         c.   The arborist may issue a written order that the permit applicant
cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; and
         d.   The permit applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms
of this chapter; and
         e.   The arborist may take steps to correct the results of the
noncomplying work, and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to
the permit applicant.
      8.   The arborist shall establish a program of public information and
education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the
urban forestry plan. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-6: PERMITS:
   A.   Scope Of Requirements: No person except the arborist, an agent of the
arborist, public utility company or a contractor hired by the arborist may
perform any of the following acts without first obtaining from the arborist a
permit for which no fee shall be charged, and nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any
additional permits as are required by law.
      1.   Plant trees or shrubs on city owned property or treat, prune, remove
or otherwise disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned
property, except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners
of property adjacent to city owned property from watering or fertilizing,
without a permit, any tree, shrub or other plant located on such city owned
property;
      2.   Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or
portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on city owned property and
thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
      3.   Place on city owned property, either above or below ground level, a
container for trees, shrubs or other plants;
      4.   Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub or other
plant located on city owned property;
      5.   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other manmade
object to any tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned property;
      6.   Dig a tunnel or trench on city owned property.
   B.   Issuance: Within seven (7) days of receipt of the application, the
arborist shall issue a permit to perform within thirty (30) days of the day of
issuance any of the acts specified in subsection A of this section, for which a
permit is requested whenever:
      1.   Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance; or
      2.   Such acts are not inconsistent with the development and
implementation of the urban forestry plan or with any regulations or standards
of the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual"; and
      3.   Whenever an application has been signed by the applicant and
submitted to the arborist detailing the location, number, size and species of
trees, shrubs or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth
the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used and presenting any
additional information that the arborist may find reasonably necessary.
      4.   The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is
sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the urban forestry
plan and with the regulations and standards set forth in the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual"; and
      5.   The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands
those provisions of the urban forestry plan, this chapter and of the
"Arboricultural Specifications Manual" which are pertinent to the work for
which the permit is sought; and
      6.   If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any
tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of such
felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon city owned property and if such
felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which such
felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the
city of Wenona harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted pursuant
to the permit and shall deposit with the city clerk a liability insurance
policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person/
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident for bodily injury
liability and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) aggregate for property damage
liability, which policy shall name the city of Wenona as an additional insured.
   C.   Public Utility Companies: Public utility companies shall notify the
city arborist prior to the initiation of pruning cycles which will involve
trees located on city owned property for the purpose of maintaining safe line
clearance. The notice shall state the estimated time frame of the pruning cycle
as well as the planned locations in the city where the work will be performed.
All pruning work shall be carried out in accordance with accepted
arboricultural standards. Public utility companies shall also notify the city
arborist prior to the installation or maintenance of underground utilities if
such activity will occur within the dripline of trees located on city owned
property. In the case of severe storms, natural disasters or other emergency
situations, a public utility company may perform any required pruning or
underground utility maintenance necessitated by such situation and thereafter
notify the city arborist of the work performed. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-7: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   Nuisances Declared: The following are hereby declared public nuisances
under this chapter:
      1.   Any dead or dying tree, shrub or other plant, whether located on
city owned property or on private property;
      2.   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub or other plant, whether located on
city owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or diseases
which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub or other
plant;
      3.   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof, whether located
on city owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or
condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of
the general public;
      4.   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on
city owned property or on private property which obstructs a street sign on
city property;
      5.   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on
city owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the view
as such may be determined by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Right To Inspect: The officers, agents, servants and employees of the
city have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located
a tree, shrub or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
   C.   Abatement: The following are the prescribed means of abating public
nuisances under this chapter:
      1.   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on city
owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property
owner or his/her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement
of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.
      2.   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on privately
owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property
owner or his/her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement
of the nuisance. No property owner may be found guilty of violating this
provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have been
satisfied:
         a.   The arborist shall cause a written notice to be personally served
or sent, by registered mail, to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for
the general taxes for the last preceding year;
         b.   Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other
nuisance, its location on the property and the reason for declaring it a
nuisance;
         c.   Such notice shall describe, by legal description or by common
description, the premises;
         d.   Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may
undertake to abate the nuisance;
         e.   Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less
than thirty (30) days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
      3.   The arborist is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any
public nuisance, provided that the nuisance is determined by the arborist to be
an immediate threat to any person or property. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-8: INTERFERENCE WITH ARBORIST:
No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the
arborist or his/her agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of
this chapter. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon being
found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each separate offense, and each day during which any
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a
separate offense. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this
chapter, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant
shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and
shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of "A Guide
To The Professional Evaluation Of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs And
Evergreens", as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. (Ord.
070703B, 7-7-2003)
7-4-10: APPEAL:
Any party who elects to dispute any action or decision by the city arborist or
tree commission shall be entitled to appeal to the city council for a final
determination. (Ord. 070703B, 7-7-2003)
CHAPTER 5
FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATIONS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Master License Agreement for Fiber Optic Installation (a “'MLAFOI”)
7-5-2: MLAFOI Required
Exhibit A: Template Master License Agreement For Fiber Optic Installation
7-5-1: MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENT FOR FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION (A “MLAFOI”):
   The template agreement set forth as Exhibit A to this Chapter and entitled,
''Master License Agreement for Fiber Optic Installation'' (a “MLAFOI”) is the
approved license for fiber optic installations within the rights-of-way and
property of the City.
(Ord. 072224C, 7-23-2024)
7-5-2: MLAFOI REQUIRED:
   No fiber optic company or telecommunications company or their contractors or
subcontractors shall install fiber optic facilities in or on City rights-of-way
or property without entering into an executed MLAFOI with the City.
   A.   The Mayor is authorized to sign, and the City Clerk is authorized to
attest, to licensees specific MLAFOI is consistent with the template master
license agreement in the form of Exhibit A and subject to review and approval
of engineering, requirements by the Engineer or other designee.
   B.   Site-specific permits for licensees having entered into a MLAFOI with
the City shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer or
other designee.
   C.   Neither the City Engineer, nor the Mayor, have the authority to
negotiate substantive changes, modifications, or revisions to the terms and
conditions set forth in the template MLAFOI.
   D.   If an entity seeks to change, modify, or revise the template MLAFOI
agreement for its use, the entity will be required to submit a written petition
to revise, modify, or amend the MLAFOI which shall be reviewed by the City
Engineer or other consultant, and subsequently submitted to the City's
Corporate Authorities for their consideration.
(Ord. 072224C, 7-23-2024)
EXHIBIT A: TEMPLATE MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENT FOR FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
THIS MASTER LICENSE AGREEMENT (“Agreement” or “License Agreement”) is made and
entered into on                           ,                 , 202   , between
the City of Wenona, LaSalle Counties, Illinois, referred to herein as the
“Licensor” or the “City” and                                      [INSERT NAME]
referred to herein as the “Licensee.” The City and the Licensee are at times
collectively referred too herein as the “Parties” or individually as the
“Party.”
Background Recitals
A.   The City is the exclusive owner of certain public rights-of-way and has
authority to impose standards for the construction of facilities on the public-
rights-of-way.
B.   The City has the right and power to regulate and permit the installation,
attachment, operation and maintenance of telecommunications facilities upon
public property and in the public rights-of-way within its municipal
boundaries.
C.   The Licensee desires to construct, install, attach, operate, repair,
maintain, and remove fiber telecommunications facilities in and/or upon the
City's public rights-of-way (the “ROWs”) within the City's boundaries, subject
to the provisions of this Agreement.
D.   In consideration of the foregoing and promises contained herein, the City
desires to allow Licensee to utilize the ROWs for such purposes, subject to the
provisions of this Agreement.
E.   The City Council has determined that the establishment of a Master License
Agreement for telecommunications use of public ways will properly facilitate
and manage the deployment of telecommunications facilities without requiring a
telecommunications company to come before the City Council each time it seeks
approval of a site-specific permit for a facility within the ROW.
F.   Regulation of the deployment of telecommunication facilities within City
ROWs can be accomplished through the use of site-specific permitting, managed
and controlled by the City, but only after a telecommunications company agrees
to the terms of this Agreement.
G.   Section 253 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
including 47 U.S.C. Section 253, and Illinois 220 ILCS 5121-1001, provides that
the City has the authority, subject to certain limitations, to control access
to and use of the ROWs within the City.
H.   The City has the authority to enter into this License Agreement pursuant
to the powers granted it by Article VII, Section 10(a) of the Illinois
Constitution of 1970, and finds that entering into this Agreement is in the
best interests of the City, its residents, and the public.
I.   The Licensee is authorized and empowered to enter into this Agreement and
to perform the covenants and promises herein made and undertaken.
      NOW, THEREFORE,  in consideration of the mutual covenants contained
herein and intending to be legally bound hereby, the Parties hereto agree as
follows below:
   1.   RECITALS: The Background Recitals are incorporated herein as
definitions, substantive provisions, and as representing the intent of the
Parties.
   2.   APPROVALS: Whenever the consent or approval of any Party hereto is
required in this Agreement such consent or approval shall be in writing and
shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and, in all matters contained
herein, the Parties shall have an implied obligation of reasonableness, except
as may be expressly set forth otherwise.
   3.   GRANT OF LICENSE: For and in consideration of the mutual covenants
herein, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein and in
compliance with all Federal, State, arid local laws and regulations, the City
grants a non-exclusive revocable license (“License”) to the Licensee for the
use of the ROWs to construct, install, operate, use, own, repair, maintain, and
remove underground and aerial fiber telecommunications facilities the
(“Facilities”).
      (a)   The License granted by this Agreement shall not convey any right,
title, or interest (including leasehold interest) in the ROWs but shall be
deemed to be a license only to use and occupy the ROWs for the limited purposes
stated herein. The rights granted to the Licensee by the City are and shall be
at all times subordinate to the City's right to ingress and egress and use the
public ROWs. All rights and obligations to the Licensee under this Agreement
shall be exercised by the Licensee at its sole cost and expense.
      (b)   This Agreement and the right it grants to use and occupy the ROWs
shall not be exclusive and does not, explicitly or implicitly, preclude the
issuance of other licenses to operate telecommunications facilities within the
City's municipal boundaries.
   4.   TERM AND FEES: The term of this Agreement shall be for a period of ten
(10) years, beginning on the date approved by the City Council and ending ten
(10) years thereafter, unless otherwise sooner terminated as provided for
herein. This License Agreement shall automatically renew for three (3)
consecutive additional five (5) year terms unless the Licensee provides written
notice to the City at least four (4) months before the expiration of the
initial term or any renewal term that Licensee does not intend to renew the
License for an additional term; provided, however; that the License shall only
renew if Licensee is in full compliance with this Agreement at. the time of
renewal.
      (a)   In the event the Licensee chooses not to renew this Agreement, the
License Agreement shall terminate and the Licensee shall remove its Facilities
from all City ROWs and restore all ROWs as required herein.
      (b)   The Licensee shall not pay any taxes to the City under this
Agreement, so long as Licensee maintains its status as a Telecommunications
Retailer under the Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act
(TIMFA) (35 ILCS 635/I0(d)) and timely pays the taxes imposed by the Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (SMTT) (35 ILCS 636/5) to the State of
Illinois.
      (c)   Permits will be issued on a block by block basis and the Licensee
shall pay a processing charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each permit
or the actual costs incurred by the City with an engineering firm or other
consultant needed for the processing of the permit. The Parties may agree to
the submission and processing of permit applications in groups or sections;
however, the City may issue permits in such a manner as to allow sufficient
time for JULIE locates and site inspections.
   5.   REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES BY LICENSEE: Licensee represents and
warrants to the City that:
      (a)   Licensee has and will maintain all approvals, authorizations,
certifications, licenses, and franchises required by the State of Illinois, the
Federal Communications Commission and/or any other agency to provide the
communications Facilities and (b) all work performed by Licensee pursuant to
this Agreement shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner, consistent
with any permit specifications, City standards, and other applicable
regulations.
   6.   TITLE AND CONDITION OF ROWs: It is understood and agreed that the City
makes no representations, warranties, or assurances with respect to the
following: the condition of the title or boundaries of the ROWs; the condition
of the underground duct or conduit; other utilities or facilities in the ROWs;
any other improvements or soils located on the ROWs; or the suitability of the
ROWs for the Licensee's intended use. The Licensee assumes all risks associated
with the placement, operation, and maintenance of the Facilities within the
ROWs and suitability of the ROWs for its Facilities. The Licensee accepts the
ROWs in an “As Is, Where Is” condition, including any environmental conditions,
and accordingly, the City shall not be held liable for any damages or
liabilities resulting from any actions that arise because of any claims
concerning the title, boundaries, or condition of the ROWs.
   7.   LOCATION: The location of the Facilities shall be approved by the
City's Engineer(or designee). The Licensee shall provide the City with accurate
plans showing the proposed vertical and horizontal locations of the Facilities
within the ROWs each time it submits a permit application. Unless agreed to by
the Parties, the minimum depth of cover for fiber optic facilities shall be
twenty-four inches (24") and the maximum depth of cover for fiber optic
facilities shall be forty-two inches (42"). Upon completion of the work
authorized by the permit, the Licensee shall provide “As built” drawings
showing the constructed location of the Facilities. Unless otherwise stated on
a permit issued by the City, the Licensee shall not locate the Facilities so as
to unreasonably interfere with the use of the ROWs by the City, by any utility,
by the general public, or by other persons authorized to use or be present in
or upon the public ROWs. As provided for in Paragraph 25(a), the Licensee shall
relocate, at its sole cost and expense, any part of its Facilities that are not
located in compliance with the permit requirements.
   8.   USE OF ROWS: In its use of the ROWs and any work to be performed
thereon, the Licensee shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances,
regulations, and requirements of federal, state, county, and local regulatory
authorities.
      (a)   All parts of the Licensee's Facilities shall be underground where
feasible. The Licensee shall use and occupy the ROWs to construct, install,
operate, use, repair, maintain, and. remove the Facilities, which shall be
limited to underground conduit and fiber telecommunications cable where
existing similar utilities are underground and related equipment and facilities
only, such “related equipment and facilities” shall not include Small Wireless
Facilities controlled by the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (50 ILCS
840/1 et seq.), as now in effect or hereafter amended or codified, the same
being a public record of the State of Illinois.
      (b)   The ROWs shall not be used for the burning of refuse, the
accumulation and/or storage of debris or other material, or for any unsanitary
or unhealthful purposes; provided, however, limited short-term storage of
conduit, tarps, and fill dirt related to ongoing work in the immediate area is
permitted.
      (c)   Any unauthorized or impermissible use of the ROWs, not corrected
after the City issues a notice to the Licensee in accordance with Paragraph 25
(a), shall be deemed to be a material breach of this License Agreement.
      (d)   Unless agreed to by the Parties, the Licensee warrants that the
installation of the Facilities will be performed without any trenching or open
trenching, but rather by directional boring. If directional boring is not
possible for installation of the required Facilities, the Licensee agrees to
work with the City's Engineer, or designee, to determine the method of
installation to be used, and to obtain the permission of the City. Unless
agreed to by the City, the Licensee shall not disturb any pavement for the
installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of its Facilities. All
movement and storage of equipment and materials shall be confined to the area
designated by the City. All surplus excavated material shall be removed from
the ROWs and disposed of in accordance with any applicable laws or regulations.
All tree stumps, and other debris resulting from construction operations shall
be removed from the ROWs.
      (e)   If a utility pole or wireless support structure is within the
right-of-way of another agency, documentation that a permit has been applied
for from the other agency such as IDOT or Marshall and LaSalle Counties, or
other state or county permits may be required.
   9.   INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: As a condition precedent to
its right to access, use, or attach any of its Facilities, the Licensee shall,
prior to occupying any area, submit a site-specific permit application for each
location, including all design plans and receive from the City Engineer (or
designee) a site-specific permit for each location. The City Engineer (or
designee) may request additional information if necessary to process the
application.
      (a)   Unless otherwise provided by law, the City reserves the right to
refuse to approve or authorize any permit application when it determines that
space in a ROW is inadequate to accommodate the Licensee's Facilities. All
terms and conditions contained in this Agreement shall be incorporated into
each individual permit obtained for each location. The installation, operation,
and maintenance of the Facilities shall comply with all applicable ordinances,
statutes; laws, or regulations.
      (b)   The Licensee, in the performance and exercise of any of its
authorizations and obligations under this Agreement, shall not obstruct or
interfere in any manner with the City ROWs, existing utility easements, private
rights of way (unless written permission is granted by the property owner and
provided to the City), sanitary sewers, sewer laterals, watermains, storm
drains, gas mains, poles, aerial and other existing telecommunications
facilities without the express written approval of the City or the other owners
of the affected property. If the Licensee proposes to install its Facilities on
a non-City owned utility pole in the ROW, the Licensee shall submit its written
agreement with the licensee which owns the existing utility pole as part of its
site-specific permit application.
      (c)   Maintenance of the Facilities within the ROWs shall be the
responsibility of the Licensee. The Facilities shall be maintained in good and
safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, regulations and policies. The Licensee shall use due care to
insure that no damage, beyond reasonable wear and tear, is caused to the ROWs.
The Licensee shall, immediately or within up to forty-eight (48) hours based
upon the urgency of the situation, report any damage it causes to any affected
party in writing. The Licensee shall reimburse the other party for any damage
caused by its employees, contractors, subcontractors, agents, representatives,
or its facilities.
      (d)   Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary herein, in the event
of an unexpected repair or emergency (“Emergency Maintenance”), the Licensee
may access the ROWs and commence such Emergency Maintenance work as required
under the circumstances.
   10.   MARKING:
      (a)   Prior to and during any installation or relocation of any
underground cables or utility lines, the Licensee shall contact JULIE to
ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground
facilities within the ROWs to be occupied by the Licensee's Facilities and
install route markers in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act, as now in effect or hereafter amended or codified, the
same being a public record of the State of Illinois.
      (b)   The City shall have no obligation to mark the location of the
Licensee's Facilities. The Licensee agrees that it will become a member of
JULIE as a requirement of this Agreement and that such a system is designed to
alert the Licensee to planned work in the rights-of-way, so that the Licensee
can mark the location of its facilities to avoid damage. The City shall have no
obligation to alert the Licensee to proposed work by itself or others, other
than as a participating member of the JULIE system. Use of JULIE will not
alleviate the Licensee's responsibility to provide plans showing the vertical
and horizontal location of all Facilities within the ROW and complying with
location requirements as set fo,th in Paragraph 7 of this Agreement.
   11.   PUBLIC SAFETY: The Licensee or other persons acting on its behalf, at
its own expense, shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares,
and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general
public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle, or property by
reason of any work in or affecting the ROWs or other property.
      If the City, in its reasonable discretion, determines that a particular
use of the ROWs by the Licensee is, or will be, hazardous to the public or the
property, the Licensee, upon written notice from the City, shall install
commercially reasonable safety devices or make commercially reasonable
modifications at the Licensee's sole expense to render the ROWs safe for, and
compatible with, public use. In the event the Licensee fails to install such
safety devices or make required modifications within a specified time which
will be between two (2) hours to twenty-four (24) hours based upon the urgency
of the situation and the nature of the safety hazard, or, if such modifications
cannot be completed expeditiously to render the ROWs safe for the public, the
City may install such safety devices. In the event the City installs such
safety devices, the Licensee agrees to pay the actual costs of such
improvements upon written demand, or the City may terminate this Agreement,
with all rights of the Licensee hereunder being forfeited, and the Licensee
waives all rights and claims of any kind against the City arising out of this
Agreement and its termination.
   12.   RESTORATION OF ROWS: Unless otherwise agreed to by the Parties, within
ten (10) business days after initial construction operations have been
completed or after repair, relocation or removal of the Facilities, the
Licensee shall grade and restore all areas disturbed by construction operations
to a condition substantially similar to that which existed prior to the work.
This time period may be extended for good cause shown. If weather or other
conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Paragraph,
the Licensee shall temporarily restore any disturbed property. Such temporary
restoration shall be at the Licensee's sole expense and the Licensee shall
promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the
weather or other conditions permit such permanent restoration.
      (a)   For a period of twelve (12) months following any work in the ROWs
by the Licensee or any person acting on the Licensee's behalf, except for
backfilling which shall be a three (3) year period, the Licensee shall, at its
sole expense, be responsible for all costs of restoring any disturbances or
damage to the ROWs or any other City property and for all repairs or damage to
City property caused by the Licensee, its officers, agents, employees,
contractors, subcontractors, successors, and assigns, except to the extent any
of the foregoing are caused by the negligence of the City. All such restoration
shall be performed to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.
      (b)   Disturbed grass areas shall be restored with seed and blanket to
the satisfaction of the City. All open excavations necessary for the
installation, repair, relocation, maintenance, or removal of the Facilities
shall be properly backfilled, and any asphalt pavement or PCC concrete pavement
or sidewalk shall be replaced with like-kind and quality of materials. The
backfill settlement repair period shall be for three (3) years from the date of
placing said backfill, during which time the affected areas shall be maintained
by the Licensee at its sole expense in a condition satisfactory to the City.
Under hard surface areas, such as roadways, sidewalks, and drives, trench
backfill shall be compacted and certified by the City to comply with the City
construction standards. All restoration work shall be completed in accordance
with City zoning or construction standards, whichever is more stringent and/or
comprehensive.
      (c)   In the event the Licensee fails, .in a timely manner, to restore
any disturbances or make any and all repairs to the ROWs or other City property
as set forth above, the City may make or cause to be made such restoration or
repairs and either demand payment from the Licensee, who agrees to pay the
reasonable costs of such restoration or repairs upon written demand and receipt
by the Licensee of all invoices and documentation supporting the actual costs
incurred by the City, or demand payment from the security posted by the
Licensee, which payment must be received by the City within thirty (30) days of
demand and receipt by the Licensee of all invoices and documentation supporting
the actual costs incurred by the City.
   13.   ENVIRONMENTAL: The Licensee shall not trim or cut any trees or shrubs,
alter or impede water flowage, apply chemicals, or disturb the topography of
the ROWs in any manner without prior written approval of the City. The Licensee
will take all reasonable steps to assure that the Licensee will not release any
regulated material in violation of any federal or state environmental law on
the ROWs. The Licensee, at its sole cost and expense, shall remediate, remove,
clean up, or abate in accordance with federal or state law, or directives of
the appropriate oversight agency, a release of a regulated material in
violation of a federal or state law occurring on the ROWs, to the extent such a
release was caused by the Licensee. In the event of a release of a regulated
material in violation of a state or federal law on the ROWs by the Licensee, or
any claim or cause of action brought against the City regarding such release,
the indemnification provided for in Paragraph I.7. shall apply.
   14.   DAMAGE TO THE LICENSEE'S FACILITIES: The City shall not be liable for
and .the Licensee expressly waives all claims for any damage to or loss of the
Licensee's Facilities within the ROWs as a result of or in connection with any
public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling,
or work of any kind in the ROWs by or on behalf of the City unless such damage
or loss is caused by the sole negligence or willful or wanton misconduct of the
City or its employees or agents.
   15.   NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT: This License Agreement shall be binding
upon and shall inure to the benefit of the Parties and their successors and
assigns. During the term of this License Agreement, the Licensee acknowledges
and agrees that it does not have the right or authority to transfer or assign
this License Agreement or any interest herein without the prior written consent
of the City; provided however, that the Licensee shall have the right, without
the City's prior written consent, to assign or otherwise transfer this License
Agreement to any successor entity or affiliate or subsidiary of the Licensee,
or to any entity into which the Licensee may be merged or consolidated or which
purchases all or substantially all of the assets of the Licensee. Any such
written consent required under this Paragraph may not be unreasonably withheld,
conditioned, or delayed. Any transferee or assignee must, at a minimum, show
satisfactory evidence that it meets the insurance requirements and other terms,
conditions, and provisions contained herein. In the event the License herein
granted is terminated or the Licensee transfers title to the Facilities or
vacates or ceases to use the Facilities, the Licensee shall, nevertheless,
remain liable to the City under the provisions hereof, until said Facilities
herein authorized are removed, and the public ROWs are restored as herein
required. Acceptance of payment from an entity or person other than the
Licensee shall not constitute a waiver of this provision. In all instances, a
successor Licensee shall within ten (10) business days of substitution, notify
the City Clerk of its legal identity, address, email address, phone numbers,
and the identity of its responsible representative to the City.
   16.   INSURANCE:
      (a)   Required coverage and limits. The Licensee shall secure and
maintain the liability insurance policies specified by the City insuring it as
named insured and including the City and its elected and appointed officers,
employees, and agents as additional insureds as their interest may appear under
this Agreement. The Licensee shall provide the City with a certificate of
insurance and blanket additional insured endorsement. The Licensee's insurance
shall be primary, and any City policies of insurance shall be deemed non-
contributory. Such insurance shall be issued by companies authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois and reasonably approved by the City. The
insurance coverages shall include, but not necessarily limited to, the
following:
         (1)   Worker's Compensation Insurance with limits as required by the
applicable statutes of the State of Illinois. The Employer's Liability coverage
under the Worker's Compensation policy shall have limits of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000) each accident/injury; five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) each employee/disease; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000)
disease - policy limits.
         (2)   Commercial General Liability Insurance protecting the Licensee
against any liability claims which may result from or arise out of the
Licensee's use and occupancy of the premises and the operations conducted
thereon in the course of the license period. The limits of liability shall be
three million dollars ($3,000,000) per occurrence for bodily injury and
property damage and five million dollars ($5,000,000) general aggregate,
including contractual liability. The City and its elected and appointed
officers, employees, and agents shall be included as additional insureds as
their interest may appear under this Agreement.
         (3)   Commercial Automobile Liability Insurance covering the
Licensee's owned, non-owned, and leased vehicles with coverage limits of three
million dollars ($3,000,000) combined single limit each accident for bodily
injury and property damage, including contractual liability. The City and its
elected and appointed officers, employees, and agents shall be included as
additional insureds as their interest may appear under this Agreement.
         (4)   Umbrellas or Excess Liability Insurance with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence bodily injury/property
damage combined single limit. The Umbrella or Excess coverage shall apply in
excess of the limits stated in subparagraphs (2) and (3) above and shall either
include an endorsement naming the City as an additional insured or provide
“following form” coverage for the primary insurance.
      The foregoing insurance coverages shall be increased upon written request
by the City to the Licensee but no more frequently than every three years and
only when increases in coverage in a category become routine in the insurance
industry in Illinois for the specified coverage. If the Licensee disagrees with
the proposed increase, it shall do so in writing no later than twenty-one (21)
days after it receives notice of an increase which writing shall explain the
basis of the objection. If the Parties are unable to reach agreement with
regard to the amount of an increase, the City and the Licensee's insurance
companies shall select a qualified third person insurance manager who shall
designate the amount of the coverage. Such designation shall be final, non-
appealable, and binding for the next three years.
      (b)   The Licensee shall provide certificates of insurance reflecting the
requirements of this Paragraph to the City within thirty (30) days following
notification that its application is complete.
      (c)   Upon receipt of notice from its insurer(s) the Licensee shall
provide the City with thirty (30) days' prior written notice of cancellation of
any required coverage and the Licensee shall obtain and furnish to the City
evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this
Paragraph. In the event that the Licensee fails to obtain or produce evidence
of said replacement insurance, any permits issued pursuant to this Agreement
shall, without any further notice, be null and void.
      (d)   The Licensee may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required by subparagraph (a) of this Paragraph.
The Licensee that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under subparagraph (a) of this Paragraph or the requirements of subparagraphs
(b) and (c) of this Paragraph. The Licensee that elects to self-insure shall
provide the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit required under subparagraph (a) of
this Paragraph, such as evidence that the Licensee is a “private self-insurer”
under the Workers' Compensation Act. Self-insurance shall be primary, and any
City policies of insurance shall be deemed non-contributory. Self-insurance
shall only be allowed with the City's written approval, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
      (e)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the Licensee to the City and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this Paragraph shall not be limited by such insurance policies,
self-insurance, or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
      (f)   The Licensee shall make certain that all Supplements are covered by
the insurance required by this Paragraph 16.
   17.   INDEMNIFICATION: To the fullest extent permitted by Illinois law and
without regard to the availability or unavailability of any insurance, the
Licensee shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its officers,
agents, employees and elected officials, from any loss, damage, demand,
liability, cause of action, fine, judgement, or settlement, together with all
costs and expenses related thereto (including reasonable expert witness and
attorney fees), that may be incurred as a result of bodily injury, sickness,
death, or property damage or as a result of any other claim or suit of any
nature whatsoever arising from or in any manner connected with Licensee's use
or occupancy of the City's improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the Licensee or its employees, agents, or contractors arising
out of the rights and privileges granted under this Agreement, and other
applicable law.
      The Licensee has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the negligence or willful
misconduct of the City or its employees or agents. Neither Party will be liable
for consequential, indirect, punitive, incidental, or special damages
(including lost revenues, loss of equipment, interruption or loss of service,
or loss of data) for any cause of action, whether in contract,.tort or
otherwise, even if the Party was or should have been aware of the possibility
of these damages, whether under theory of contract, tort (including
negligence), strict liability or otherwise, however caused, based on any theory
of liability. The indemnification provisions set forth in this Paragraph shall
remain in effect for any claims based on occurrences during a license period.
   18.   RESERVATION OF RIGHTS AND IMMUNITIES: Nothing in this Agreement shall
be interpreted or constitute a waiver, release, or to otherwise compromise the
Patties' common law or statutory privileges or immunities which are fully
reserved.
   19.   EXCLUSIVE REMEDY: The Licensee's exclusive remedy for the Licensor's
breach of all or any portion of this Agreement shall be specific performance or
termination of the Agreement including termination as it pertains to a specific
site.
   20.   THIRD-PERSON BENEFICIARIES: There are no third-person beneficiaries or
patties of this Agreement.
   21.   SECURITY: Prior to performing any work in the ROWs, the Licensee shall
establish a security fund in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000), which shall be provided to the City, at the Licensee's election, in
the form of cash or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to
the City. This security fund shall serve as security for the installation of
the Facilities in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes
and standards, the proper location of the Facilities as specified by the City,
restoration of the ROWs and other property affected by the construction or to
satisfy any claims or damages. The City may draw on the letter of credit or
withdraw cash for the reasons set forth in this Agreement and require
replenishment by the Licensee.
   22.   DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION: Within fifteen (15) days of a written
request from the City, the Licensee shall furnish any information requested
that is reasonably related to this Agreement, the License granted hereunder,
and any business activities related to the License or business operations of
the Licensee in the City.
   23.   NO ENCUMBRANCES: The Licensee shall not place or allow any liens,
mortgages, security interests, pledges, claims of others, equitable interests,
or other encumbrances to attach to be filed against title to the ROWs.
   24.   TAXES: Subject to Paragraph 3 of this Agreement, nothing contained in
this License Agreement shall be construed to exempt the Licensee from any fee,
tax, property tax levy, or assessment, which is or may be hereinafter lawfully
imposed on it relative to its use of the ROWs or its operation of the
Facilities, except as limited by the Telecommunications Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act (TIMFA) (35 ILCS 635/I0(d)) and timely payment of the taxes
imposed by the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (SMIT) (35 ILCS
636/5).
      If License should begin to provide either “cable service” or “video
service,” as those terms are defined in Section 21-201 of the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-201), within the corporate limits of
City, the Licensee shall immediately become liable to the City for the service
provider fee allowed by Section 21-801 of the Cable and Video Competition Law
of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-801) and by subsection (c) of Section 253 of Title 47 of
the United States Code. The City shall be entitled - not more than once every
calendar quarter - to take reasonable measures to audit the services provided
by Licensee within the corporate limits of the City to determine whether those
services go beyond the “sale at retail,” as that term and component terms are
defined in Section 5-7 of the SMIT. The Licensee shall promptly cooperate with
the City's request to conduct such an audit of services.
   25.   REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES: Unless
otherwise agreed to by the Parties or required by law, within sixty (60) days
following written notice from the City, the Licensee shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate,
change, or alter the position of any part of its Facilities within the ROWs
whenever the City has determined, in the exercise of its governmental
proprietary rights and powers, that such temporary or permanent removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the City in or upon, the ROWs. The City's written notice to
Licensee to temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change, or
alter the position of any part of its Facilities shall sufficiently explain the
circumstances requiring removal, relocation, or modification. Licensee shall
have thirty (30) days to dispute the notice. In all instances, the Parties
shall work together in good faith to identify a mutually agreeable alternative
to removal or relocation. In the event that relocation of any or all of the
Facilities is required and the City and the Licensee are unable to identify an
agreeable alternative to relocation within the legally required or agreed to
time or the sixty (60) day period, then the City may terminate this Agreement,
without penalty or payment to the Licensee, solely with respect to the portion
of the ROWs required by the City for the above reasons or other public
purposes.
      If the Licensee is required to disconnect, relocate, remove, change, or
alter the position of part of all of its Facilities from the ROWs and fails to
do so within the time required by the City, the City may make or cause to be
made such disconnection, relocation, removal, change, or alteration, and the
Licensee shall be liable to the City for all costs regarding same. The City may
either demand payment from the Licensee, who agrees to pay the reasonable costs
of such relocation or removal upon written demand and receipt by the Licensee
of all invoices and documentation supporting the actual costs incurred by the
City, or demand payment from the security posted by the Licensee, which payment
must be received by the City within thirty (30) days of demand and receipt by
the Licensee of all invoices and documentation supporting the actual costs
incurred by the City.
      (a)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days
following written notice from the City, the Licensee shall, at its own expense,
remove all or any part of any unauthorized facilities or appurtenances from the
ROWs. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following
circumstances:
         (1)   Upon expiration or termination of this License Agreement or
permit obtained by the Licensee, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
         (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or permit;
         (3)   If the facility was constructed, installed, or maintained in
violation of this License Agreement; or
         (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by any permit obtained by the Licensee.
         If the Licensee installs its facilities in a ROW without a permit for
that location, the Licensee agrees to immediately (a) submit a permit
application for the unpermitted installation and pay the required fee, plus a
penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or (b) remove the installation and
restore the site. The City shall timely review any permit application
submitted. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Parties, if the Licensee fails to
obtain the required permit or remove the Facilities within thirty (30) days,
then the Licensee shall pay a penalty to the City in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per month due on the first day of each month regardless of
the amount of time the Licensee's Facilities remain in the ROW during that
month until removed or permitted. Payment of the penalty shall not authorize
the presence of the Facilities in the specific site without a permit. No action
or inaction by the City with respect to unauthorized use of any City ROW shall
be deemed a ratification of an unauthorized use.
      (b)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities: The City retains the
right and privilege to disconnect, cut, move, or remove any part of the
Licensee's Facilities located within the ROWs of the City, as the City may
determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public
health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the City shall attempt to
notify the Licensee, if known, prior to cutting or removing any part of the
Facilities and shall notify the Licensee after cutting or removing any part of
the Facilities.
   26.   TERMINATION: The City may terminate this License Agreement and the
License granted herein for any of the following reasons:
      (a)   The Licensee made fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application; or
      (b)   Failure to cure a breach of this License Agreement after receipt of
written notice and a thirty (30) day cure period; or
      (c)   The Licensee's physical presence or presence of the Licensee's
Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the ROWs
presents a direct or imminent threat lo the public health, safety, or welfare
which the Licensee fails to remedy as provided for in Paragraph 11; or
      (d)   The Licensee's failure to construct the Facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans which Licensee fails to remedy
after receipt of written notice and a thirty (30) day cure period; or
      (e)   Failure to provide the required traffic control; and to respond to
requests from the City to correct such deficiencies within a reasonable time
frame.
      Upon termination of this Agreement for any reason, the Licensee shall,
within sixty (60) days of written notice from the City, remove its Facilities
from all City ROWs and restore all ROWs as required herein.
      The Licensee may terminate one or more of the Facilities locations
pursuant to this Agreement by giving at least thirty (30) days written notice
to the City. The Licensee will not be subject to any penalty or fee for
terminating such Facilities location prior to the end of the term of this
Agreement.
   27.   NO WAIVER: Failure of any Party to this Agreement to insist upon the
strict and prompt performance of the terms, covenants, agreements, and
conditions herein contained or any of them, upon any other Party imposed, shall
not constitute or be construed as a waiver or relinquishment of any Party's
right thereafter to enforce any such term, covenant, agreement, or condition,
but the same shall continue in full force and effect.
   28.   NOTICES: All notices hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed
validly given if sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
commercial courier, provided the courier's regular business is delivery service
and provided further that it guarantees delivery to the addressee by the end of
the next business day following the courier's receipt from the sender,
addressed as follows (or any other address that the Party to be notified may
have designated to the sender by like notice):
 
      CITY:                   LICENSEE:
      City of Wenona          NAME:                                                
      226 S. Chestnut Street  ADDRESS:                                 
      Wenona, IL 61377        CITY STATE ZIP:                              
      Telephone: 815-853-4227 Telephone:                                        
                                    Email:                                                
      With a copy to:         With a copy to:
                                    NAME:                                                
      Klein, Thorpe & Jenkins,FIRM:                                                 
      7 Northpoint Drive      ADDRESS:                                 
      Streator, IL 61364      CITY STATE ZIP:                              
      Telephone: 815-672-3116 Telephone:                                        
                                    Email:                                                
 
      Either Party may change the addressee and/or location for the giving of
notice to it by providing a thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the other
Party.
      Notice shall be effective upon actual receipt or refusal as shown on the
receipt obtained pursuant to the foregoing.
(Ord. 072224C, 7-23-2024)
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Nuisances Declared Unlawful
8-1-2: Penalty
8-1-3: Nuisances Defined, Generally
8-1-4: General Enforcement
8-1-5: Enumeration Not Exclusive
8-1-6: Duty of City Officers to Investigate; Power of Entry
8-1-7: Notice to Proper Officials
8-1-8: Foul Odors, Filth
8-1-9: Rubbish, Dry Grass
8-1-10: Petroleum Products, Explosives
8-1-11: Unsafe Buildings
8-1-12: Abandoned Refrigerators
8-1-13: Dust, Cinders
8-1-14: Scaffolding, Ladders
8-1-15: Notice to Abate Nuisance
8-1-16: Duty to Abate; Time Limits
8-1-17: Failure to Abate; Separate and Recurring Offense; Penalty
8-1-18: Abatement by City
8-1-19: Summary Abatement by City; Emergency; Public Property
8-1-20: Costs of Abatement; Debt of Owner
8-1-1: NUISANCES DECLARED UNLAWFUL 1 :
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any person to wilfully
or negligently create, erect, maintain or permit a nuisance to exist anywhere
within the City. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2, power of City to define, prevent and abate
  nuisances.
8-1-2: PENALTY:
Whenever in this Chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or a nuisance, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, when no specific penalty is
provided therefor, any person violating such provision shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (1994 Code)
8-1-3: NUISANCES DEFINED, GENERALLY:
Any thing, act, omission, occupation or condition which shall exist or continue
for such a length of time as to:
   A.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the health, safety, peace or
welfare of the public; or
   B.   In any way render the public insecure in life or property; or
   C.   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
   D.   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, sidewalk, alley, navigable body or other
public way or place;
is hereby declared a nuisance. (1994 Code)
8-1-4: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT:
Any nuisance declared by statute, this Chapter or other provisions of this Code
or ordinances of the City shall be enforceable under the provisions of this
Chapter as if enumerated specifically herein. (1994 Code)
8-1-5: ENUMERATION NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Nuisances enumerated in this Chapter shall not be deemed exclusive, but are in
addition to and shall be construed in conjunction with any other nuisances
enumerated in statutes or other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the
City. (1994 Code)
8-1-6: DUTY OF CITY OFFICERS TO INVESTIGATE; POWER OF ENTRY:
   A.   For the purpose of discovering nuisances, it shall be the duty of the
police, fire, health and building officers and inspectors to investigate,
confirm and report any nuisances coming to their attention.
   B.   In order to investigate, confirm and report nuisances, said officers
and inspectors shall, upon proper identification, be permitted at any
reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner, to visit and enter into or upon any
premises or property within the City to make an examination thereof, if they
shall have reasonable grounds to believe that a nuisance exists. (1994 Code)
8-1-7: NOTICE TO PROPER OFFICIALS:
Whenever any nuisance shall be reported to or investigated and determined by
the police, fire, health or building officers or inspectors, notice shall be
given to the owner or person in control of the property or premises involved,
and to the appropriate City officials whose functions include the abatement of
such nuisances. (1994 Code)
8-1-8: FOUL ODORS, FILTH 1 :
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the health, safety,
welfare, peace and comfort of the City and its residents for any person:
   A.   Businesses: To conduct any business or to use any premises so as to
create an offensive or foul odor which taints the air and renders it nauseous
to persons in the vicinity.
   B.   Animals 2 : To keep or maintain any animals in an unclean or filthy
manner or surroundings, or to keep or maintain any animals from which emit any
particularly foul or offensive odors.
   C.   Animal Carcasses, Offal: To cause or permit to be collected or to
remain upon any premises or place any animal carcass or any offal, filth,
excretion or other noisome or noxious animal matter of any kind which is, or is
likely to become, putrid, foul or offensive.
   D.   Vegetable Matter: To cause or permit to be collected or to remain upon
any premises or place any slop or other vegetable matter of any kind which is
or is likely to become putrid, foul or offensive.
   E.   Cellars, Vaults, Privies: To cause or permit any cellar, vault,
cistern, drain, privy, yard or other premises whatsoever to become, from any
cause, foul or offensive or injurious to the public health.
   F.   Stagnant Water: To permit to be collected or to stand upon any premises
any foul or stagnant water of any kind.
   G.   Pigsties: To locate or maintain, or permit to exist or remain anywhere
within the City any pigsty.
   H.   Foul or Noxious Substances: To use, deposit or keep any property,
substance or thing emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous
or noxious odor, effluvia or stench particularly repulsive to the physical
senses and which annoys, discomforts or endangers the welfare, health or safety
of any person. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2, power of City to define, prevent and abate
  nuisances.
2 2. See Title 5, Chapter 2 of this Code for animal regulations.
8-1-9: RUBBISH, DRY GRASS:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and health and a nuisance
for any person to cause or permit:
   A.   Rubbish, Rags: The deposit or accumulation of any refuse, oily rags,
rubbish or other materials or substances of any kind, so as to constitute a
fire hazard.
   B.   Dry Grass, Vegetation: The deposit, accumulation, existence or growth
upon any property of any dry or dead weeds, grass, vegetation or other like
substances of any kind, so as to constitute a fire hazard. (1994 Code)
8-1-10: PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, EXPLOSIVES:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to cause or permit:
   A.   Petroleum Products: The accumulation or storage, within one hundred
(100) yards of any building occupied as a residence or business, other than a
licensed gasoline service station, of any petroleum, naphtha, benzine, coal
oil, gasoline, kerosene, turpentine or other petroleum products or inflammable
substances of any kind, in quantities greater than fifty (50) gallons.
   B.   Explosives: The deposit, accumulation, storage or presence, within one
hundred (100) yards of any building occupied as a residence or business, of any
powder magazine, nitroglycerine, dynamite or other explosive substance of any
kind. (1994 Code)
8-1-11: UNSAFE BUILDINGS 1 :
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to cause or permit the existence of any unsafe, dilapidated or otherwise
insecure building, wall, stack, chimney, cornice, sign, awning or other like
structure of any kind which, from manner of construction, age, condition or
other circumstances, is or may become a menace to the safety of persons or
property. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1, power of City to define and demolish unsafe
  buildings.
8-1-12: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS 1 :
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to permit the existence or storage in any place accessible to children
of any abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, ice chest, deep freeze or
other airtight appliance or container of any kind, of a capacity of one and
one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, from which the lids, doors or other covers
have not been removed, or which cannot be easily opened by a child, by means of
pushing only, from the inside thereof. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. 720 ILCS 505/1.
8-1-13: DUST, CINDERS 1 :
   A.   It is hereby declared a menace to the public health and a nuisance for
any person to cause or permit any operations that allow any dirt, sand, gravel,
cinders, ashes, earth or other similar materials to be hauled, moved, rolled,
compacted, scraped, dragged or otherwise disturbed, so as to cause or permit
dust to be raised, blown or stirred through the operation of machinery or
otherwise, to the detriment of any person or property.
   B.   Every person engaged in the hauling of any sand, dirt, cinders, ashes,
earth or other similar materials or substances, or engaged in the moving,
rolling, compacting, scraping, dragging or other disturbance of soil, and the
like, shall make adequate provision as often as is required to arrest and
prevent such dust through the use of salts, oil, chemicals and other materials
used and recommended for retarding or eliminating such dust, subject to the
supervision and approval of the Superintendent of Water and Streets. (1994
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 3 of this Title.
8-1-14: SCAFFOLDING, LADDERS:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person:
   A.   To erect or use, or to cause or permit to be erected or used, any
insecure or unsafe scaffold or ladder whereby the safety of persons working
thereon or passing thereunder may in any way be endangered.
   B.   To place or leave, or to cause or permit to be placed or left, any
tools or articles on any such scaffold or ladder in such manner that the same
may fall into any street, sidewalk or other public way, whereby the safety of
persons passing thereunder may in any way be endangered. (1994 Code)
8-1-15: NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE 1 :
   A.   Whenever any health or building official or inspector, or any police or
fire officer determines that a nuisance exists on any private property or
premises, the proper City official shall cause a written notice to be served
personally upon the owner or person in control of the property or premises who
is causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance, which notice shall give
the person served five (5) days from the date of service of the notice to abate
the nuisance. Such notice shall be by means of personal service of a copy of
the complaint or by certified or registered mail of a copy of the complaint.
Personal service shall be by any authorized inspector from the Department of
Inspections or by any police officer of the Police Department or any person
authorized by law to make personal service.
   B.   Such notice shall fairly apprise such person of the nature of the
nuisance, his duty to abate or remove the nuisance within the time provided
therein, the penalty for failure to abate the same, and shall state that, if
said nuisance is abated by the City, liability for necessary expenses to be
incurred shall accrue as provided for in Section
8-1-17 of this Chapter. (1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2, power of City to define, prevent and abate
  nuisances.
8-1-16: DUTY TO ABATE; TIME LIMITS:
It is hereby declared the duty of any person determined to have created,
caused, erected, maintained or permitted a nuisance to exist within the City to
discontinue and abate such nuisance within five (5) days, or such other time
period as may be specified in the notice, from the time he receives written
notice thereof. (1994 Code)
8-1-17: FAILURE TO ABATE; SEPARATE AND RECURRING OFFENSE; PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any person to
neglect, refuse or otherwise fail to remove or abate any nuisance after
expiration of the five (5) days or other specified time period provided by
notice thereof; and each twenty four (24) hours, or fraction thereof, during
which such nuisance continues or exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
   B.   Any person who shall cause, permit or allow a nuisance to continue or
exist as provided for in subsection A above shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (1994 Code)
8-1-18: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Whenever any nuisance is not abated by the owner, lessee or person in control
of the premises or property affected within the time provided by notice, the
proper City officer shall cause the abatement or removal of such nuisance.
(1994 Code)
8-1-19: SUMMARY ABATEMENT BY CITY; EMERGENCY; PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Whenever any nuisance (a) constitutes or is deemed to be an imminent or
immediate danger to the public health or safety, or (b) exists on public
property, the proper City officer shall cause such nuisance to be summarily and
immediately abated and removed, regardless of any five (5) day or other time
period specified by notice to the person responsible therefor; provided,
however, that in situation (a) above, such officer shall have first applied for
and obtained the written permission of the Mayor for such summary abatement.
(1994 Code)
8-1-20: COSTS OF ABATEMENT; DEBT OF OWNER:
   A.   Any costs or expenses of abatement reasonably incurred by the City
pursuant to the provisions of Sections
8-1-18 and
8-1-19 of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City by the owner, lessee
or person in control of premises upon which such nuisance existed; provided,
that where specifically provided in this Code or by statute 1 , such costs and
expenses shall become a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all
other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to enforce by civil action
any and all such debts or liens as provided in subsection A of this Section.
(1994 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, 5/11-20-8, 5/11-20-12 and 5/11-31-1.
CHAPTER 2
WEEDS, GRASS PLANTS AND BUSHES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Weeds
8-2-2: Tall Grass
8-2-3: European Barberry
8-2-4: Notice Not Required
8-2-5: Abatement By City; Cost Responsibility
8-2-6: Lien Upon Premises
8-2-6-1:    Procedure
8-2-6-2:    Failure To Record Or To Mail Notice Not To Affect
8-2-6-3:    Sale For Nonpayment; Disposition Of Proceeds
8-2-7: Lien Against Property; Legal Proceedings Authorized For Collection
8-2-8: Penalty
8-2-9: Notice To Appear
8-2-1: WEEDS:
No weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy or
other poisonous vine or plant, noxious weeds shall be permitted to grow on any
property in the city, and they may be destroyed by the city at the expense of
the owners and/or tenants of any property in the city where they are found to
be growing. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-2: TALL GRASS:
It is unlawful for any owner and/or tenants of any property to permit any grass
exceeding six inches (6") in height to grow. Tall grass found growing in excess
of six inches (6") on any property within the city shall be mowed by the city
at the expense of the owners and/or tenants of the property. This includes
parkway adjacent to any private property within the city. The "parkway" is
defined to be the area between the property owner's real estate and the street
or alley surfaced by the city and shall be maintained by the said property
owner. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-3: EUROPEAN BARBERRY:
It is unlawful for any owner and/or tenant of any property to plant or permit
to grow within the city the bush of the species of tall, common European
barberry (further known as Berberis vulgaris), or its horticultural varieties.
European barberry may be destroyed by the city at the expense of the owners
and/or tenants of any property in the city where it is found to be growing.
(Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-4: NOTICE NOT REQUIRED:
   A.   Individual notice to abate weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed,
thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy, or other poisonous vine or plant, noxious weed
and/or grass exceeding six inches (6") in height and European barberry is not
required.
   B.   Yearly, in the spring, the city of Wenona will publish a notice in a
local newspaper that it is a violation of this code to allow weeds such as
jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy, or other poisonous
vine or plants, noxious weeds or grass exceeding six inches (6") in height and
European barberry to grow within the corporate boundaries of the city of
Wenona. The notice will advise property owners and/or tenants that a lien
covering mowing, cleanup and administrative costs will be placed on the
property or premises and that the estimated minimum cost will be in the amount
of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-5: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COST RESPONSIBILITY:
The city will keep an account of the expenses for the abatement of a violation
of this chapter; such expense shall be charged to and paid by such owner and/or
tenant of the property. The city administrator will prepare a statement of the
city expenses incurred to abate a violation of this chapter and submit it to
the property owner for payment to the city. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-6: LIEN UPON PREMISES:
8-2-6-1: PROCEDURE:
Charges for the abatement of a violation of this chapter shall be a lien upon
the property. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for sixty (60)
days after it has been rendered, the city clerk shall file with the recorder of
deeds of Marshall County a statement of lien claim. This statement of lien
shall contain a legal description of the property, the expenses and cost
incurred, the date the grass or weeds were mowed and/or European barberry
destroyed and brush, plants, weeds and bushes removed, and notice that the city
of Wenona claims a lien for this amount. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-6-2: FAILURE TO RECORD OR TO MAIL NOTICE NOT TO AFFECT:
Failure of the city clerk to record a lien claim or to mail notice of same, or
failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for such charges, as provided in section
8-2-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-6-3: SALE FOR NONPAYMENT; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid grass and weed mowing or cutting and
removal of certain plants, bushes, and brush charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the
charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory
liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the city of Wenona.
(Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-7: LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY; LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AUTHORIZED FOR COLLECTION:
The city attorney is authorized and directed to institute proceedings, in the
name of the city of Wenona in any court having jurisdiction against any
property for which the bill has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has
been rendered. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-8: PENALTY:
Any owner and/or tenant of any property within the corporate boundaries of the
city of Wenona who violates this chapter shall be fined two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for the first offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
second offense and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third and
subsequent offenses.
The chief of police or his designee will issue a city ordinance citation to the
defendant for a violation of this chapter. The chief of police or his designee
will serve the ordinance violation to the defendant either by posting it on the
property on which the alleged violation exists in a conspicuous place at the
entrance door or avenue of the access to the property, by mailing a copy of the
citation to the defendant by certified mail, by delivering a copy of the
citation to the defendant in person, or by leaving it in the possession of any
person in charge of the property at that time. (Ord. 050508, 5-5-2008)
8-2-9: NOTICE TO APPEAR:
A defendant who has been issued a city ordinance citation of this chapter, that
has failed or refused to pay the fine to the city of Wenona for the cited
violation, or has pleaded not guilty to the violation, shall be issued a notice
to appear by the chief of police, arresting officer or prosecuting attorney,
advising them of a date, time and location to appear in court. (Ord. 050508, 5-
5-2008)
CHAPTER 3
AIR POLLUTION
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Emission of Dense Smoke
8-3-3: Open Burning
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this Chapter have the following meanings:
AIR POLLUTION: The discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts,
openings, buildings, structures, premises, open fires, portable boilers,
vehicles, processes or any other source of any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust,
cinders, dirt, noxious or obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors,
toxic or radioactive substances, waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous
matter, or other materials injurious to human, plant or animal life or
property.
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE: Any combustible waste material containing carbon in free or
combined state other than liquids or gases.
DENSE SMOKE: For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart is hereby adopted, and shall be used, as a standard for
such grading. Smoke is hereby declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree of
density of number two (2), or greater, of Ringelmann Smoke Chart for more than
six (6) minutes in an hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not.
OPEN FIRE or BURNING: Any fire from which the products of combustion are
admitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart used in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke, published and described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular
6888, on which are illustrated the graduated shades of gray to black.
SMOKE: Small gas-borne particles, consisting, predominantly of carbon and other
combustible material, resulting from incomplete combustion and present in
sufficient quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other
solids.
STACK or CHIMNEY: A vertical conduit, duct, vent or flue attached to a
permanent structure. (1994 Code)
8-3-2: EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke or
fumes from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the
City which causes annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
The owner, proprietor, lessee or occupant of any building, or the person in
charge of the furnace therein, who causes, permits or allows dense smoke or
fumes to issue or be emitted from the smokestack of any stationary furnace, or
the chimney or smokestack of any building in the City contrary to the
provisions of this Code, is guilty of creating a nuisance. (1994 Code)
8-3-3: OPEN BURNING:
The open burning of leaves, brush, trimmings from trees or bushes, paper,
garbage, refuse, waste or other combustible material on any property, public or
private, from any source whatsoever, within the City is unlawful and is hereby
prohibited, with the exception of:
   A.   Fires set and supervised or authorized by a representative of the City,
or a department thereof, for the disposal of diseased trees, public safety or
recreation purposes; said fires not being allowed on blacktop or oil-base
streets.
   B.   Fires in outdoor fireplaces or burners when cooking food.
   C.   Fires set in the fall during daylight hours for burning twigs and
leaves only. (1994 Code)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND CURBSIDE RECYCLING
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Program Coverage
8-4-3: Program Fee Structure
8-4-4: Program Fee Collection And Late Payment Penalties
8-4-5: Prohibition Of Accumulation
8-4-6: Illegal Deposits
8-4-7: Offensive Substances
8-4-8: Collection Services
8-4-9: Residential Container Responsibilities
8-4-10: Solid Waste Containers
8-4-11: Recycling Containers
8-4-12: Source Separation Of Recyclables
8-4-13: Landscape Waste
8-4-14: Commingling Of Waste
8-4-15: Bulky Items And White Goods
8-4-16: Unlawful Removal Of Recyclable, Material
8-4-17: Penalty
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL UNIT: Any building wherein commerce or business is conducted, both
for profit and not for profit, including, but not limited to, stores, markets,
offices, restaurants, theaters, schools, churches, government offices, and
manufacturing facilities.
CONTRACTED HAULER: That person or company that has been contracted by the city
of Wenona to provide collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables.
GARBAGE: Waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking,
and consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, processing, storage, and
sale of produce.
HAULER: Any person or company that engages in the business of collecting or
hauling solid waste, recyclables or other refuse on a continuous and regular
basis.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree
limbs and other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES: Includes services provided by the city of Wenona to promote
public health, safety, morals, comfort and general public welfare for the
benefit of all residents within the corporate boundaries of the city, and shall
include the public water supply system, public sewer collection system, and
public solid waste and recycling disposal system.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Garbage, general household, institutional and commercial
waste, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and construction and demolition
debris.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person or persons whose name is on the owner of record
document recorded with the recorder of deeds for the applicable county. A
contract for deed is not recognized as a bona fide proprietary document, and
any person or persons named thereon shall not be considered to be the property
owner of record.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials that are separated from solid waste for the
purpose of recycling, including, but not limited to, aluminum and tin cans,
plastic and glass containers, newspapers, corrugated cardboard, high grade
printing and writing papers, and magazines.
RECYCLING: The process by which materials that would otherwise be disposed of
or discarded are collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: A container made of rigid plastic construction for the
purpose of holding recyclable materials for collection.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: Any building or structure, designed or intended to provide
support, enclosure, shelter, protection from exterior elements, housing, or
habitable living quarters for human occupancy. When any building or structure
is divided into separate units by unpierced walls extending from floor to
ceiling, or is divided by sealed accesses between units, then each unit within
the building or structure is deemed to be a separate residential unit.
SOLID WASTE: All waste which normally results from the operation of a household
or business.
SOURCE SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable material from other
waste prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. (Ord.
111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-2: PROGRAM COVERAGE:
All residential units within the city of Wenona included in the city solid
waste and recycling services program as described herein. Commercial units are
exempt from this chapter, but they may directly benefit from approved services
and rates resulting from this program. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-3: PROGRAM FEE STRUCTURE:
The service charge for this program shall be determined from time to time by a
hauler contract approved and entered into by the mayor and city council. A city
surcharge of not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the residential unit per
month hauler fee agreed to in the hauler contract shall be added to the
residential unit monthly fee to cover the costs of the solid waste and
recycling services program, which include, but are not limited to, the costs of
administration, education, and special events. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-4: PROGRAM FEE COLLECTION AND LATE PAYMENT PENALTIES:
A monthly bill for the city residential solid waste program shall be included
on each residential unit water bill. Municipal services may be discontinued for
failure to pay as required.
In the event the charges for the water, sewer and/or solid waste programs are
not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for such service,
such charges shall be deemed delinquent. Penalties for delinquency shall be
handled in the same manner as delinquent water and sewer bills have been
handled prior to the adoption hereof. This is to include a ten percent (10%)
penalty if not paid by the twentieth of the following month, and water shutoff
can result once a bill is thirty (30) days overdue. Water shutoff is possible
twenty (20) days after a written notice of discontinuation of service has been
sent by United States mail to the delinquent party.
When service is discontinued for nonpayment, it shall not be resumed until all
delinquent charges are paid in full and an additional payment of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) is received for reinstatement, plus attorney fees, and
preparation and recording costs for any lien which may have been filed. (Ord.
111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-5: PROHIBITION OF ACCUMULATION:
The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the city shall remove from
said premises or otherwise dispose of all garbage, dead rodents, animals or
fowl, ashes, tin cans, metal ware, broken glass, crockery, stoneware, manure
and all other refuse and rubbish of every description whatsoever, and shall
keep said premises at all times free and clear of any accumulation of garbage,
dead rodents, animals or fowl, ashes, tin cans, metal ware, broken glass,
crockery, stoneware, manure and all other refuse and rubbish of every
description whatsoever. Dumping of rubbish on vacant public and private
property or streets, alleys or other public places and properties is
prohibited. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-6: ILLEGAL DEPOSITS:
It shall be illegal for any person or business to cast, place, sweep or deposit
within the limits of the city any garbage or other waste matter in such a
manner that it may be carried or deposited by the action of the sun, wind, rain
or snow into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other
public place, or into any occupied or unoccupied premises within the limits of
the city. If after notice is given to a property owner that the above described
conditions exist, and it is not cleaned up within a reasonable amount of time,
the city may make arrangements to have the premises cleaned up at the expense
of the property owner.
It shall also be illegal for any person to dump or place any municipal solid
waste, landscape waste, recyclable material, noxious material or materials
subject to governmental regulation on any private or public premises in the
city without the consent of the property owner of such premises. (Ord. 111696,
11-16-1996)
8-4-7: OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES:
No pile or deposit of manure, garbage, miscellaneous waste, or refuse of any
kind whatsoever, nor accumulation of any offensive or nauseous substances or
materials subject to governmental regulation, shall be made within the limits
of the city, nor shall any person or business unload discharge or put upon the
right of way of any railroad, street, alley or other public and private
property within the limits of the city, any manure, garbage, miscellaneous
waste, refuse or offensive or nauseous substance, nor shall any vehicles loaded
with or having upon them any such substance or substances, be allowed to remain
or stand or park on or along any railroad, street, alley or other public and
private property within the limits of the city. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-8: COLLECTION SERVICES:
The collection of solid waste and recyclable materials shall be made from any
residential unit on the same day, once a week. The day of the week that will be
set for collection will be determined by mutual agreement of the city and the
contracted hauler. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-9: RESIDENTIAL CONTAINER RESPONSIBILITIES:
All solid waste and recycling containers shall not be placed at the curbside
any earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the evening before the day assigned
for pick up. Any emptied containers must be removed from the curbside by twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight of the day of service. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-10: SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS:
All solid waste for collection by the contracted hauler shall be contained in
plastic bags, or galvanized or plastic containers which have close fitting
covers, grips on each side suitable for lifting the container, and are
watertight. Any trash container shall not exceed thirty three (33) gallon
capacity and forty (40) pounds in weight when full, and will be kept in a
sanitary condition. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-11: RECYCLING CONTAINERS:
Recycling containers shall be provided to each residential unit which wishes to
participate in the recycling program. The container shall be deemed owned by
the city and shall remain city property at all times. Any container that is
damaged or missing shall be replaced at the cost and expense of the resident(s)
of the residential unit, unless the damage was the fault of the contracted
hauler, in which case the contracted hauler will be responsible for its
replacement. A replacement charge shall be assessed for any container not
returned to city hall when service is discontinued for any reason.
Residents may recycle more materials than can be held in the provided recycling
container by using a garbage can with a lid painted red or which has the word
"RECYCLE" clearly printed on it. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-12: SOURCE SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES:
All materials to be recycled shall be separated from the solid waste by the
person(s) in possession of the premises from which the materials are collected.
These source separated recyclables shall be placed in recycling containers at
the curbside for pick up by the city's contracted hauler. All recyclable
materials shall be prepared for pick up according to instructions provided by
the city and/or hauler. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-13: LANDSCAPE WASTE:
The contracted hauler is not required to collect any solid waste or recyclables
placed on the curbside for collection if it is contaminated with landscape
waste. Residents may contract with any qualified hauler to provide this service
for them. It is unlawful in the state of Illinois to place landscape wastes in
a landfill. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-14: COMMINGLING OF WASTE:
No landscape waste, as defined by public act 85-1429 as now in effect or as may
be amended from time to time, or solid waste (other than recyclable material)
shall be placed in any recycling container. No landscape waste shall be placed
in any garbage collection container. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-15: BULKY ITEMS AND WHITE GOODS:
Bulky items and white goods are not included in the weekly pick up of
residential solid waste and recyclables. Residents may contract with any
qualified hauler to provide this service for them. It is unlawful in the state
of Illinois to place white goods in a landfill. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-16: UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLE, MATERIAL:
It is hereby deemed unlawful for any person, firm or corporation except the
city's contracted hauler to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable
material placed for collection as part of the curbside recycling program as
herein defined. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
8-4-17: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 111696, 11-16-1996)
CHAPTER 5
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Use of Public Sewers Required
8-5-3: Private Sewage Disposal
8-5-4: Building Sewers and Connections
8-5-5: Use Restrictions
8-5-6: Rates and Charges
8-5-6-1: Wastewater Service Charges
8-5-6-2: Measurement of Flow
8-5-6-3: Review and Revision of Charges; Notice
8-5-6-4: Bills for Service; Delinquencies
8-5-6-5: Disposition of Revenues
8-5-6-6: Books and Records; Audit
8-5-6-7: Effective Date of Rates and Charges
8-5-6-8: Appeals
8-5-6-9: Penalty
8-5-7: Protection of Sewage Works from Damage
8-5-8: Powers and Authority of Inspectors
8-5-9: Violations and Penalties
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms
used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
   Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   Federal Act: The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466 et seq.) as amended,
(Pub. L. 95-217).
   Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
   Approving Authority: The Superintendent of the wastewater collection and
treatment system.
   Chapter: This Chapter.
   City: The City of Wenona.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the
Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the Federal Act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sanitary (or
combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with City funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Storm Water Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
   Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
   Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of outstanding loan, bond, etc.
   Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs, other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
   Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Surcharge: The assessment, in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge, which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in this Chapter.
   Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in this Chapter and shall consist of the total or the basic user
charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
   Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
   Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
   Industrial Users: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
   Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions and users associated with Federal, State and local governments.
   Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments and permanent multi-family dwellings.
   User Class: The type of user, "residential, institutional/ governmental,
commercial" or "industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
   BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20o) Celsius, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   Effluent Criteria: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
   Industrial Waste: Solid, liquid or gaseous substances discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that: a) Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more
per average workday; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the
flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or d) is found by the permit issuing
authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly
owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment
works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
   Milligrams per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in one thousand (1,000) ml of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used, commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20
pounds of suspended solids.
   Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
   Sewage: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   Water Quality Standards: Are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTION:
   Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   The owner of all the houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the
City is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so;
provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of property
line. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Private System Permitted: Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer
is not available under the provisions of subsection
8-5-2D of this Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
   B.   Permit Requirements: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the City. A permit and inspection fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the City at the time the
application is filed.
   C.   Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
City when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty eight (48)
hours of the receipt of written notice by the Superintendent.
   D.   Construction Specifications: The type, capacities, location and layout
of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of
the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with
the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be
issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than ten thousand feet
(10,000'). No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
   E.   Connection to Public Sewer:
      1.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection
8-5-2D of this Chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
      2.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or
dirt.
   F.   Responsibility of Owner: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.
   G.   Provisions Nonlimiting: No statement contained in this Section shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the Marshall County Health Officer. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent.
      2.   Classification of Permits; Fees: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits:
         a.   For residential wastewater service, and
         b.   For commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial
wastewater service.
   Residential:
   The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the
City. This permit shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the City at the time application is
filed.
   Industrial:
   The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the
City. This permit shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. Fee
will depend on location, flow rates and size of sewer connection.
      3.   Restrictions on Issuance of Permit: A building sewer permit will
only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Sewer Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building, and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   C.   Use of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
   D.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes 1  or other applicable rules and regulations of the
City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
"American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois" shall apply.
      2.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with subsection G1 of this Section and discharged to
the building sewer.
   E.   Connections to Public Sewers:
      1.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
superintendent or his representative.
      2.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the "American Society Of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent
before installation.
   F.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   G.   Discharges Into System:
      1.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
      2.   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   H.   Liability Of Owner: All costs and expense incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord., 10-
1-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  3-9-1 of this Code.
8-5-5: USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Discharge Of Effluent:
      1.   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. (Ord., 10-
1-1990)
      3.   Any new construction tributary to a combined sewer shall be designed
to minimize and/or delay inflow contribution to the sewer. Said design shall be
subject to the approval of the city council and its designee.
      4.   Any new building domestic waste connection shall be distinct from
any inflow connection to facilitate disconnection if a storm sewer becomes
available.
      5.   Any inflow sources connected to a combined sewer shall be connected
to a storm sewer within twelve (12) months from the time that the city notifies
the owner that a storm sewer is available. (Ord. 090407, 9-4-2007)
   B.   Prohibited Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or other gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   C.   Materials Under Special Review:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the superintendent, that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees (150o) Fahrenheit (65oC).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees (32o -150o) Fahrenheit
(0oC -65oC).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Superintendent for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City Council as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the City Council in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
         h.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
         i.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as
Hg at any time except as permitted by the City Council in compliance with
applicable State and Federal regulations.
         j.   Any cyanide in excess of ten (10) mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the City Council in compliance with applicable State and Federal
regulations.
         k.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of waste
constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
         l.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      2.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated herein and/or which are in violation of the
standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 25, 1978, and any
amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the City Council, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the City Council may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection G of this Section. If the City Council permits the pretreatment
or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws.
   D.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   E.   Preliminary Treatment: Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   F.   Measurements, Tests and Analyses:
      1.   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and,
when required by the City Council, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City Council. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his own expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
      2.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the City Council or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the City Council, but no less than once per
year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that the Federal, State and local standards are
being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the City at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the
City. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and
reporting required by the City. At such times as deemed necessary, the City
reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside
laboratory service.
      3.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
where pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
   G.   Special Agreements: No statement contained in this Section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City
and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, in accordance with Section
8-5-6 of this Chapter, by the industrial concern; provided such payments are in
accordance with Federal and State guidelines for user charge system. (Ord., 10-
1-90)
8-5-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
8-5-6-1: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The sewer rents or rates shall be established by the City Council as needed on
or about the first Monday in November of each year. (1994 Code)
8-5-6-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall
be metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one hundred
(100) gallons.
   A.   If the person discharging wastes in the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the Superintendent for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained
from these other sources.
   B.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the Superintendent if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from metered
water consumption records.
   C.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the Superintendent. (Ord. 0-49-90, 8-20-90)
8-5-6-3: REVIEW AND REVISION OF CHARGES; NOTICE:
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less often
than annually, by certified public accountants for the City in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs or O, M & R costs.
The users of the wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater operation, maintenance and
replacement. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-6-4: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendering Bills: Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Water
Collector on or about the first day of the month or quarter succeeding the
period for which the service is billed.
   B.   Payment of Bills; Liability for Service: The rates or charges for
services shall be payable monthly or quarterly depending on the classifications
of service for which bills are rendered. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to
the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the City.
   C.   Delinquencies:
      1.   Late Fee: All sewer bills are due and payable fifteen (15) days
after being sent out. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all
bills not paid by the sixteenth day after they have been rendered.
      2.   Discontinuance of Service: If the charges for such services are not
paid within forty five (45) days after the rendition of the bill for such
services, such services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall
not be reinstated until all claims are settled.
      3.   Liens; Notice and Foreclosure:
         a.   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for ninety (90)
days for monthly or quarterly after it has been rendered, the City Treasurer
shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the City claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the City
Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises, if his address be known, to the Treasurer whenever such bill remains
unpaid for the period of forty five (45) days for a monthly bill or one hundred
five (105) days for a quarterly bill after it has been rendered.
         The failure of the City Treasurer to record such lien or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the
right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned herein.
         b.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid forty five
(45) days in the case of a monthly bill or one hundred five days in the case of
a quarterly bill after it has been rendered. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-6-5: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall
be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. The City Treasurer
shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds
and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be
delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as
the "Sewerage Fund of the City". The Treasurer shall administer such Fund in
every respect in the manner provided by statute of the "Revised Cities and
Villages Act", chapter 24, effective January 1942 1 .
All such revenues and monies shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and
apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
City, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered
to the City Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or
at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
Mayor and Council. (Ord., 10-1-90)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. ch. 24 has been revised and sections can be found at 65 ILCS 5/1-1-
  1 et seq.
8-5-6-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS; AUDIT:
   A.   Accounts Kept; Annual Audit: The City Treasurer shall establish a
proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative
to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
   In addition to the customary operating systems, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.
In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged.
   B.   Access to Records: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the City which are applicable to the City system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to insure compliance with the terms of special and general conditions to any
State grant. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-6-7: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates and service charges established for user charges in this Section
8-5-6 shall be effective as of January 1, 1991. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-6-8: APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this Section
8-5-6 shall be made available for a user within ten (10) days of receipt of a
written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the
computations thereof shall be remedied by the City Attorney within ten (10)
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-6-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Section
8-5-6 shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-7: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City, the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The
Superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment.
   B.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this Section, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify
the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain conditions as required in subsection
8-5-5F of this Chapter.
   C.   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City,
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord., 10-1-90)
8-5-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice of Violation; Permit Revocations: Any person found to be
violating any provision of this Chapter, except Section
8-5-7 shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations. The City may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection A above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Liability of Violator: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall become liable to the City by reasons of such violation.
(Ord., 10-1-90)
CHAPTER 6
GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Minimum And Maximum Setback Zones
8-6-1: MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONES:
   A.   Purpose: Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-125-4 (2010); 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14.2 and 5/14.3
(2010); and in the interest of securing the public health, safety, and welfare;
to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order to
assure a safe and adequate water supply for present and future generations; and
to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those aquifers having a
potential for future use as a public water supply, the provisions of this
section shall apply to all properties located within the minimum setback zone
established under section 14.2 of the environmental protection act 1  ("act")
and this section, and the maximum setback zone established under section 14.3
of the act 2  and this section.
   B.   Definitions: Except as stated in this section, and unless a different
meaning of a word or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or
terms in this section shall be the same as those used in the act and the
Illinois groundwater protection act 3 :
    ACT: The environmental protection act 4
.
   AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
   BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
   MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well
established under section 14.3 of the act and this section, and described in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well
established under section 14.2 of the act and this section, and described in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   C.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection D or E of this section, no person
shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or
new potential route within the minimum setback zone.
      2.   Except as provided otherwise in subsection D of this section, no
person shall place a new potential primary source within the maximum setback
zone.
   D.   Waivers, Exceptions, And Certifications Of Minimal Hazard:
      1.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(b) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is granted a waiver by the agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a
waiver to the same extent from subsection C1 of this section.
      2.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by
the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), is granted
an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to
the same extent from subsection C2 of this section.
      4.   If, pursuant to section 14.5 of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the agency, such owner shall
not be subject to subsection C1 of this section to the same extent that such
owner is not subject to section 14.2(d) of the act.
   E.   Exclusion: Subsection C1 of this section shall not apply to new common
sources of sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to section 17 of the act
and the regulations adopted thereunder by the agency; however, no such common
sources may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a community
water supply well specified by such regulations. (Ord. 110711A, 11-7-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/14.2 (2010).
2 2. 415 ILCS 5/14.3 (2010).
3 3. 415 ILCS 55/1 (2010).
4 4. 415 ILCS 5/1 (2010).
TITLE 9
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: Base Flood Elevation
9-1-4: Duties Of The Building Inspector
9-1-5: Development Permit
9-1-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
9-1-7: Protecting Buildings
9-1-8: Subdivision Requirements
9-1-9: Public Health And Other Standards
9-1-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
9-1-11: Variances
9-1-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-1-13: Penalty
9-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
9-1-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   A.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   B.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   D.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   E.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   F.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Wenona, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Wenona, or that may be annexed
into the city, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the city are generally identified as such on panel number(s) as
17123C024 and 0250 of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Marshall
County dated November 4, 2010; and for those portions in LaSalle County, the
community based floodplain map panel 1704260001 dated December 2, 1998,
prepared by the federal emergency management agency. Floodplain also includes
those areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Marshall and LaSalle Counties
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be
annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance
rate map prepared for Marshall and LaSalle Counties by the federal emergency
management agency and dated November 4, 2010 and September 7, 2001,
respectively.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Sandy Creek Tributary shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resources/office
of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres
or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from
the department. (Ill. adm. code title 17, part 3700.30.) The department may
grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide
permit which meets the standards defined in section
9-1-6 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
9-1-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss" buildings. (See definition of Repetitive Loss.)
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   A.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   B.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Sandy Creek Tributary
shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood
insurance study of Marshall County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and November 4, 2010.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone"
or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Marshall County and the community based map of the
city of Wenona.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of
Marshall County and the community based map for the city of Wenona shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the
applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Marshall and LaSalle Counties that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be annexed into the
city, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Marshall and LaSalle Counties prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated November 4, 2010 and September 7, 2001.
(Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the city of Wenona meet the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, the building inspector shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
9-1-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
9-1-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
9-1-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
9-1-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
9-1-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
9-1-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
9-1-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the building inspector. The building inspector shall
not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   A.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
9-1-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building
inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey elevation to be
below the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be
shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and
which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements
of this chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below
the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
The building inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
The building inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building
inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
9-1-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
9-1-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         e.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four
feet (4') at any point.
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   C.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   D.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   E.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection D of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   F.   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet x 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
9-1-6 and
9-1-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
9-1-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
9-1-6 and
9-1-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
9-1-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-
2010)
9-1-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Wenona shall notify adjacent communities in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the board of appeals for a
variance. The board of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city
council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   A.   Conditions: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   Notification: The board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of the building protections standards of
section
9-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property, and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Historic Structures: Variances to the building protection requirements
of section
9-1-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
9-1-6 and
9-1-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   D.   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and
wet floodproofed:
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
9-1-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
9-1-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
9-1-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
9-1-7B of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
9-1-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Wenona or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
9-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the building inspector may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
building inspector shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Wenona shall make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Wenona shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.
   B.   The building inspector shall inform the owner that any such violation
is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The building inspector is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the board of appeal. Written notice of such hearing shall be
served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Wenona from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 100410, 10-
4-2010)
9-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city council
to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program; provided,
however, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 100410, 10-4-2010)
TITLE 10 GENERAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TEMPORARY STORAGE POD AND SHIPPING CONTAINER REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
SECTION
10-1-1:    Definitions
10-1-2:    Regulations
10-1-3:    Permit Required
10-1-4:    Exemptions
10-1-5:    Non-Conforming Uses
10-1-6:    Penalty
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
SHIPPING CONTAINER: A unit or container which is intended to be used primarily
for shipping goods or materials within an enclosed container on highways, rail
lines, or waterways or consisting of a truck compartment or trailer that is not
on a currently licensed trailer or attached to a currently licensed chassis.
STORAGE POD: A self-contained container used for the temporary storage and/or
moving of small amounts of goods such as a household's contents or office
tenants contents.
(Ord. 051925, 5-19-2025)
10-1-2: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Temporary storage pods and shipping containers shall be utilized only
for the storage, loading, and unloading of household or business items or other
tangible personal property. A temporary storage pod or shipping container shall
not be utilized for the purpose of conducting business, selling merchandise or
property, dwelling, living, habitation, camping, cooking, or recreation. It is
the intent of this Chapter to limit, except as provided herein, the placement
and use of any temporary storage pod or shipping container as an accessory
building or storage building on commercial, industrial, or residentially zoned
land.
   B.   On properties where the primary structure is identified as a single-
family detached structure, townhouse, two-family dwelling structure or three-
family dwelling structure, a temporary storage pod or shipping container may be
placed, maintained, or stored only within the boundaries of the property
owner's lot and subject to the front area regulations applicable to residential
districts.
   C.   On properties where the primary structure is identified as anything
other than a single-family detached structure, townhouse, two-family dwelling
structure or three-family dwelling structure, a temporary storage pod or
shipping container may be placed, maintained, or stored only within the
boundaries of the property owner's lot and in compliance with the front and
side area regulations of the applicable zoning district, and further provided
that the placement, maintenance, or storage of such container does not impede
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, occupy off-street parking spaces
required by this City Code, or interfere with the normal operation of the
permanent use on the property.
   D.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container, or any portion thereof,
shall not be placed, maintained, or stored on or within any roadway, alley,
parkway, other publicly-owned right-of-way, sidewalk, easement for ingress and
egress, access lane or aisle, fire access lane, public utility easement,
location that obstructs traffic visibility, or other location not specifically
identified as acceptable within the provisions of this Chapter. A temporary
storage pod or shipping container shall not be placed, maintained, or stored in
a manner that will or may interfere with City operations including, but not
limited to, snow removal, street cleaning, or capital improvements.
   E.   The temporary storage pod or shipping container user and/or permit
holder shall be responsible for any damage to the public right-of-way. In the
event of damage to the public right-of-way, the City shall estimate, or cause
an estimate to be made, of the cost to repair the damage, and the user and/or
permit holder will be notified of the cost of repair. Failure of the user and/
or pe1mit holder to pay the cost to repair the damage within thirty (30) days
of receipt of the estimate of the cost of repair shall be punishable by a fine
in the amount as determined by Section 10-1-5 of this Chapter.
   F.   Only one (1) temporary storage pod or shipping container may be located
on a residential property at any time. The stacking or placement of any items
on top of or around any temporary storage pod or shipping container in a
residential district is prohibited.
   G.   Only two (2) temporary storage pods or shipping containers may be
located on a commercial property at any time.
   H.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container placed, maintained, or
stored on a residential property shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height and
one hundred thirty (130) square feet in size. A temporary storage pod or
shipping container placed, maintained, or stored on a commercial or industrial
property shall not exceed eight feet, six inches (8'6") in height and three
hundred (320) square feet in size.
   I.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container shall be painted and in
good condition and appearance, with no structural damage, holes in the
container that would allow leaks, visible rust, or other forms of visible
deterioration; capable of being moved intact; free of vermin or other pests;
and free of graffiti or advertising other than the name, address, and telephone
number of the person or entity engaged in the business of renting or otherwise
placing the temporary storage pod or shipping container. A temporary storage
pod or shipping container shall not be placed, maintained, or stored in such a
manner as to create a risk of injury to persons or damage to property.
   J.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container shall not be placed,
maintained, or stored on a residential property for more than fifteen (15)
consecutive days. No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall place,
maintain, or store such a pod or container upon the same property for more than
two (2) such fifteen (15) day periods per calendar year.
   K.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container shall not be placed,
maintained, or stored on a commercial property for more than thirty (30)
consecutive days. No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall place,
maintain, or store such a pod or container upon the same property for more than
four (4) such thirty (30) day periods per calendar year.
   L.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container shall not be used to
store personal or business property of a toxic, flammable, hazardous, or
offensive nature.
   M.   A temporary storage pod or shipping container shall be kept locked and
secured against unauthorized entry when not being loaded or unloaded.
(Ord. 051925, 5-19-2025)
10-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   Any person. firm, corporation, or other entity desiring to use a temporary
storage pod or shipping container in a commercial or residential district shall
apply for and obtain a permit from the City prior to the placement,
maintenance, or storage of said temporary storage pod or shipping container on
any property in the City. An applicant for a permit shall complete an
application on a form to be determined by the City. The permit fee shall be
five dollars ($5.00).
(Ord. 051925, 5-19-2025)
10-1-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   The restrictions and regulations contained in this Chapter shall not apply
to any temporary storage pod or shipping container that is located on property
owned or used by a unit of local, state, or federal government or a railroad.
(Ord. 051925, 5-19-2025)
10-1-5: NON-CONFORMING USES:
   The Storage Pods located at 205 S. Hickory Street and 307 N. Walnut Street
are deemed allowed non-conforming uses and are hereby granted to September 30,
2025 to be painted or sided in a manner to be cornplimentaiy to the respective
residential houses on the same lots. Failure to comply with this requirement on
or before September 30, 2025 will cause these existing Storage Pods to lose
their status as allowed non-conforming uses and shall thereafter be subject to
the provisions of the Chapter, including the penalties set forth in Section
10-1-6.
(Ord. 051925, 5-19-2025)
10-1-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who violates any
provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
   B.   Any tempora1y storage pod or shipping container in violation of the
requirements of this Chapter shall be removed immediately from the property it
is located on.
   C.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the City in any way to
use any or all means available to remove the nuisance, or summarily eliminate
immediate hazards to the public health, safety, or welfare as granted in any
ordinances of the City or the laws or Constitution of the State of Illinois.
   D.   Whenever a person, firm, corporation, or other entity violates any of
the provisions of this Chapter, the City may cause appropriate legal actions
and proceedings, in law or in equity, to be instituted and maintained to
enforce compliance herewith.
   E.   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter by a property owner or any officer,
director, manager, agent, employee, patron, tenant, contractor, or
subcontractor thereof shall be deemed and held to be the act of such property
owner, and such property owner shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the property owner personally.
   F.   The restrictions and regulations contained in this Chapter shall be
interpreted as minimum standards, and shall be in addition to any other
applicable City ordinances and requirements that apply to temporary storage
pods or shipping containers or the properties on which they are located. If any
restriction or regulation in this Chapter is found to be in conflict with any
other restriction or regulation in this Code, the most restrictive or highest
standard shall prevail.
(Ord. 051925, 5-19-2025)
 
