WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-25 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024 and
Res. 23-387, passed 11-16-2023; and
State legislation approved through 2024 Pamphlet #2
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com 
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
COUNTY OFFICIALS
WILL COUNTY EXECUTIVE
Jennifer Bertino-Tarrant
DISTRICT #1
Sherry Newquist
Judy Ogalla
DISTRICT #2
Amanda Koch
Jim Moustis
DISTRICT #3
Raquel Mitchell
Margaret Tyson
DISTRICT #4
Kenneth Harris
Jacqueline Traynere
DISTRICT #5
Gretchen Fritz
Meta Mueller - County Board
Majority Leader
DISTRICT #6
Don Gould
Joe Van Duyne
DISTRICT #7
Stephen Balich
Mike Fricilone - County Board
Minority Leader
DISTRICT #8
Herbert Brooks, Jr.
Denise Winfrey
DISTRICT #9
Annette Parker
Rachel Ventura
DISTRICT #10
Natalie Coleman
Tyler J. Marcum
DISTRICT #11
Julie Berkowicz
Mimi Cowan - County Board
Speaker
DISTRICT #12
Frankie Pretzel
Tom Weigel
DISTRICT #13
Mica Freeman
Debbie Kraulidis
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Executive Committee Ordinance #11-292
ORDINANCE OF THE COUNTY BOARD
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
Re-Codifying the Will County Code of Ordinances
   WHEREAS, pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-29001 the County Board may authorize the
compilation, publication and maintenance of a county code; and
   WHEREAS, the Will County Clerk has worked in conjunction with the Will
County State's Attorney's Office and the various offices and departments
throughout the County to update and re-codify the Will County Code of
Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, the proposed re-codification of the Will County Code of Ordinances
(herein, "Code") updates and clarifies the current Code by updating statutory
citations, correcting clerical errors, incorporating recent amendments and
deleting obsolete text; and
   WHEREAS, the County of Will published the attached Code on July 27, 2011,
and held a public hearing on August 18, 2011, in conformance with 55 ILCS 5/5-
29001.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the County Board of Will County that the
County Code of Ordinances is hereby adopted as described in the attached CD and
shall be effective upon approval by the Will County Executive.
   BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that any Ordinance(s) previously adopted prior to
May 31, 2011, and not set forth in the attached Will County Code of Ordinances
is hereby repealed.
Adopted by the Will County Board this 18th day of August, 2011.
Vote: Yes              No                Pass              (SEAL)
                                              
   Nancy Schultz Voots
   Will County Clerk
Approved this               day of               , 2011.
                                             
   Lawrence M. Walsh
   Will County Executive
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of construction
   
10.07   Construction of revised ordinances
   
10.08   Repeal of repealing act; rights saved
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Conflicting provisions
   
10.12   Reference to office
   
10.13   Errors and omissions
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Ordinances saved
   
10.17   Recording of ordinances
   
10.18   Recordation as prima facie evidence
   
10.19   Proof of ordinances
   
10.20   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.21   Adoption of county seal
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the Will
County Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “building code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.”
(1980 Code, § 10.01) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, the reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to the cited sections thereof. Footnotes, cross-
references, and other comments are by way of explanation only and should not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (C)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the county although the same may not be so limited
specifically.
(1980 Code, § 10.02) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I, not incompatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.
(1980 Code, § 10.03) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(1980 Code, § 10.04) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND or OR. Either conjunction may include the other, as if written AND/OR,
where the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Will County.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70. § 1.07)
   COURT. Any court of record.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HIGHWAY or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the United
States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and all
bridges thereupon.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   MAY. Indicates that the act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Ch. 5. Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPALITIES. The meaning established in section 1 of Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.27)
   OATH. Includes affirmation and SWORN includes affirm.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OCCUPANT. See TENANT.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of the property.
   PERSONS. May extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate as well
as individuals.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Policemen employed and in the service of the county. POLICE
FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the employ of the county
as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall hereafter be appointed
and sworn as policemen.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PEACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, schoolyard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Land and real estate, including rights and easements of
incorporeal rights and structures, and tenements thereon.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   S.H.A. Smhh-Hurd Illinois Annotated Statutes.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Includes any or all of the following: a sewage treatment
plant or plants, collecting, intercepting and outlet sewers; force mains,
conduits, lateral sewers and extensions, pumping stations, ejector stations,
and all other appurtenances, extensions or improvements necessary or useful and
convenient for the collection, treatment, and disposal, in a sanitary manner,
of sewage and industrial wastes. This term also includes the disconnection of
storm water drains and constructing outlets therefor, where, in any case, such
work is necessary to relieve existing sanitary sewers of storm water loads, in
order to permit the efficient operation of such sanitary sewers for collection,
treatment, and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-141-1)
   SHALL. Indicates that the act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,§ 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. See HIGHWAY.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
underlined heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. May include printing, electronic, and any other mode
of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person
is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
it shall be(1) the proper handwriting of such person or, in case he is unable
to write, his proper mark or (2) an electronic signature as defined in the
Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(ILCS Ch. 5. Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed YEAR is equivalent to the
expression “year of our Lord.”
(1980 Code, § 10.05) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Legislative intent and meaning. All general provisions, terms,
phrases, and expressions shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the
true legislative intent and meaning.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (B)   Construction.  Words and phrases shall be read in context and
construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases
that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative
definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (C)   Generally.  As used in the code, unless the context otherwise
requires:
      (1)   Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons or things, and words importing the plural number may include
the singular.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words importing the masculine gender may be applied to females.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
(ILCS Ch. 5. Act 70, § 1.02)
   (D)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last
day is Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, as defined or fixed in any statute now
or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding the Saturday, Sunday, or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
      (2)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice
shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty or compliance with the notice.
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more county officers or other persons shall be construed as giving this
authority to a majority of these officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with state statute or other provisions.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the
subject matter or context of the law may be repugnant thereto.
(1980 Code, § 10.06) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.07 CONSTRUCTION OF REVISED ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of any ordinance, so far as consistent with any prior
ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior provisions and not
as a new enactment.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2) (1980 Code, § 10.07) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.08 REPEAL OF REPEALING ACT; RIGHTS SAVED.
   (A)   No act or part of an act expressly repealed shall be deemed to be
revived by the repeal of the repealing act.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3)
   (B)   Whether the former law is expressly repealed or not, no new law shall
be construed to repeal a former law as to any offense committed against the
former law, any act done, or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, any
right accrued, or claim arising under the former law, except that the
proceedings shall, as far as practicable, conform to the law in force at the
time of the proceeding.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4)
   (C)   If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any
provision of a new law, the provision may, by the consent of the party
affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new law takes effect.
This provision extends to all repeals, either by express words or by
implication, whether the repeal is in the act making any new provision on the
same subject or in any other act.
(S.H.A. Ch. I, § 1103)
(1980 Code, § 10.08) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.31) (1980 Code, § 10.09) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in such
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(1980 Code, § 10.10) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.11 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
(1980 Code, §10.11) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.12 REFERENCE TO OFFICE.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(1980 Code, § 10.12) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.13 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected, and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
(1980 Code, § 10.13) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
(1980 Code, § 10.14) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
(1980 Code, § 10.15) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body or a certain county officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall
remain in effect and are saved.
(1980 Code, § 10.16) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.17 RECORDING OF ORDINANCES.
   The County Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the corporate authorities. Immediately following each
ordinance the County Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage
and of the publication or posting, where required, of the ordinance.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-5)
(1980 Code, §10.17) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.18 RECORDATION AS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   The record and memorandum required by §
10.17, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage, and of the publication or posting of ordinances.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-5)
(1980 Code, § 10.18) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.19 PROOF OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The contents of all county ordinances, the date of passage, and the
date of publication or posting, where required, may be proved by the
certificate of the County Clerk, uner the seal of the county.
   (B)   Whenever county ordinances are printed in book or pamphlet form, and
purport to be published by authority of the county authorities, the book or
pamphlet shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and legal
publication of the ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in the book or
pamphlet, in all courts and administrative tribunals.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5. § 1-2-6) (1980 Code, § 10.19) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 10.20 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances
until the County Board shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   The following language should be used by the county to amend, add, or
repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   Section amended:
         “Section        of the Will County Code of Ordinances is amended to
read as follows:...”
      (2)   Section added:
         “Section       , which reads as follows, is added to and amends the
Will County Code of Ordinances:...”
      (3)   Section repealed:
         “Section          of the Will County Code of Ordinances, which reads
as follows, is repealed:..."
(1980 Code, § 10.20) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.21 ADOPTION OF COUNTY SEAL.
   A corporate seal shall be adopted bearing the name of Will County that
reflects the pride we feel and the love we bear for our county, state, and
country.
(1980 Code, § 10.21) (Res. 85-74, adopted 6-20-1985; Res. 05-385, adopted 8-18-
2005; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise provided, for
any violation of any section or provision of this Code for which no penalty is
stated, the minimum penalty will be not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000.
(1980 Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNTY BOARD
      
31.   EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT
      
32.   COUNTY OFFICIALS
      
33.   DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND COMMITTEES
      
34.   AGENCIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
35.   COUNTY HOME
      
36.   PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
      
37.   COURTS; COUNTY LAW LIBRARY
      
38.   PUBLIC RECORDS
      
39.   COUNTY POLICIES
      
40.   FISCAL AFFAIRS
      
41.   PURCHASING CODE
      
42.   COUNTY LOBBYIST’S REGISTRATION
      
43.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
CHAPTER 30: COUNTY BOARD
Section
Rules, Procedures and Standards of Conduct
   
30.01   Duties and officers
   
30.02   Committees
   
30.03   Conduct of business
   
30.04   Purchases
   
30.05   Settlement authority for general liability and worker’s compensation
   
30.06   Legal services
   
30.07   Ethics ordinance
   
30.08   Existing legislation continued
RULES, PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 30.01 DUTIES AND OFFICERS.
   (A)   Will County Board. The governing body of the County of Will shall be
known as the “Will County Board”, or the “County Board of Will County,
Illinois”, hereinafter referred to as the “Board”, and its members as “County
Board member/members” (abbreviated “CBM/CBM's”). The Board is the legislative
body of the County of Will, having those powers provided for by the
Constitution and laws of the state.
   (B)   Officers. On the first Monday in December in even numbered years after
each regular election at which members are elected, at the biennial
reorganization meeting, the Board shall elect from its membership a County
Board Speaker, a Legislative Democratic Caucus Chair and Legislative Republican
Caucus Chair; these three members shall constitute County Board Leadership.
These officers shall serve two-year terms, or until their successors are
elected and qualified.
   (C)   Duties of the County Board Speaker.
      (1)   The County Board Speaker shall preside over Board meetings in the
temporary absence of the elected County Executive. As the presiding officer of
the Executive Committee, the County Board Speaker shall be an ex-officio member
of all other committees and may, in the event of a temporary committee vacancy,
fill such vacancy for the purpose of establishing a quorum, with voting
privileges, and in that event, may act as the Committee Chair in the absence of
the Chair and Vice-Chair. The County Board Speaker shall be the presiding
official at all times that the County Board meets as a “Committee of the Whole”
and in his or her absence the Democratic Caucus Chair shall preside.
      (2)   The County Board Speaker shall be the chief administrative official
of the County Board. All staff of the Board shall work at the direction of the
County Board Speaker. The County Board Speaker shall assign all matters to
committees as recommended by the Executive Committee, and have responsibility
for the preparation of all agendas of the County Board. The executive and
judicial branch of county government and elected officials shall work directly
through the County Board Speaker and staff regarding requests for assignment of
any matter to a committee of the County Board. Any County Board member may
submit a written request to the Executive Committee for assignment of any
matter to a committee, and the Executive Committee shall then consider such
request. Moreover, it shall be the policy of the County Board that County Board
staff shall, upon request, be made available in their respective areas of
expertise to elected county officers and department heads to the extent that
the availability is not in conflict with the priorities assigned by the County
Board.
   (D)   Duties of the Legislative Democratic and Republican Caucus Chairs.
      (1)   The Legislative Democratic and Republican Caucus Chairs shall
provide floor leadership for all Democratic and Republican party members with
respect to all legislative matters pending before the Board, including, but not
limited to, informing the membership of reasons for and against the adoption of
proposed ordinances and resolutions, assessing support for and opposition to
the adoption of proposed ordinances and resolutions, assessing the need for
amendments thereto, consulting with the opposite Legislative Democratic and
Republican Caucus Chair with respect to the passage of proposed ordinances and
resolutions, and generally assisting in the efficient consideration by the
Board of all matters before the Board. The Legislative Democratic and
Republican Caucus Chairs shall be the Chief spokesmen of their respective
parties on the floor, shall be members of the Executive Committee, and shall be
ex-officio members of all other committees and may, in the event of a temporary
committee vacancy, fill such vacancy for the purpose of establishing a quorum
with voting privileges, and may act as the Committee Chair in the absence of
the Committee Chair and Vice-Chair.
      (2)   In the absence of the Legislative Democratic or Republican Caucus
Chair, the County Board Members of the Democratic or Republican political party
may designate a leader “pro tem” who shall act and serve on committees in the
Leader's place with like authority.
      (3)   The Legislative Democratic and Republican Caucus Chair shall each
appoint a Legislative Whip, to be known as the Democratic and Republican Whip
who shall assist its Legislative Democratic or Republican Caucus Chair, at the
Caucus Chair's direction, in the performance of the Democratic and Republican
Caucus Chair's duties. In the absence of the Democratic or Republican Caucus
Chair, the Legislative Democratic or Republican Whip shall serve as an ex-
officio member of all committees for the purpose of establishing a quorum with
voting privileges.
   (E)   Duties of the County Executive. The County Executive shall perform
those duties as set forth in ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 2-5001 et seq., and as
follows:
      (1)   Submit Budget to Board.
         (a)   It is the duty of the County Executive to prepare and submit to
the County Board for its approval the annual budget required by Division 6-1 of
the Counties Code, ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(c).
         (b)   The budget shall be submitted by the County Executive to the
County Board at the regular September County Board meeting.
      (2)   Reports to the Board. It is the duty of the County Executive to
make an annual report to the Board on the affairs of the county, on such date
and at such time as the Board shall designate, and keep the Board fully advised
as to the financial condition of the county and its future financial needs.
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5001)
         (a)   The County Board hereby designates the regular recessed August
County Board meeting for the making of the County Executive's annual report to
the County Board.
         (b)   The County Board's Finance Committee shall receive the advice of
the County Executive on the financial condition of the county and its future
financial needs not less than monthly.
      (3)   Appointments.
         (a)   The County Executive shall:
            1.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the Board, persons to
serve on the various boards and commissions to which appointments are provided
by law to be made by the Board; and
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(d))
            2.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the Board, persons to
serve on various special districts within the county except where appointment
to serve on such districts is otherwise provided by law.
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(e))
         (b)   At the beginning of each fiscal year the Executive's office
shall provide to the County Board a listing of all “Board” and “Commission”
appointment positions to be filled in the coming year.
         (c)   1.   A list of appointments to be approved at the next month's
County Board meeting shall be submitted by the County Executive to the County
Board administrative office not later than the Tuesday before the current
month's County Board meeting.
            2.   The Board's staff will insure that a copy of the appointment
list for approval next month is on the desk of each County Board Member (CBM)
at the current month's County Board meeting. (In this way each CBM will have
knowledge of next month's appointments a month in advance.)
         (d)   The appointment list will contain the following information for
each position:
            1.   Name of position;
            2.   Position criteria;
            3.   Name of appointee;
            4.   Appointee qualifications;
            5.   County Board and Commissions form;
            6.   County Board District, if criteria for appointment; and
            7.   Letters of recommendation, if any.
         (e)   The County Executive shall post vacant positions (not including
positions where incumbent is to be re-appointed) on the county's website.
      (4)   County Executive hires.
         (a)   The County Executive shall appoint, with the advice and consent
of the Board, such subordinate deputies, employees and appointees for the
general administration of county affairs as considered necessary, except those
deputies, employees and appointees in the office of an elected county officer.
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(g))
         (b)   A list of general administration positions, to be filled by
appointment under this section, shall be submitted to the County Board
administrative office not later than the Tuesday before the first Executive
Committee meeting of the month.
         (c)   An employee advice and consent request form, (attached to
Resolution No. 12-378, passed 12-3-2012 as Exhibit A) shall be completed for
each general administration appointee and included with the List of General
Administration Positions submitted to the County Board administrative office
not later than the Tuesday before the first Executive Committee meeting of the
month.
         (d)   The Board's staff will insure that a copy of the “General
Administration Position List” for approval at the current month's County Board
meeting is provided each County Board member (WCBM) by the Tuesday preceding
the second Executive Committee meeting of the month.
         (e)   The Board's staff will maintain a file in the County Board
administrative office of all the “Personnel Advice and Consent” forms submitted
in support of candidate approval so that it is available for review by members
of the County Board, at their discretion, prior to consideration by the full
County Board. The names of all candidates for general administration positions
shall remain confidential, to the extent allowed by law, until acted upon by
the County Board.
         (f)   All general administration appointments, beginning with the
declaration of a position vacancy to the identification of a position
candidate, shall be processed by the Human Resources Department and its staff
in accordance with the policy or policies established from time to time by the
County Board, approved collective bargaining agreements (as may be applicable),
as well as federal and state laws and regulations.
         (g)   Vacant positions shall be posted on the county's website for at
least ten business days prior to the selection of a candidate by the County
Executive.
         (h)   General administration appoint- ments shall be based solely on a
candidates overall qualifications and ability to work with others and
consistent with approved collective bargaining agreements then in effect (and
if applicable). Appointing or supporting a candidate to further a political
agenda or purpose (political hiring) is expressly prohibited.
         (i)   Hires in advance of County Board approval are hereby prohibited
except in the following cases:
            1.   Replacement staff at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
            2.   An “emergency hire” with the prior approval of the County
Board Speaker, Legislative Democratic and Republican Caucus Chair until such
time that the hire is formally approved or disapproved by the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 30.01) (Ord. adopted 12-3-1990; Ord. adopted 12-7-1992; Ord.
adopted 12-5-1994; Ord. adopted 12-2-1996; Ord. adopted 12-4-2000; Ord. adopted
12-20-2001; Res. 02-555, passed 12-2-2002; Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res.
08-480, passed 12-1-2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed
12-3-2012)
§ 30.02 COMMITTEES.
   (A)    Membership on the Executive Committee shall be comprised of at least
the following:
      (1)   County Board Chair;
      (2)   Democratic and Republican Leaders or, in the absence of the
Democratic or Republican Leader, the Democratic or Republican Whip;
      (3)   Chair of each of the other standing committees of the Board or, in
the absence of any such Chair, the Committee Chair may request of the Executive
Committee Chair that the Vice-Chair attend in their stead, with voting
privileges and would constitute a quorum; and
      (4)   In addition to the County Board Chair, Democratic and Republican
Leader and Committee Chairs, all remaining members shall be determined by
leadership. (55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
   (B)   Committee appointments. The County Board Chair, in consultation with
the Democratic and Republican Leaders, shall appoint the Chair of each standing
committee from the membership of the Democratic or Republican parties, and
shall appoint such other members of the seven standing committees excluding the
Executive Committee as is deemed necessary for the proper oversight and
functioning of the business of the Board. (55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
   (C)   Committee vacancies. Whenever any member of any committee is either
temporarily or permanently unable to perform the duties of such appointment due
to resignation, death, disability, illness, or absence, the appointing
authority may declare such position vacant and appoint another member to fill
the vacancy. If the vacancy is temporary and not permanent, the appointment
shall terminate once the incumbent member is able to return to perform the
duties of the committee assignment. For purposes of this division (C),
“absence” shall be defined as missing three consecutive meetings of a single
committee, in which case the County Board Chair may replace that member either
permanently or temporarily. (55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
   (D)   Standing committees.
      (1)   There shall eight standing committees of the County Board. Each
standing committee shall consist of at least five members, except the
following: the Executive Committee, which shall consist of at least 10 members.
(55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
      (2)   The date and time of a committee's meeting shall be set by the
County Board Chair in consultation with the Committee Chair. At a meeting of a
committee, in the absence of a Committee Chair, the Committee Vice-Chair shall
act as temporary Chair. In the absence of the Chair and Vice-Chair, present
committee members, with the ability to comprise a quorum, may elect a Chair-
Pro-tem in order to conduct the business of the Committee. (55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
      (3)   The standing committees and their responsibilities are as follows:
         (a)   Executive. This Committee shall be responsible for the
following:
            1.   Assignment of all matters to all standing committees for
consideration.
            2.   Consideration of all County Executive appointments.
            3.   The approval of the County Board agenda.
            4.   Making a recommendation to the Board on all contracts for
professional services, including but not limited to insurance and audits.
            5.   The review and oversight of the Community Development Block
Grant Program, including recommendations to the Board for grant proposals.
Economic development; hearings on the issuance of county licenses, in
accordance with state statutes and local resolutions and ordinances.
            6.   The examination, review, analysis and policy setting of the
county's various insurance plans and policies. Review personnel policy issues
including, but not limited to, the examination and review of employee salaries
and job descriptions. Setting policy on deferred compensation and employee
development programs offered in the county.
            7.   The examination, review, analysis and recommendation to the
County Board of all matters dealing with general county policy issues and
amendments to the County Board Rules.
            8.   To request opinions from the State's Attorney's Office. A
request for a written opinion from the State's Attorney's Office shall be
submitted in writing and shall set forth the specific issue of concern. These
items shall be listed on the agenda under Requests for State's Attorney's
Opinion until a written opinion is received.
            9.   In cooperation with the County Executive's office, work to
advance the diversity efforts that are determined by the county stakeholders.
This may include working with outside consultants to accomplish defined tasks.
            10.   Guide the County Board's policymaking efforts to continue
progress in the area of diversity, inclusion and equity issues, improving
minority participation in future contracting efforts, and related work that can
measurably improve the diversity of county governmental functions.
            11.   All other matters not specifically assigned to other
committees of the Board.
         (b)   Finance. This committee shall be responsible for the following:
            1.   Making recommendations concerning county fiscal policies and
financial administration.
            2.   Establishing and reviewing County Board budget priorities.
            3.   The examination, review, analysis, and where appropriate the
modification of the annual budget proposed by the County Executive.
            4.   The preparation of the annual appropriation and levy
ordinances for the county.
            5.   The review of all internal and external audits of all county
departments and the offices of all elected county officials.
            6.   The review and disposition of grant requests.
            7.   Review and approve all county indebtedness and approve of any
short-term or long-term borrowings.
            8.   The appropriation of salaries of all county employees,
appointed officials, and officeholders.
            9.   The review of all matters of taxation and finance for the
purpose of generating new revenue for the county.
            10.   This Committee shall also receive monthly financial reports
from the County Executive's Office containing both monthly and year-to-date
income statements, revenue projections, expense statements and projections and
projected budget surpluses and/or shortfalls. The Committee shall include a
summary statement of the County Executive's report in its report to the
Executive Committee.
            11.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS
5/5-1004)
         (c)   Public Works & Transportation. This Committee shall be
responsible for the following:
            1.    Recommending to the County Board the prioritization of
proposed public works and transportation projects, the development and
expansion of current vendor list, the review and policy-setting of planning,
acquisition, construction, improvement, demolitions, modification, and
maintenance of Will County's infrastructure, such as roads, bridges, right- of-
ways, water systems, cable systems and resource recovery systems.
            2.   In conjunction with the Land Use & Development Committee, this
Committee shall be responsible for oversight and review of infrastructure to
insure adequate road access and the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the county.
            3.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS 5/
5-1004)
         (d)   Public Health & Public Safety. This Committee shall be
responsible for the following:
            1.   The examination, review, analysis and policy setting of the
county's health, and public welfare needs.
            2.   To act as the liaison between the County Board and the Board
of Health and the Health Department Administration.
            3.   Identifying the changing needs of Will County's aging and
disabled population.
            4.   Oversight of the EMA (Emergency Management Agency), Animal
Control Department, and all community programs within the county.
            5.   The examination, review, analysis, recommendation and policy
setting for the judicial and law enforcement needs of the county (excepting the
construction or expansion of facilities), including but not limited to the
needs of the Circuit Court, the Jury Commission, the State's Attorney, the
Sheriff, the Coroner, the Circuit Court Clerk, the Public Defender, the Adult
and Juvenile Detention Facilities, and the Probation Department.
            6.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS 5/
1004)
         (e)   Land Use & Development. This Committee shall be responsible for
the following:
            1.   Examination, review, analysis and policy setting of the Will
County Land Resource Management Plan, including landfills and wetlands as
related to the land resource management plan, as well as the land use needs and
requirements of the county.
            2.   Review, adoption, and modification to the county's land use
plans, zoning ordinances, and subdivision ordinances, construction guidelines
and building codes and standards, stormwater regulation policy and associated
fees.
            3.   Policy and associated fees for the county's Geographic
Information System (GIS).
            4.   All proposals for changes to or modifications involving
agricultural lands or flood plains.
            5.   In conjunction with the Public Works & Transportation
Committee, provide oversight and review of infrastructure to insure the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the county.
            6.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS 5/
1004)
         (f)   Legislative. This Committee shall be responsible for the
following:
            1.   Examination, review and coordination of the state and federal
legislative needs of the county. Such needs shall include, but are not limited
to, recommendations for legislation transmitted from any standing committee,
any Board member(s) or an elected county official or department head to the
Executive Committee.
            2.    Communication liaison with federal and state county
legislators, for legislative and grant assistance and to foster better
intergovernmental cooperation between all levels of government. Where time is
of the essence and the Legislative Committee is unable to meet then the
Legislative Committee Chair shall consult with leadership for purposes of
determining the legislative message to be conveyed.
            3.   Bring current proposed legislation to the committee for
discussion and review.
            4.   Develop the annual Federal and State Legislative Agendas in
consultation with the appropriate lobbyist to be approved at the November
County Board Meeting for the following year.
            5.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS 5/
5-1004)
         (g)   Capital Improvements and IT. This Committee shall be responsible
for the following:
            1.   Making recommendations to the County Board on matters dealing
with accommodating the space needs of Will County Government including all
branches of government and all constitutional officers for both the long and
short term.
            2.   Review and analysis of lease options for the county.
            3.   Provide oversite, planning and recommendations on other
matters dealing with capital improvements, including, but not limited to,
communications, infrastructure matters, and projects of benefit to the citizens
of Will County.
            4.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS 5/
5-1004)
         (h)   Landfill Committee. This Committee shall be responsible for the
following:
            1.   Provide policy guidance and determinations related to solid
waste planning, oversight and compliance, in conjunction and cooperation with
the State’s Attorney and those county departments charged with the
responsibility for solid waste planning, oversight and compliance, as well as
in conjunction with any special committee appointed in accordance with federal
or state statutes, rules and regulations, and the siting of regional pollution
control facilities.
            2.   Monitoring all aspects of administration and enforcement of
the County's Solid Waste Management Plan, and shall conduct those public
hearings required by statute, rule, regulation or ordinance (except as
otherwise may be determined by the County Board), and shall make
recommendations to the Board for the expenditure of county revenues and funds
which have been allocated for solid waste environmental matters and other
pollution control facility matters. Shall provide oversight and review of
proposed uses of all county owned property surrounding the Prairie View county
landfill including the RNG facility. Shall review policy considerations and
recommendations for the future of the Prairie View county landfill. Nothing in
these rules shall supersede specific lawful statutory assignments of authority.
            3.   On an annual basis, the Committee shall review the Auditor's
report concerning the Prairie View Landfill as well as the status of any other
landfills and transfer stations located within the county.
            4.   Making recommendations to the Executive Committee. (55 ILCS 5/
5-1004)
      (4)   Ad-hoc committees shall be established by the County Board Chair
with the concurrence of the Executive Committee. Appointments to ad-hoc
committees shall follow the procedures for standing committees as defined in
division (B) of this section. Every ad-hoc committee shall consist of a
sufficient number of members to accomplish the specific purpose or purposes for
which it was created. The Executive Committee shall dissolve the ad-hoc
committee after its purpose is accomplished. (55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
      (5)   The County Board may meet as a "Committee of the Whole" by the call
of the County Board Chair, or an affirmative vote of a majority of the
Executive Committee, or upon the affirmative vote of 10 County Board members at
a regular meeting of the County Board, or upon a written request setting forth
the items for discussion and signed by 10 members of the County Board. The
time, place, and agenda for any meeting of the "Committee of the Whole" shall
be set by the County Board Chair consistent with the provisions of this
division and rules and published and posted in accordance with Illinois law.
(55 ILCS 5/5-1004)
   (E)   Powers of committees.
      (1)   The various elected officials and department heads, in addition to
the County Board staff, shall provide such assistance, information and support
to the standing committees and to the Board as a whole, as may be required, by
said committees or by the Board. Information required by the Board or any of
its standing committees shall be provided upon request of any Board member or
Board staff.
      (2)   The staffing for the standing committees shall be provided by the
County Board staff and access to the Executive Committee agenda shall be
through the County Board staff.
      (3)   All County Board Committees, in the exercise of their legislative
functions and powers, shall have the right to summon employees and to review
those documents and records necessary or helpful in the exercise of such
responsibilities. Willful failure to respond to a request issued to a county
employee or appointed department head by a Board Committee shall be sufficient
cause to authorize the committee to apply to the Board for a resolution of
notification to the appropriate county officer (elected official) of the
failure of his or her employee/employees to appear, and to request an immediate
redress of said grievance.
   (F)   Written minutes. All committees shall keep written minutes and all
such forms of minutes as required by law. Minute books for every committee
shall be kept in the County Board Office. Administrative services shall be
provided by the County Board staff. Audio recordings of regular meetings shall
be disposed of once the meeting minutes have been approved. The audio recording
of closed meetings shall be disposed of no less than 18 months after completion
of the meeting recorded, but only after the approval of the minutes of the
closed meeting and the approval of the destruction of the audio recording. (5
ILCS 120/2.06)
(1980 Code, § 30.02) (Ord. adopted 12-3-1990; Ord. adopted 12-17-1992; Ord.
adopted 12-5-1994; Ord. adopted 12-2-1996; Ord. adopted 12-4-2000; Ord. adopted
12-20-2001; Res. 02-555, passed 12-2-2002; Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res.
08-480, passed 12-1-2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed
12-3-2012; Ord. 23-312, passed 9-21-2023)
§ 30.03 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Order of business. The order of business for each regular meeting of
the County Board shall be as follows:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Pledge of allegiance to the flag;
      (3)   Invocation;
      (4)   Roll call;
      (5)   Determination of quorum;
      (6)   Motion to place on file certificate of publication;
      (7)   Approval of minutes;
      (8)   Citizens to be heard;
      (9)   Honorary resolutions/proclamations;
      (10)   Old business - executive vetoes;
      (11)   New business - committee reports and recommendations;
      (12)   Appointments by the County Executive;
      (13)   Announcements by the County Board Speaker, Legislative Democratic
and Republican Caucus Chair;
      (14)   Executive session; and
      (15)   Recess/adjournment.
   (B)   Time and place of regular and special meetings. The County Board shall
meet for the purpose of transacting business at the hour of 9:30 a.m. on the
third Thursday of each month at the County Board Room, 302 North Chicago
Street, Joliet, Illinois, 60432. Special meetings of the County Board not
called by the Executive in accordance with his or her statutory authority may
be called by a written direction signed by not less than nine members of the
Board and delivered to the County Clerk. Such direction shall specify the date
and time of the meeting, the business to be conducted, and shall be delivered
with at least 24 hours notice to the residence of each Board member. All
special meetings shall take place in the County Board Room, 302 North Chicago
Street, Joliet, Illinois, 60432.
   (C)   Parliamentary procedure. In the absence of a County Board rule to the
contrary, the parliamentary procedure of this Board shall be governed by
Roberts Rules of Order - Newly Revised.
   (D)   Board rules and amendments. At the Board reorganization meeting, which
shall be held on the first Monday in December in even numbered years at the
hour of 9:30 a.m. in the County Board Room, the County Clerk shall initially
preside and call the meeting to order. After the invocation, pledge of
allegiance and roll call, the newly elected County Executive, county-wide
elected officials, if any, and newly elected County Board Members, shall take
the oath of office and the meeting called to order. The only business that may
be transacted at the reorganization meeting of the County Board is the adoption
of the rules, selection of board leadership (as defined by the rules) and
committee appointments. Board rules must be approved by a majority of the
members of the Board at the reorganization meeting. Thereafter, no amendment
shall be made to any of the rules of the Board except upon motion made in
writing and approved by three-fifths of the members of the County Board at the
next regular meeting of the Board, adjourned or otherwise occurring not less
than 30 days from the date of the initial written motion.
   (E)   Suspension of rules. In a particular case, to avoid hardship or to
promote the orderly transaction of county business, a rule or rules of the
Board may be temporarily suspended by a voice vote of three-fifths of the
members present.
   (F)   Right to address the Board. No person who is not a member of the
Board, excepting the County Executive in the performance of his or her duties
as Presiding Officer of the County Board meeting, shall be permitted to address
the Board unless the purpose of the comment pertains to an item specifically
placed on the agenda. Excepting public hearings, such person shall be allowed
to address the Board for a period of three minutes only, but only after
submitting a formal written request to the County Clerk's Office not less than
48 hours prior to the published starting time of the County Board meeting, or,
upon a motion, second and affirmative vote to suspend the rules to allow a non-
member to address the Board. However, when the County Board Speaker or
Legislative Democratic or Republican Caucus Chair requests the opinion of the
County Executive (unrelated to the conduct of the County Board meeting),
State's Attorney or of a department head, it shall not be necessary to suspend
the rules to allow such person to speak.
   (G)   Text amendments/map amendments, objections & protests. All written
protests and written objections to proposed zoning ordinance text amendments
and map amendments shall be submitted to the County Board in accordance with
the rules of the Board and agencies of county government not in conflict with
the laws of the state.
   (H)   Agenda. There shall be a written agenda prepared for every meeting of
the County Board. The agenda shall be prepared by the Executive Committee, not
less than seven days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the County
Board. Any elected official wishing to place an item on the agenda shall
present it to the Executive Committee, through the County Board staff at the
time the agenda is set. A copy of the agenda shall be made available to the
members at least five days prior to the Board meeting, and shall also be placed
on display in the Clerk's office and posted outside of the County Board room at
least five days prior to the Board meeting. No matter not on the published
agenda may be placed on the agenda at the meeting of the County Board, except
as may be allowed by law and upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the
members present, and such motion shall require a roll call vote.
Notwithstanding the above, the County Board Speaker shall have the authority to
place an item or items on the agenda after the Executive Committee has prepared
the agenda but prior to 48 hours before the scheduled County Board meeting for
any item or items which are of a time sensitive or critical nature. Said
addition of an item or items shall be done in full compliance with the Open
Meetings Act.
   (I)   Motions. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if requested by any
member of the Board.
   (J)   Vote. Any member in attendance may vote “Yes”, “No”, “Present”, or
“Abstain”, on any matter before the Board. A roll call vote may be requested by
any member on any matter before the Board.
   (K)   Reconsideration of motions. When a question has been decided in the
affirmative or the negative, it shall be in order for any member of the
prevailing side who voted on such question to move reconsideration thereof, but
no motion for the reconsideration of any vote shall be in order unless made on
the same day on which the vote was taken. Such motion may be seconded by a
member of either the prevailing or the losing side.
   (L)   Executive vetoes.
      (1)   Any ordinance, resolution, motion or item of appropriation vetoed
by the County Executive shall be returned to the Board at its first meeting
occurring not less than six days, Sundays excepted, after said ordinance,
resolution, motion or item of appropriation has been presented to him. Each
such vetoed ordinance, resolution, motion or item of appropriation shall be
accompanied by a written statement of the objections of the County Executive,
which objections shall be entered and spread upon the journal.
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5010)
      (2)   The Board shall proceed to reconsider all such ordinances,
resolutions, motions or items of appropriation vetoed and returned to the Board
by the County Executive as provided in the County Executive law. The County
Executive shall take no part in the conduct of the debate. Upon the close of
debate, the Clerk shall call the roll on a vote to reconsider as required by
the County Executive law, and if three-fifths of the members of the Board vote
affirmatively to reconsider (override) the veto, then the ordinance,
resolution, motion or item of appropriation shall become effective on the date
prescribed, but no earlier than the date of the override vote.
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5010)
      (3)   If any ordinance is not returned by the County Executive to the
Board at its first meeting occurring not less than six days, Sundays excepted,
after it has been presented to him or her, it shall become effective unless the
Board has recessed or adjourned for a period in excess of 60 days, in which
case it shall not become effective without his or her approval.
(ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5010)
[Format to be used by the County Executive in the event an ordinance,
resolution, motion or item of appropriation is vetoed/disapproved by County
Executive.]
I am hereby returning (Ordinance, Resolution, Motion or Item of Appropriation
as appropriate) #              to the County Board this            day of
             20      with the attached objections.
                                   
   Will County Executive
[Format to be used by County Clerk when appropriate]
This (Ordinance, Resolution, Motion or Item of Appropriation as appropriate)
not having been approved by the County Executive, nor returned to the County
Board at its first meeting occurring not less than 6 (six) days, Sundays
excepted, nor more than 60 (sixty) days since its adoption, by operation of law
this (Ordinance, Resolution, Motion or Item of Appropriation as appropriate) is
now deemed effective.
   Signed this           day of               , 20    . (SEAL)
                             
   Will County Clerk
[Format to be used upon reconsideration of Executive veto/disapproval of
ordinance, resolution, motion or item of appropriation]
On this       day of            20   , the Will County Board reconsidered the
above (Ordinance, Resolution, Motion or Item of Appropriation as appropriate).
The vote was     Aye     Nay     Pass     Abstain. Three-fifths of the County
Board having voted to approve the (Ordinance, Resolution, Motion or Item of
Appropriation as appropriate) it is adopted over the Executive's veto.
OR
On this        day of              20    , the Will County Board reconsidered
the above (Ordinance, Resolution, Motion or Item of Appropriation as
appropriate). The vote was     Aye     Nay     Pass     Abstain. Three-fifths
of the County Board not having voted to approve the (Ordinance, Resolution,
Motion or Item of Appropriation as appropriate), the reconsideration fails.
   (N)   Committee reports. Committee reports shall be made by the Chair of
each respective committee, or in his or her absence by the Vice-Chair of the
committee. In the event of the absence of both the Chair and Vice-Chair of a
committee at a regular Board meeting, the committee report may be made by any
other member of said committee.
(1980 Code, § 30.03) (Ord. adopted 12-3-1990; Ord. adopted 12-7-1992; Ord.
adopted 12-5-1994; Ord. adopted 12-2-1996; Ord. adopted 12-4-2000; Ord. adopted
12-20-2001; Res. 02-555, passed 12-2-2002; Res. 03-187, passed 4-17-2003; Res.
03-534, passed 11-20-2003; Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res. 08-480, passed
12-1-2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 30.04 PURCHASES.
   All purchases, including printing, publications and contracts for all
offices and departments of the county shall be made in accordance with the
County Purchasing Ordinance 08-461.
(1980 Code, § 30.04) (Ord. adopted 12-3-1990; Ord. adopted 12-7-1992; Ord.
adopted 12-5-1994; Ord. adopted 12-2-1996; Ord. adopted 12-4-2000; Ord. adopted
12-20-2001; Res. 02-555, passed 12-2-2002; Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res.
08-480, passed 12-1-2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed
12-3-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Purchasing Code, see
Ch. 41
§ 30.05 SETTLEMENT AUTHORITY FOR GENERAL LIABILITY AND WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Settlement offers of up to $15,000. Delegated to the third party
administrator with settlements resulting from such offers remaining contingent
upon approval of the County Board.
   (B)   Settlement offers from $15,001 up to $50,000. Delegated to the Risk
Manager/Human Resource Director with settlements resulting from such offers
remaining contingent upon the approval of the County Board.
   (C)   Settlement offers from $50,001 up to $100,000. May be made by the
appropriate parties, including the third party administrator and/or the
attorneys, with the authorization of the Risk Manager/Human Resource Director,
with settlements resulting from such offers remaining contingent upon the
approval of the County Board.
   (D)   Settlement offers in excess of $100,000. Must be authorized by the
Executive Committee prior to being extended, with the final settlement
agreement remaining contingent upon the approval of the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 30.05) (Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res. 08-480, passed 12-1-
2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 30.06 LEGAL SERVICES.
   The State's Attorney of the county shall perform all legal services required
by the Board or any of its committees or members. If the State's Attorney has a
conflicting position with the County Board, the Board shall have the option to
seek appointment of special counsel.
(1980 Code, § 30.06) (Ord. adopted 12-3-1990; Ord. adopted 12-7-1992; Ord.
adopted 12-2-1996; Ord. adopted 12-4-2000; Ord. adopted 12-20-2001; Res. 02-
555, passed 12-2-2002; Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res. 08-480, passed 12-1-
2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 30.07 ETHICS ORDINANCE.
   It shall be the obligation of every County Board member, county employee and
appointed or elected official (except Circuit Judge, Circuit Clerk or State's
Attorney) to comply with the terms of the County Ethics Ordinance, §§
32.065 through
32.069.
(1980 Code, § 30.07) (Ord. adopted 12-3-1990; Ord. adopted 12-7-1992; Ord.
adopted 12-2-1996; Ord. adopted 12-4-2000; Ord. adopted 12-20-2001; Res. 02-
555, passed 12-2-2002; Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res. 08-480, passed 12-1-
2008; Res. 10-406, passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed 12-3-2012)
§ 30.08 EXISTING LEGISLATION CONTINUED.
   Except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions of these
rules, procedures and standards of conduct, all existing county laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations heretofore adopted shall continue in full
force and effect until amended, superseded or repealed.
(1980 Code, § 30.08) (Ord. adopted 12-20-2001; Res. 02-555, passed 12-2-2002;
Res. 06-503, passed 12-4-2006; Res. 08-480, passed 12-1-2008; Res. 10-406,
passed 12-6-2010; Res. 12-378, passed 12-3-2012)
CHAPTER 31: EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT
Section
   
31.01   Ethical standards for executive branch
   
31.02   Appointment of persons to various boards and commissions
   
31.03   Procedure for appointing subordinate deputies; employees and other
appointees
   
31.04   Procedure for removing or suspending any appointed person
   
31.05   Annual reports to County Board
   
31.06   Care and custody of county property
   
31.07   Lump sum spending authority
§ 31.01 ETHICAL STANDARDS FOR EXECUTIVE BRANCH.
   All subordinate deputies, employees and appointees serving in the executive
branch of county government shall adhere to the following standards of ethics.
   (A)   Conflicts of interest. No member of the executive branch shall use his
or her position to influence any decision or action in any matter in which he
or she has any economic interest distinguishable from that of the public
generally.
   (B)   Gifts. No member of the executive branch shall accept any gift based
upon any understanding, either explicit or implicit, that a judgement or
decision will be influenced.
   (C)   Advice or assistance. No member of the executive branch shall solicit
or accept any gift in return for advice or assistance on any matter concerning
the operation or business of the county.
   (D)   Use of county-owned property. No member of the executive branch shall
engage in or permit unauthorized use of county-owned property.
   (E)   Use or disclosure of confidential information. No member of the
executive branch shall disclose confidential information or use confidential
information gained in the course of his or her position for financial gain.
   (F)   Interest in county business. No member of the executive branch shall
have a financial interest in:
      (1)   Any contract, work or business of the county; or
      (2)   In the purchase of any property that belongs to the county or in
the sale of any property by the county which exceeds the value of $500.
   (G)   Nepotism. No member of the executive branch shall hire, or hire in any
county agency, any person who is a relative as defined as a spouse, parent,
child, brother or sister, aunt or uncle, niece or nephew, grandparent or
grandchild, solely because of that relationship. Whenever any hiring takes
place, it will be presumed that it was done solely because of the existing
relationship and it will be incumbent on the hiring officer or agency to
demonstrate otherwise.
   (H)   Campaign ethics. No member of the executive branch shall knowingly
suggest, compel, coerce or intimidate any person to make or refrain from making
any political contribution.
(1980 Code, § 31.01) (Executive Order 89-1, dated 2-16-1989)
§ 31.02 APPOINTMENT OF PERSONS TO VARIOUS BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   Whereas, under the County Executive form of government (ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 2-5009(d) and (e)), the County Executive has the power to appoint,
with the advice and consent of the County Board, persons to serve on the
various boards and commissions to which appointments are provided by law to be
made by the Board, and has the power to appoint, with the advice and consent of
the Board, persons to serve on various special districts within the county
except where appointment to serve on the districts is otherwise provided by
law;
   (B)   Whereas, the County Executive has the power to coordinate and direct
by executive order all administrative and management functions of the county
government except the offices of elected county officers; and
   (C)   Now, therefore, be it ordered that the County Executive will submit
lists of names to the County Board of persons to fill appointments, to be
approved or rejected by the Board.
(1980 Code, § 31.02) (Executive Order 89-2, dated 2-16-1989)
§ 31.03 PROCEDURE FOR APPOINTING SUBORDINATE DEPUTIES; EMPLOYEES AND OTHER
APPOINTEES.
   (A)   Whereas, under the County Executive form of government (ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 2-5009(g)), the County Executive has the power to appoint, with the
advice and consent of the County Board, the subordinate deputies, employees and
appointees for the general administration of county affairs as considered
necessary, except those deputies, employees and appointees in the office of an
elected county officer;
   (B)   Whereas, the County Executive has the power to coordinate and direct
by executive order all administrative and management functions of the county
government except the offices of elected county officers; and
   (C)   (1)   Now, therefore, be it ordered that the County Executive will
submit lists of names to the County Board of persons to become subordinate
deputies, employees and appointees to be approved or rejected by the County
Board. Persons currently serving in the positions will retain their position
unless removed or suspended by the County Executive, or unless the position is
deemed unnecessary. All employees serving in the various county departments,
with the exception of those serving in the office of an elected county officer,
are covered by this executive order; and
      (2)   Be it further ordered that no unlawful discrimination, as that term
is defined in the State Human Rights Act, as amended; shall be exercised in any
manner by any county official, appointing authority or employee.
(1980 Code, § 31.03) (Executive Order 89-3, dated 2-16-1989)
§ 31.04 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVING OR SUSPENDING ANY APPOINTED PERSON.
   (A)   Whereas, under the County Executive form of government (ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 2-5009(h)), the County Executive has the power to remove or suspend in
his or her discretion, after due notice and hearing, anyone whom he or she has
the power to appoint;
   (B)   Whereas, the County Executive has the power to coordinate and direct
by executive order all administrative and management functions of the county
government except the offices of elected county officers; and
   (C)   (1)   Now, therefore, be it resolved that the County Executive will
suspend, demote or dismiss any subordinate deputy, employee or appointee for
misconduct, inefficiency, incompetence, insubordination, misfeasance,
malfeasance or other unfitness to render effective service, or for lack of
funds or abolition of the position, or for noncompliance with the ethical
standards as established by order of the County Executive or the ordinances and
resolutions of the county; and
      (2)   Be it further ordered that any employee subject to suspension,
demotion or dismissal will be served a written notice outlining the reasons for
suspension, demotion or dismissal. After due notice of seven days, a hearing
will be conducted. The employee has the right to counsel and the right to bring
forth evidence or witnesses to be heard. A decision will be rendered by the
County Executive within seven days of the hearing.
(1980 Code, § 31.04) (Executive Order 89-4, dated 2-16-1989)
§ 31.05 ANNUAL REPORTS TO COUNTY BOARD.
   (A)   Whereas, under the County Executive form of government (ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 2-5009(f)), the County Executive has the power to make an annual
report to the County Board on the affairs of the county and to keep the Board
fully advised as to the financial condition of the county and its future
financial needs;
   (B)   Whereas, the County Executive has the power to coordinate and direct
by executive order all administrative and management functions of the county
government except the offices of elected county officers; and
   (C)   (1)   Now, therefore, be it ordered that the County Executive will
prepare and submit an annual report to the County Board at the regular County
Board meeting, designated by the Board; and
      (2)   Be it further ordered that monthly written financial reports shall
be distributed to the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 31.05) (Executive Order 88-2, dated 12-5-1988)
§ 31.06 CARE AND CUSTODY OF COUNTY PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whereas, under the County Executive form of government (ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 2-5009(j)), the County Executive has the power to supervise the care
and custody of all county property including institutions and agencies;
   (B)   Whereas, the County Executive has the power to coordinate and direct
by executive order all administrative and management functions of the county
government except the offices of elected county officers; and
   (C)   Now, therefore, be it ordered that the County Executive will supervise
the use of county office space. Any requests for space by any county official
or employee shall be filed in writing in the office of the County Executive.
Requests will be approved or denied within two weeks. The County Executive has
the right to reassign space as needed.
(1980 Code, § 31.06) (Executive Order 88-3, dated 12-5-1988)
§ 31.07 LUMP SUM SPENDING AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(q), the County Executive is
authorized to exercise internal control over the operations of his or her
personal office and staff in a manner similar to all other county elected
officials. The County Executive shall have the authority to exercise
independent judgment in the expenditure of his or her budget within the limits
established by the County Board and ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(p).
(1980 Code, § 31.07) (Res. 89-315, adopted 11-16-1989)
CHAPTER 32: COUNTY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Bond for county officials
   
32.002   County Auditor; Deputy Auditor
   
32.003   County Clerk
   
32.004   County Manager
   
32.005   County Treasurer
   
32.006   Supervisor of Assessments
   
32.007   Building Officer
   
32.008   Liquor Control Commissioner
   
32.009   Personnel Director
   
32.010   Building Code Authority
   
32.011   Health Authority
   
32.012   Administrative Assistant to County Board
   
32.013   Deputy Supervisor of Assessments
   
32.014   Indemnification of certain officers
Disaster Emergencies
   
32.030   Chain of command
   
32.031   Duties of the County Clerk
Code of Conduct
   
32.045   Conflicts of interest
   
32.046   Soliciting, offering or receiving anything of value
   
32.047   Advice or assistance
   
32.048   Use of county-owned property
   
32.049   Use or disclosure of confidential information
   
32.050   Interest in county business
   
32.051   Compliance by commissioned agencies
   
32.052   Campaign ethics
Ethics Ordinance
   
32.065   Definitions
   
32.066   Prohibited political activities
   
32.067   Gift ban
   
32.068   Ethics Advisor
   
32.069   Whistle blower protection
 
   
32.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 BOND FOR COUNTY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The following officials are required to file official bonds, in the
amounts established by the County Board.
 
County Clerk                     $20,000
County Treasurer                 $750,000
County Collector                 $750,000
County Superintendent of Schools $12,000
County Sheriff                   $10,000
 
   (B)   These bonds are to be entered upon the records of the County Board and
filed in the office of the County Clerk and state, where necessary.
(1980 Code, § 32.01) (Res. 78-106, adopted 11-30-1978; Res. 80-183, adopted 11-
28-1980; Res. 84-155, adopted 11-15-1984; Res. 86-123, adopted 9-18-1986; Res.
90-238, adopted 11-15-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Bond of County Treasurer, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-10003
   Bond of County Superintendent of Schools, see ILCS Ch. 105, Act 5, § 3-2
§ 32.002 COUNTY AUDITOR; DEPUTY AUDITOR.
   (A)   In addition to all other duties, the County Auditor shall:
      (1)   Audit the receipts of the various county officers presented for
deposit with the County Treasurer;
      (2)   Maintain a continuous internal audit of the transactions and
financial records of the officers, agents or divisions of the county; and
      (3)   Devise and install a system of financial records in the offices and
divisions of the county, suitable to the needs of the office and in accordance
with generally accepted principles of accounting for governmental bodies; the
system shall then be followed in these offices.
   (B)   The County Auditor is to be aided in the performance of these duties
by the Deputy Auditor.
(1980 Code, § 32.02) (Sup. Rec. Bk. p. 247, adopted 6-9-1975) (Res. 78-114,
adopted 11-30-1978; Res. 79-152, adopted 8-29-1979)
Cross-reference:
   Prevention of overexpenditures, see §
40.03
   Purchase orders; contracts, see §
40.04
Statutory reference:
   County Auditor in general, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 3-1001 et seq.
§ 32.003 COUNTY CLERK.
   For provisions concerning the County Clerk in general, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act
5, §§ 3-2001 et seq.
(1980 Code, § 32.03)
Cross-reference:
   Purchase orders; contracts, see §
40.04
§ 32.004 COUNTY MANAGER.
   (A)   There is created the position of County Manager, who shall, under the
supervision of the Chairperson and the Administrative Services Committee of the
County Board, and for the service of the entire Board, direct the day-to-day
operation of county facilities, programs and personnel and assume the following
duties:
      (1)   Be responsible for budget preparation and administration;
      (2)   Administer a county personnel policy;
      (3)   Administer a county purchasing policy;
      (4)   Assist in coordination and implementation of County Board actions
and resolutions;
      (5)   Keep the Board regularly informed concerning federal and state
legislation, including grants and revenue sharing affecting county government;
      (6)   Research and recommend long range plans regarding capital
improvements, financial planning and county development;
      (7)   Assist the Chairperson of the County Board and committees of
special projects and assignments;
      (8)   Develop a property maintenance and management policy for the County
Board;
      (9)   Administer the property maintenance and management of the County
Board; and
      (10)   Administer a central information office for the County Board
members, other public officers and the general public on county operations.
   (B)   The County Board shall hire the County Manager based on his or her
ability, knowledge and skills.
(1980 Code, § 32.04) (Res. 11A, adopted 5-18-1978)
§ 32.005 COUNTY TREASURER.
   For provisions concerning the County Treasurer in general, see ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, §§ 3-10001 et seq.
(1980 Code, § 32.05)
§ 32.006 SUPERVISOR OF ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   The County Board creates the office of Supervisor of Assessments.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the County Board is authorized to enter into a
contract of employment with the Supervisor of Assessments for a term of four
consecutive years until a successor is appointed and qualified pursuant to
state statute. The contract of employment shall provide compensation and shall
in all respects comply with the state statute governing the employment by this
county of a Supervisor of Assessments.
(1980 Code, § 32.06) (Res. 78-84, adopted 10-26-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Supervisor of Assessments, see ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 3-5 through 3-65
§ 32.007 BUILDING OFFICER.
   For provisions concerning the office of Building Officer, see §§ 150.15
through 150.19.
(1980 Code, § 32.07)
§ 32.008 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   For provisions concerning the Liquor Control Commissioner, see §§
110.135 through
110.142.
(1980 Code, § 32.08)
§ 32.009 PERSONNEL DIRECTOR.
   For provisions concerning the Personnel Director, see §§
36.001 through
36.009.
(1980 Code, § 32.09)
§ 32.010 BUILDING CODE AUTHORITY.
   For provisions concerning the Building Code Authority, see §§ 151.20 through
151.24.
(1980 Code, § 32.10)
§ 32.011 HEALTH AUTHORITY.
   For provisions concerning the Health Authority, see §§ 151.20 through
151.24.
(1980 Code, § 32.12)
§ 32.012 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO COUNTY BOARD.
   For provisions concerning this office, see the County Board staff.
(1980 Code, § 32.13)
§ 32.013 DEPUTY SUPERVISOR OF ASSESSMENTS.
   The County Board approves the reinstatement of the former Deputy Supervisor
of Assessments.
(1980 Code, § 32.14) (Res. 91-54, passed 2-21-1991)
§ 32.014 INDEMNIFICATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS.
   (A)   By virtue of ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1003 and ILCS Ch. 745, Act 10, §
2-301, the county is authorized to indemnify the Public Defender, Assistant
Public Defenders and other employees of the office of the Public Defender. The
County Board believes and hereby declares that it is in the best interests of
the county to indemnify the Public Defender, Assistant Public Defenders and
other employees of the office of the Public Defender for actions performed in
the scope of their employment in the manner provided by law.
   (B)   To the fullest extent permitted by the Constitution of the state and
applicable law, each of the following officials and employees of the county,
viz, the Public Defender, Assistant Public Defenders and employees of the
office of the Public Defender shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless
by the county from and against all costs, liabilities, expenses of
investigation, judgments and amounts paid in settlement which may be imposed
upon or reasonably incurred or paid by the official or employee in connection
with or resulting from any claim made against him or her, or any action, suit,
proceeding or investigation in which he or she may be involved, by reason of
his or her being or having been the official or the employee of the county,
whether or not he or she continues to be the official or employee at the time
of the claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation; provided, however,
that the foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
      (1)   Any liability or cost with respect to any matter as to which the
official or employee is finally adjusted to be guilty of willful and wanton
misconduct in the performance of his or her duties as the official or employee;
      (2)   Any payment, expense or cost arising out of a settlement of any
claim, action, suit or proceeding, unless the settlement shall be approved by
the court having jurisdiction over the claim, action, suit or proceeding, with
express knowledge of the existence of the indemnification provided hereby, or
the settlement shall have been made upon the opinion of legal counsel
representing the Board, to the effect that there is no reasonable ground for
any finding of willful and wanton misconduct on the part of the official or
employee and that the anticipated cost of the settlement will not substantially
exceed the estimated cost and expense of defending the claim, action, suit or
proceeding to a final conclusion;
      (3)   Any liability or judgement payable to the county itself; and
      (4)   The cost of independent legal representation in any action, suit or
proceeding if the county offers or otherwise indicates its willingness to
provide a legal defense with respect to the claim, action, suit, proceeding or
investigation.
   (C)   The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any
other rights to which the official or employee may otherwise be entitled as a
matter of law.
(1980 Code, § 32.15) (Res. 00-179, passed 4-20-2000)
DISASTER EMERGENCIES
§ 32.030 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   (A)   The County Board designates emergency interim successors in the
following order of succession, to be contacted in the event of a local disaster
emergency in which the principal executive officer, the County Board
Chairperson, is unable to be located:
      (1)   Vice-Chairperson of the County Board;
      (2)   Chairperson of the Health and Human Services Committee;
      (3)   Chairperson of the Transportation and Communication Committee;
      (4)   Chairperson of the Appropriations Committee;
      (5)   Chairperson of the Capital Improvements and Purchasing Committee;
      (6)   Chairperson of the Land Use Committee; and
      (7)   Vice-Chairpersons of the Committees in the order previously listed.
   (B)   In the event that the Chairperson of the County Board, or his or her
deputy provided for pursuant to law, is unavailable, the powers of the office
shall be exercised and duties shall be discharged by his or her designated
emergency interim successors in the order specified. The emergency interim
successor shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to
which designated until a time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled in
accordance with the constitutions or statutes, or until the officer, or his or
her deputy or a preceding emergency interim successor, again becomes available
to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of his or her office.
(1980 Code, § 32.20) (Res. 85-75, adopted 6-20-1985)
Cross-reference:
   Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, see §§
34.015 through
34.026
§ 32.031 DUTIES OF THE COUNTY CLERK.
   The County Clerk shall compile the names, addresses and phone numbers of the
individuals listed in §
32.030, including the Chairperson of the County Board, and forthwith notify the
State Emergency Services and Disaster Agency and all local Emergency Services
and Disaster Agencies of the individual who is to be contacted in the event of
an emergency.
(1980 Code, § 32.21) (Res. 85-75, adopted 6-20-1985)
CODE OF CONDUCT
§ 32.045 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   No elected official shall use his or her position to influence any decision
or action in any matter in which he or she had any economic interest
distinguishable from that of the public generally.
(1980 Code, § 32.30) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.046 SOLICITING, OFFERING OR RECEIVING ANYTHING OF VALUE.
   (A)   No elected official, his or her spouse or child, shall accept anything
of value, based upon any understanding, either explicit or implicit, that a
judgment or decision may be influenced, or to gain any type of advantage for
themselves.
   (B)   No elected official, his or her spouse or child, shall solicit or
accept any anonymous gift, favor, service or anything of value.
(1980 Code, § 32.31) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.047 ADVICE OR ASSISTANCE.
   No elected official shall solicit or accept anything of value in return for
advice or assistance on any matter concerning the operation or business of the
county.
(1980 Code, § 32.32) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.048 USE OF COUNTY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   No elected official shall engage in or permit unauthorized use of county-
owned property.
(1980 Code, § 32.33) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.049 USE OR DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No elected official shall disclose confidential information or use
confidential information gained in the course of his or her position to gain
any type of advantage for themselves.
(1980 Code, § 32.34) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.050 INTEREST IN COUNTY BUSINESS.
   No elected official shall have a financial interest in:
   (A)   Any contract, work or business of the county; or
   (B)   Or in the purchase of any property that belongs to the county or in
the sale of any property by the county.
(1980 Code, § 32.35) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.051 COMPLIANCE BY COMMISSIONED AGENCIES.
   Any member of any agency so commissioned by an elected official will
likewise comply with this standard of ethics.
(1980 Code, § 32.36) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
§ 32.052 CAMPAIGN ETHICS.
   No elected officials shall knowingly suggest, compel, coerce or intimidate
any person to make or refrain from making any political contribution.
(1980 Code, § 32.37) (Res. 92-221, passed 10-15-1992)
ETHICS ORDINANCE
§ 32.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE.
      (1)   Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the
selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual to any
federal, state of local public office or office in a political organization, or
the selection, nomination or election of presidential or vice-presidential
electors.
      (2)   This terms does not include activities:
         (a)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action;
         (b)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
         (c)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official
duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. The same meaning as that term
is defined in § 3 of the State Public Labor Relations Act.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3)
   COMPENSATED TIME.
      (1)   With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the
employee that counts toward any minimum work requirement imposed as a condition
of his or her employment. For purposes of this subchapter, however, this term
does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
      (2)   With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. The same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-14 of the
Election Code.
(ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-14)
   EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the county, whether on a full-time or part-
time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work
is to be performed. EMPLOYEE does not include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER. The county, as well as its elected and appointed officials who are
subject to this subchapter.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment;
      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3), but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a
county clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for a political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Servicing as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action:
         (a)   By an officer; or
         (b)   By an employee or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business:
         (a)   With the officer; or
         (b)   With an employee or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee.
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated:
         (a)   By the officer; or
         (b)   By an employee or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(1980 Code, § 32.50) (Ord. 04-168, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 05-499, passed 11-17-
2005)
§ 32.066 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the county,
including county issued cell phones, vehicles or other county property or
resources, in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (1)   As part of that officer or employee’s duties;
      (2)   As a condition of employment; or
      (3)   During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this subchapter.
   (E)   No person shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party or of a political organization or club that either:
      (1)   In a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of
public employment; or
      (2)   In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by
federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system
of personnel administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs,
(1980 Code, § 32.51) (Ord. 04-168, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 05-499, passed 11-17-
2005) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.067 GIFT BAN.
   (A)   Gift ban. Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as RECIPIENTS), shall intentionally solicit or
accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (A) above is not applicable to the following:
         (a)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;
         (b)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value;
         (c)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code
or activities associated with a fund-raising event in support of a political
organization or candidate;
         (d)   Educational materials and missions;
         (e)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business related to the
office or an employee’s official capacity;
         (f)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in- law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister and including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée;
         (g)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
            1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            2.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            3.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
         (h)   1.   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value
on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are:
               a.   Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or
               b.   Catered.
            2.   For the purposes of this division (B), CATERED means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
         (i)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee and are customarily provided to others
in similar circumstances;
         (j)   Intra-governmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose
of this section, INTRAGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and INTERGOVERNMENTALGIFT means any
gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity;
         (k)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; and
         (l)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
      (2)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other.
   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this subchapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a
gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount
equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered or succeeded.
(1980 Code, § 32.52) (Ord. 04-168, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 05-499, passed 11-17-
2005) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.068 ETHICS ADVISOR.
   (A)   The County Executive, with the advice and consent of the County Board
shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the county. The Ethics Advisor may not be
already an employee of the county and shall not be related, either by blood or
by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the
county. The Ethics Advisor shall be an independent contractor of the county,
and the compensation for the Ethics Advisor shall be as set by the County
Board.
   (B)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the county concerning the interpretation of and compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter and state ethics laws for the future actions
of any officer or employee. Should the Ethics Advisor become aware of any past
violations of this subchapter, the Ethics Advisor shall inform the Ethics
Commission of the violation. If the Ethics Commission does not exist, the
Ethics Advisor shall inform the County State’s Attorney of the violation. The
Ethics Advisor shall perform other duties as may be delegated by the County
Board.
(1980 Code, § 32.53) (Ord. 04-168, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 05-499, passed 11-17-
2005)
§ 32.069 WHISTLE BLOWER PROTECTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PUBLIC BODY.
         (a)   Any officer, member or agency;
         (b)   The federal government;
         (c)   Any local law enforcement agency or prosecutorial office;
         (d)   Any judiciary, grand or petit jury, law enforcement agency or
prosecutorial office; and
         (e)   Any officer, employee, department, agency or other division of
any of the foregoing.
      RETALIATORY ACTION. The reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion or
denial of promotion or transfer of any employee in the terms and conditions of
employment, and that is taken in retaliation for an employee’s involvement in
protected activity, as set forth in division (B) of this section.
      SUPERVISOR. An officer, a member or an employee who has the authority to
direct and control the work performance of a employee or who has authority to
take corrective action regarding any violation of a law, rule or regulation of
which the employee complains.
   (B)   Protected activity. An officer, a member or an agency shall not take
any retaliatory action against an employee because the employee does any of the
following:
      (1)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, agency or other
employee that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule
or regulation;
      (2)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body or
Ethics Commission conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any
violation of a law, rule or regulation by any officer, member, agency or other
employee; or
      (3)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (C)   Burden of proof.
      (1)   A violation of this section may be established only upon a finding
that:
         (a)   The employee engaged in conduct described in division (B) above;
and
         (b)   The conduct was a contributing factor in the retaliatory action
alleged by the employee.
      (2)   It is not a violation, however, if it is demonstrated that the
officer, member, other employee or agency would have taken the same unfavorable
personnel action in the absence of that conduct.
   (D)   Remedies.
      (1)   The employee may be awarded all remedies necessary to make the
employee whole and to prevent future violations of this section.
      (2)   Remedies imposed by the court may include, but are not limited to,
all of the following:
         (a)   Reinstatement of the employee to either the same position held
before the retaliatory action or to an equivalent position;
         (b)   Two times the amount of back pay;
         (c)   Interest on the back pay; and
         (d)   The reinstatement of full fringe benefits and seniority rights.
   (E)   Preemption. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish the
rights, privileges or remedies of an employee under any other federal or state
law, rule or regulation or under any collective bargaining agreement or
employment contract.
(1980 Code, § 32.54) (Ord. 04-168, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 05-499, passed 11-17-
2005) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
32.066 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in
an amount not to exceed $2,500.
   (B) A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
32.067 is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more
than $5,000.
   (C) Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of §§
32.065 through
32.069 to the local enforcement authorities, the State’s Attorney or any other
law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
   (D)   A violation of §
32.066 shall be referred to the County State’s Attorney or his or her designee
for review. The State’s Attorney or his or her designee may file in the circuit
court by way of an information or sworn complaint charging the offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond
a reasonable doubt.
   (E)   A violation of §
32.067 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the County State’s
Attorney, or his or her designee, or, if an Ethics Commission has been created,
by the Commission through the designated administrative procedure.
   (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of §§
32.065 or
32.066 is subject to discipline or discharge.
(1980 Code, § 32.99) (Ord. 04-168, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 05-499, passed 11-17-
2005)
CHAPTER 33: DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND COMMITTEES
Section
Police Department
   
33.001   Participation in State Police Training Act
   
33.002   Exemptions from merit system
   
33.003   Merit Commission
   
33.004   Administration
   
33.005   Disciplinary measures
   
33.006   Disciplinary procedures; hearing
   
33.007   Classification of ranks
   
33.008   Appointment to the Department
   
33.009   Promotions in the Department
   
33.010   Leave of absence
   
33.011   Resignation and reinstatement
   
33.012   Conduct of members of Police Department
   
33.013   Rules and regulations of Police Department
   
33.014   Employment policies for deputies
   
33.015   Creation, rules and regulations of Auxiliary Police Department
   
33.016   Staffing County Jail
   
33.017   Sworn Personnel Reimbursement Fund
   
33.018   Police Management Association
Platting Department
   
33.030   Creation
Machine Records Department
   
33.045   Creation
Health Department
   
33.060   Definitions
   
33.061   Control of communicable disease
   
33.062   Fees for home health services
   
33.063   Animal control program
Office of Juvenile Services
   
33.075   Creation
   
33.076   Powers and duties
Advisory Committee to Review Locations for Landfills
   
33.090   Creation
Advisory Committee to Review Applications for Urban Community Development Block
Grant Funds
   
33.105   Establishment
Stormwater Management Planning Committee
   
33.120   Establishment
   
33.121   Purpose
   
33.122   Membership
   
33.123   Duties; powers
Road Improvement Impact Fee Advisory Committee
   
33.135   Establishment
City-County Advisory Committee
   
33.150   Establishment
County Department of Finance
   
33.165   Establishment
   
33.166   Duties
Cross-reference:
   Historic Preservation Commission, see
Ch. 166
   Program Review Committee for Economic Development Plan, see §
157.02
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.001 PARTICIPATION IN STATE POLICE TRAINING ACT.
   (A)   The county elects to participate in the program provided for in the
State Police Training Act.
   (B)   Before an individual may commence regular employment as a police
officer, he or she must be certified by the State Local Governmental Law
Enforcement Officers’ Training Board as having successfully completed the
approved training course provided in the Act.
   (C)   This basic training must be completed by the trainee within his or her
probationary period of 12 months.
   (D)   The Commissioners of the County Police Department shall make the
necessary amendments to the personnel rules of the Manual of Rules of the
County Police Department, and to the Commission rules, to require that any
person appointed to the Police Department of the county pursuant to the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-29 and the State Police Training Act
shall not become a regular member of the County Police Department until he or
she has completed the approved training course within 12 months of the date of
his or her initial employment.
(1980 Code, § 33.01) (1966 pp. 338—339, adopted 6- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237,
p. 163)
Statutory reference:
   Board of Police Commissioners, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq.
   Illinois Local Government Law Enforcement Officers’ Training Board, see ILCS
Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.
   Illinois Police Training Act, see ILCS Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 33.002 EXEMPTIONS FROM MERIT SYSTEM.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-12003, the County Board exempts from
coverage of the County Merit Commission all individuals assigned to the
following common ranks: Undersheriff, Chief Deputy, Chief Deputy Warden and
Deputy Chief and other administrative assistants by whatever name called,
without increasing the total number of sworn police personnel commonly referred
to as deputies.
(1980 Code, § 33.02) (Res. 90-81, adopted 5-17-1990)
§ 33.003 MERIT COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Merit Commission consisting of five members to be appointed by the
Sheriff and approved by the County Board is established. Of the initial
appointments to the Commission, one shall be for a two-year term, one for a
term of three years, one for a term of four years, one for a term of five years
and one for a term of six years. Not more than three of the members appointed
may be from the same political party.
   (B)   The compensation for the members of the Commission is fixed on a per
diem basis in the sum of per diem as per budget, plus reimbursement for
reasonable and necessary expenses in connection with the performance of their
duties.
   (C)   The rules and regulations as submitted by the Merit Commission and
listed below in §§
33.004 through
33.015 are adopted by the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 33.03) (1965 pp. 723—724, adopted 9- -1965; 1966 pp. 12—26,
adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp. 45, 87—94; Sup. Rec. Bk.     , p.
451, adopted 10-15-1975) (Res. 03-525, passed 11-20-2003)
Cross-reference:
   Staffing County Jail, see §
33.016
§ 33.004 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Office and employees. The Merit Commission shall maintain an office in
Joliet, Illinois, where the staff assistants as it requires shall function and
where its files and records shall be kept.
   (B)   Confidential matters. The files of the Merit Commission relating to
all personnel matters of the County Police Department shall be confidential;
however, any member of the Department shall be permitted on request to examine
his or her graded written examinations and efficiency reports. The reason or
reasons for rejection of an applicant for appointment to the Department shall
not be disclosed.
   (C)   Regular meetings. A regular meeting of the Merit Commission shall be
held at its office in Joliet, Illinois, on the second Monday of each quarter,
i.e., the second Monday in January, April, July and October. The Commission may
postpone a quarterly meeting to any other time the Chairperson may fix, but not
later than the last day of the same month.
   (D)   Special meetings. Notice of special meetings shall be given by the
Chairperson to each of the Merit Commission members, specifying the time and
place of the special meeting, at least five days before the date thereof;
however, notice may be waived.
   (E)   Voting. On all matters, the concurrence of at least two members of the
Merit Commission shall be necessary to a decision and the action of this
majority shall be the act of the Commission.
   (F)   Quorum. At all meetings, two members of the Merit Commission shall
constitute a quorum and shall conduct any and all business of the Commission.
   (G)   Change in procedures, rules and regulations. The Merit Commission may
at any meeting, regular or special, amend, adopt or rescind any procedures,
rules or regulations by a vote of two-thirds of the members present at the
meeting, subject to approval of the County Board.
   (H)   Officers of the Merit Commission. The officers of the Commission shall
be: Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary.
      (1)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and shall perform all
duties required by him or her by these procedures, rules and regulations.
      (2)   The Vice-Chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence or
disability of the Chairperson.
      (3)   The Secretary shall keep the minutes and records of the Commission.
      (4)   The term of office of the Chairperson and of the Secretary shall be
two years or until his or her term of office as a member of the Commission
shall expire, whichever period is shorter.
   (I)   Minutes and records. The Merit Commission shall keep and maintain a
minute book of meetings in which will be recorded the actions of the Commission
and decisions rendered at each meeting.
   (J)   Inspections. At the request of the Sheriff, or at its discretion, the
Merit Commission shall periodically, and at least annually, inspect and
investigate the morale and efficiency of the personnel of the County Police
Department and may report its findings.
(1980 Code, § 33.04) (1966 pp. 13—14, adopted 1- -66) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
87—88)
§ 33.005 DISCIPLINARY MEASURES.
   (A)   By the Sheriff.
      (1)   The Sheriff, without filing charges with the Merit Commission, may
suspend without pay for any reasonable period not to exceed a total of ten days
within a 12-month period, any member of the County Police Department for
infractions of §§
33.002 through
33.015 and a written report shall be sent to the Merit Commission.
      (2)   The Sheriff may suspend any member of the County Police Department
for a period in addition to the above-limited ten days, only after charges
against that member have been filed with the Merit Commission and pending the
decision of the Commission on those charges.
      (3)   The Sheriff, without filing charges with the Merit Commission, may
take the following disciplinary measures for infractions of §§
33.002 through
33.015 in addition to, or in place of, suspension as above described:
         (a)   Assign extra duty in his or her regular assignment or otherwise,
with or without pay, not to exceed eight hours in any one week nor 40 hours in
any three-month period;
         (b)   Reprimand a member in writing; and
         (c)   Reprimand a member orally.
      (4)   No other disciplinary measures shall be taken by the Sheriff except
by order of the Merit Commission.
   (B)   By the Merit Commission. The Merit Commission, after the hearing upon
written charges as prescribed by the County Police Department Merit Commission
Act, if it shall make a finding of guilty, may order any of the following
disciplinary measures which, in the opinion of the Commission, the offense
merits:
      (1)   Discharge and removal from the County Police Department;
      (2)   Reduction in rank; or
      (3)   Suspension for a period not to exceed a total of 180 days in any
12-month period.
(1980 Code, § 33.05) (1966 pp. 14—15, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
88—89)
Cross-reference:
   Disciplinary procedures; hearings, see §
33.006
§ 33.006 DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES; HEARING.
   (A)   Complaints. In all cases where the Sheriff desires to discipline a
member of the County Police Department beyond measures prescribed by §
33.005(A), he or she shall file with the Merit Commission a written complaint
in quintuplicate, setting forth a plain and concise statement of the facts upon
which the complaint is based and the specific section or sections of §§
33.002 through
33.015 which the accused member is charged with violating.
   (B)   Notification of hearing.
      (1)   On receipt of a complaint from the Sheriff, the Merit Commission
will send a letter to the accused member enclosing a copy of the complaint. The
letter shall advise of the filing of the complaint and set forth the time and
place of hearing of the charges contained in the complaint. The letter shall be
sent by registered or by certified mail, return receipts requested, at the
residence address of the member shown on the face of the complaint. Delivery of
the letter to his or her residence, as shown by the return receipt, shall
constitute service of the complaint on the accused member.
      (2)   A copy of the letter shall be mailed to the Sheriff and shall
constitute notice to him or her of the time and place of the hearing on the
complaint.
   (C)   Hearings on charges.
      (1)   All hearings shall be public.
      (2)   At the time and place of hearing, the Sheriff and the accused
member may be represented by counsel if they desire.
      (3)   All proceedings before the Merit Commission during the hearing
shall be recorded.
      (4)   The record of hearings will not be transcribed unless requested by
the Merit Commission or by any party interested in the hearing. The cost of the
transcript shall be borne by the person requesting it.
      (5)   All witnesses shall be sworn by the Chairperson or another member
of the Merit Commission prior to testifying.
      (6)   The Merit Commission will first hear the witnesses substantiating
the charges which have been made. Thereafter, the accused member may present
and examine those witnesses whom he or she desires the Commission to hear. All
parties shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses presented by the
opposite party. The Commission shall have the right to examine and to recall
witnesses.
   (D)   Decision on charges. After the Merit Commission has made its finding
and determined its order, it shall mail to the accused member by registered or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of the finding and order
of the Commission. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the Sheriff.
   (E)   Subpoena.
      (1)   The Sheriff and the accused member, or their respective counsel,
may, at any time before the hearing, apply to the Merit Commission for a
subpoena directed to specific persons requiring their appearance at the hearing
and, if necessary, requiring them to produce at the hearing books, papers,
records and any other things that may be relevant to the hearing. The
application shall specify the names and addresses of the persons to be
subpoenaed and the documents and things which they are to be required to
produce. The requested subpoena will be issued.
      (2)   A subpoena issued by the Merit Commission may be served by any
adult person designated by the party requesting the subpoena. A subpoena will
not be issued for anyone residing outside the state.
      (3)   Any request for continuance by reason of inability to serve the
subpoena shall be filed in the office of the Merit Commission at least five
days before the date set for the hearing.
   (F)   Filing of papers. All papers may be filed with the Merit Commission by
mailing them to the County Police Department Merit Commission at its address in
Joliet, Illinois. All papers may also be filed by delivering them to the
Commission’s office in Joliet, Illinois personally or by messenger. For the
purpose of these procedures, rules and regulations, the filing date of any
paper shall be the date it was received in the Commission’s office, in the
event the paper is delivered personally or by messenger. In the event a paper
is forwarded by mail, then the filing date shall be the date which is
postmarked on the envelope containing the paper.
   (G)   Form of papers.
      (1)   All papers filed in any proceeding shall be typewritten or printed
and shall be on one side of the paper only.
      (2)   If typewritten, the lines shall be double spaced, except that long
quotations may be single spaced and indented.
      (3)   All papers shall not be larger than eight and one-half inches wide
by 11 inches long and shall have inside margins of not less than one inch.
      (4)   The original of all papers filed shall be signed in ink by the
party filing the paper or by his or her counsel.
      (5)   If papers are filed by an attorney, his or her name and address
shall appear thereon.
   (H)   Continuance of hearing. No hearing shall be continued at the request
of any of the parties thereto or their counsel, unless the request is made
orally to the Chairperson of the Merit Commission or in writing at the
Commission’s offices in Joliet, at least ten days before the date for which the
hearing is scheduled.
(1980 Code, § 33.06) (1966 pp. 21—24, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
92—93)
§ 33.007 CLASSIFICATION OF RANKS.
   The ranks in the County Police Department shall be as follows:
   (A)   Undersheriff;
   (B)   Lieutenant;
   (C)   (1)   Sergeant; and
      (2)   Investigator.
   (D)   Patrol officer; and
   (E)   Probationary patrol officer.
(1980 Code, § 33.07) (1966 p. 15, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 89;
Sup. Rec. Bk. p. 224, adopted 6-13-1977)
§ 33.008 APPOINTMENT TO THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Appointment to the Patrol Division. Applicants for appointment as
patrol officers to the County Police Department must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   Be no younger than 21 years of age nor older than 35 years of age
at the time his or her application is received by the Merit Commission.
However, if the applicant has served three or more years on active duty in the
military service of the United States, his or her application shall not be
rejected because of his or her age unless he or she is younger than 21 or older
than 40 at the time the application is received by the Merit Commission. The
age limit is waived for those who have had recognized police experience and are
not older than 55 years of age;
      (2)   Be a high school graduate, or have certification of equivalent
formal education;
      (3)   Be no less than five feet eight inches tall; however, an applicant
for appointment as a female police officer must be no less than five feet five
inches tall;
      (4)   Have weight in proportion to height;
      (5)   Pass any examinations of intelligence, reasoning and judgment that
the Merit Commission may from time to time prescribe;
      (6)   Pass any screening examinations the Merit Commission may from time
to time prescribe;
      (7)   Be acceptable to the Merit Commission following investigation of
background, reputation and character;
      (8)   Be acceptable to the Merit Commission on an oral interview;
      (9)   Have passed the Red Cross course or be in its program;
      (10)   Have a valid driver’s license; and
      (11)   Be a resident of the county.
   (B)   Veterans; preference for appointment. Those applicants for appointment
to the County Police Department who have honorably served in the military or
naval services of the United States shall file with their supplementary
employment questionnaire a sworn or certified copy of their certificate of
honorable service, or any other evidence they may have of honorable service in,
or honorable discharge from the armed services of the United States. Each
applicant who is found, on the basis of the physical, mental and screening
examination and the background investigation, to possess the prescribed
requisites for appointment, shall receive a numerical rank on the appointment
list above that of all other applicants who received the same or a lower grade
on the examinations.
   (C)   Appointment list for female police officer. The Merit Commission shall
establish a separate appointment list of women applicants qualified for
appointment.
   (D)   Certification for appointment. After the physical, mental and
screening examinations and the background investigation have been completed,
those applicants who have been found to possess the prescribed requisites for
appointment shall be so informed by the Merit Commission.
      (1)   Thereafter, upon receiving notice from the Sheriff or from the
Chief of the County Police Department that a vacancy or vacancies exist, the
Merit Commission will conduct oral interviews of the applicants in order of
their rank in the examinations and shall certify for appointment those
applicants deemed by the Merit Commission to be qualified.
      (2)   An applicant certified for appointment who declines to accept
appointment within 60 days after it is offered to him or her, shall be deemed
to have withdrawn his or her application, and his or her name shall be stricken
forthwith from the list of those certified.
(1980 Code, § 33.08) (1966 pp. 15—17, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
89—90)
§ 33.009 PROMOTIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   To patrol officer first class.
      (1)   There will no written examination for patrol officer for the rank
of patrol officer first class.
      (2)   The Sheriff shall recommend to the Merit Commission those patrol
officers who merit promotion because of satisfactory performance of duty, which
shall be stated in the recommendation.
      (3)   Upon receiving the recommendation, the Merit Commission will
interview the officer recommended and review his or her fitness reports. If in
the opinion of the Commission, he or she is qualified for the recommended
promotion, the Commission will then certify him or her for promotion to the
higher rank.
   (B)   To sergeant.
      (1)   Eligibility. To be eligible for promotion to sergeant, an officer
must meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Must have served as a patrol officer first class in the County
Police Department for at least two years;
         (b)   Must have taken and passed the promotional examination for
sergeant offered by the Merit Commission; and
         (c)   At the time of notification of the holding of an examination for
promotion, must not be in any of the following categories:
            1.   Under suspension by order of the Merit Commission;
            2.   On leave of absence, except for military service, for 15 or
more days; and
            3.   On inactive duty due to disability.
      (2)   Examination. A written examination shall be given by the Merit
Commission as needed and at the discretion of the Commission.
      (3)   Score. In compiling the total score of the sergeant’s promotional
examination, the following formula will be used in determining the grades which
will be posted.
         (a)   Results of written promotional examination = 50%;
         (b)   Efficiency mark, as prepared and forwarded to the Merit
Commission by the Sheriff or by the Chief of the County Police Department =
25%; and
         (c)   Results of the oral examination = 25%.
      (4)   Certification for promotion to sergeant.
         (a)   The Merit Commission shall notify those who have taken the
promotional examination of their total score computed in accordance with the
above formula and of their numerical rank among those who took the examination.
         (b)   Thereafter, upon receiving notice from the Sheriff that a
vacancy, or vacancies, exist in the rank of sergeant, the Merit Commission will
conduct oral interviews of candidates in the order of their rank, based on the
total score, and shall certify to the Sheriff those candidates deemed by the
Commission to be qualified for promotion to sergeant.
         (c)   The Merit Commission may certify for promotion more candidates
than there are vacancies then existing in the rank of sergeant.
      (5)   Posting of certified promotion lists.  The promotional list
certified to the Sheriff, or a copy thereof, shall be posted in the central
office and in the various stations of the County Police Department.
      (6)   Duration of certified promotional list.  A promotional list
certified to the Sheriff shall remain in force for two years from the date of
certification or until a subsequent promotional examination shall have been
given by the Merit Committee, whichever period is shorter.
      (7)   Withdrawal of application. An applicant for appointment to the rank
of sergeant who shall decline to accept the appointment within 60 days after it
is offered to him or her, shall be deemed to have withdrawn his or her
application and his or her name shall be stricken forthwith from the list of
those certified.
   (C)   To lieutenant.
      (1)   Eligibility. To be eligible for promotion to lieutenant, an officer
must meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Must have served as a sergeant in the County Police Department
for at least two years;
         (b)   Must have taken and passed the promotional examination for
lieutenant offered by the Merit Commission; and
         (c)   At the time of notification of the holding of an examination for
promotion, must not be in any of the following categories:
            1.   Under suspension by order of the Merit Commission at any time
during the preceding year;
            2.   On leave of absence, except for active military service, for
15 or more days; and
            3.   On inactive duty due to disability.
      (2)   Examination. The Merit Commission shall give a written examination
for promotion to the rank of lieutenant.
      (3)   Score. In compiling the total score of candidates for lieutenant by
promotion or appointment, the following formula will be used in determining the
total grade of candidates for promotion to the rank of lieutenant:
         (a)   Results of the written promotional examination = 50%;
         (b)   Efficiency mark as prepared and forwarded to the Merit
Commission by the Sheriff or by the Chief of the County Police Department =
25%; and
         (c)   Oral examination = 25%.
      (4)   Certification for promotion to lieutenant.
         (a)   The Merit Commission shall notify those who have taken the
written examination for lieutenant of their total score computed in accordance
with the above formula and of their numerical rank among those who took the
examination.
         (b)   Thereafter, upon receiving notice from the Sheriff that a
vacancy, or vacancies, exist in the rank of lieutenant, the Merit Commission
will interview candidates in the order of their numerical rank, and shall
certify to the Sheriff those candidates deemed by the Commission to be
qualified for appointment, or promotion, to the rank of lieutenant.
         (c)   The Merit Commission may certify more candidates than there are
vacancies existing in the rank of lieutenant.
         (d)   An applicant for appointment to the rank of lieutenant who shall
decline to accept the appointment within 60 days after it is offered to him or
her, shall be deemed to have withdrawn his or her application and his or her
name shall be stricken forthwith from the list of those certified.
      (5)   Duration of certified list. The list certified to the Sheriff shall
remain in force for two years or until a subsequent examination shall have been
given, whichever period is shorter.
(1980 Code, § 33.09) (1966 pp. 17—20, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
90—91)
§ 33.010 LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Leave of absence without pay may be granted any member of the County
Police Department irrespective of rank. The leave shall be from the position
and rank he or she holds at the time the leave is granted and on termination of
the leave, the officer shall be returned to the same rank he or she held at the
time the leave was granted.
   (B)   All leaves of absence, except for military service, shall be for one
year or less, with the privilege of obtaining a new leave at the expiration of
the first.
      (1)   Leaves of absence shall be granted by the Sheriff with the approval
of the Merit Commission, acting through its Chairperson.
      (2)   An officer on leave of absence who accepts a position other than
that for which the leave is granted, without the written approval of the
Sheriff and the Commission, shall be deemed to have resigned. An officer who
fails to return to his or her position following the granted leave, or to
request and be granted a new leave of absence on or before the expiration of
his or her first leave, shall also be deemed to have resigned.
   (C)   Leave of absence without pay may be granted for the following reasons
and purposes:
      (1)   Illness of an employee, properly certified by a physician
acceptable to the Merit Commission; however, the Commission may require a
member who has applied for a leave, to submit to a physical examination by a
physician of its choosing;
      (2)   Active duty in the military or naval service of the United States
during a period of national emergency; and
      (3)   Other reasons acceptable to the Sheriff and the Merit Commission.
(1980 Code, § 33.10) (1966 pp. 20—21, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
91—92)
§ 33.011 RESIGNATION AND REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   Any member who resigns from the County Police Department for any
reason will not be reinstated.
   (B)   Should a former member desire to again affiliate himself or herself
with the County Police Department, he or she must meet the basic requirements
for eligibility for appointment to the County Police Department, take the
written examinations then being administered and go through all screening
procedures in competition with all other applicants.
(1980 Code, § 33.11) (1966 p. 21, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 92)
§ 33.012 CONDUCT OF MEMBERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Any member of the County Police Department who shall be guilty of any
of the following shall be subject to disciplinary action by the Sheriff and the
Merit Commission.
   (B)   No member of the County Police Department shall:
      (1)   Violate any law or statute of a state or of the United States;
      (2)   Violate any ordinance of a county or municipal government;
      (3)   Willfully mistreat any person;
      (4)   Violate any of the general orders, special orders or rules and
regulations of the Department which are not inconsistent with these rules and
regulations;
      (5)   Negligently or carelessly use any weapon;
      (6)   Knowingly make a false official report;
      (7)   Fail to obey a lawful order;
      (8)   Be insubordinate to, or show disrespect for, a superior in the
Department;
      (9)   Mistreat a junior member of the Department;
      (10)   Neglect to perform his or her duties or perform his or her duties
with gross inefficiency or incapacity;
      (11)   Engage in any conduct unbecoming to a member of the Department or
which tends to reflect discredit on the Department;
      (12)   Leave his or her post of duty without permission or without being
properly relieved;
      (13)   Be absent from duty without leave or appropriate permission;
      (14)   Willfully destroy or damage any property of the Department;
      (15)   Use of property of the Department without authority;
      (16)   Receive, solicit or attempt to solicit money or anything of value
for performing or failing to perform any police duty;
      (17)   Solicit business, clients or customers for any business
establishment or any business or professional person;
      (18)   Drink any kind of intoxicating liquor while on duty or while in
uniform except when the action is required and properly authorized in the
performance of assigned duties;
      (19)   Use of any habit-forming drug or narcotic, except at the direction
of a physician;
      (20)   Associate with persons having known criminal records or
connections, except when the action is required and properly authorized in the
performance of assigned duties;
      (21)   Frequent any establishment of unsavory reputation or owned or
operated by any person having a known criminal record or connections, except
when the action is required or properly authorized in the performance of
assigned duties; and
      (22)   Disseminate or release any information concerning essential police
matters except when properly authorized to do so.
(1980 Code, § 33.12) (1966 pp. 24—25, adopted 1- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, pp.
93—94)
Cross-reference:
   Disciplinary measures, see §
33.005
   Disciplinary procedures; hearing, see §
33.006
§ 33.013 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The rules and regulations of the County Sheriff’s Police Department adopted
March 6, 1966 are adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this code
as if fully set out herein. Copies of the rules and regulations are on record
with the County Clerk and available from the Police Department.
(1980 Code, § 33.13)
§ 33.014 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES FOR DEPUTIES.
   The following employment policies are established for deputies in accordance
with the County Deputies Union contract and Local #2961.
   (A)   There will be a 9% pay increase for each year for 1982 and 1983.
   (B)   There will be 90% paid hospitalization and major medical.
   (C)   There will be $0.25 per hour shift differential for all shifts
starting after 12:00 noon and before 6:00 a.m.
   (D)   All mandatory (required) training outside normal work hours (i.e. off
duty) will be paid at straight time.
   (E)   Each deputy shall be allowed 12 sick days per year, and shall be able
to accumulate unused sick days from year to year with a maximum as set forth in
division (H) below.
   (F)   Each deputy shall be allowed one personal day per year. Unused
personal days shall not accumulate from year to year.
   (G)   If a deputy does not use a sick day nor a personal day during the
fiscal year, then he or she shall be allowed to accumulate two additional sick
days as a bonus for a maximum of 14 per year.
   (H)   Sick time shall accumulate to a maximum of 150 days.
(1980 Code, § 33.14) (Res. 81-139, adopted 8-27-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Exemptions from merit system, see §
33.002
§ 33.015 CREATION, RULES AND REGULATIONS OF AUXILIARY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is created the County Auxiliary Police whose members shall
consist of persons of good character and repute who have satisfactorily
completed and passed examinations and qualifications that may be prescribed by
the Sheriff and approved by the County Board. All members shall have attained
at least the age of 21 years.
   (B)   Members of the Auxiliary Police Department shall comply with the
following.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the auxiliary police to direct traffic and
provide assistance to the regular Sheriff’s police in the event of natural or
human-made disasters, and to aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the
Sheriff.
      (2)   Members shall wear any uniforms or identifying apparel that shall
be designated and approved by the Sheriff.
      (3)   No guns or weapons shall be carried by the members except under the
specific direction of the Sheriff.
      (4)   Members shall receive no compensation for their services, except as
may be allowed or provided by the County Board, and by state statute.
      (5)   There shall be held monthly meetings of the members for the purpose
of training and instructing the members. The time and place of the meetings is
to be designated by the Sheriff.
      (6)   Applications for membership in the County Auxiliary Police
Department shall be made to the Sheriff, on forms provided by him or her for
the purpose.
      (7)   The Sheriff shall, from time to time, adopt and prescribe rules and
regulations for the operation and conduct of the Auxiliary Police Department.
      (8)   Appointments to the Auxiliary Police Department will be made by the
Sheriff with the advice and consent of the County Board. The Sheriff is
authorized to appoint 80 auxiliary deputies.
      (9)   Auxiliary deputies shall perform those duties prescribed by law
only at those times and places specifically authorized by the Sheriff or Chief
Deputy.
      (10)   No member shall drink intoxicating liquors while on any duty, or
in uniform while on or off duty.
      (11)   When permitted by the Sheriff to carry weapons, no member will
remove any firearm from its holster except to protect his or her life.
Positively no horseplay with guns shall be permitted.
      (12)   No member will accept or arrange to accept any gifts or gratuities
while on or off duty in any connection with his or her police activities.
      (13)   Members will obey all laws and regulations, thereby setting an
example for the citizens by their good conduct.
      (14)   Members will respect the rights and safety of the public in
carrying out their police work.
      (15)   Members are to cooperate with all law enforcement officers, to be
courteous and polite to everyone they contact, and to carry out police duties
as persons of the finest caliber.
      (16)   All special assignments, including picnics, fairs, private parking
(such as churches or shopping centers), dances, special community programs and
the like, shall be cleared and approved by the Sheriff and/or the Chief Deputy.
(1980 Code, § 33.15) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 494, adopted 11-19-1975) (Res. 79-
148, adopted 7-25-1979)
§ 33.016 STAFFING COUNTY JAIL.
   All corrections officers appointed by the Sheriff of the county to staff the
county jail shall be made from a list of qualified applicants furnished to him
or her by the County Merit Commission. Lists will be furnished to the Sheriff
which have been completed according to recognized merit principles of public
employment. This plan shall be administered by the County Merit Commission, who
shall promulgate rules, regulations and procedures for the operation of the
merit system, effective January 1, 1982.
(1980 Code, § 33.16) (Res. 81-226, adopted 12-17-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Merit Commission, §
33.003
§ 33.017 SWORN PERSONNEL REIMBURSEMENT FUND.
   The County Board establishes the Sworn Personnel Reimbursement Fund to pay
for extra-curricular employment. The rate to be charged for this service shall
be $15 per hour for the service of a deputy and $17 per hour for the service of
a deputy and police vehicle for patrol purposes.
(1980 Code, § 33.17) (Res. 81-211, adopted 11-19-1981)
§ 33.018 POLICE MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION.
   The County Board recognizes the County Sheriff’s Police Management
Association as the exclusive representative for all full-time members of the
County Sheriff’s Police who are sworn peace officers and hold the Merit
Commission rank of sergeant and lieutenant, excluding those serving in exempt
positions.
(1980 Code, § 33.18) (Res. 91-216, passed 9-19-1991)
PLATTING DEPARTMENT
§ 33.030 CREATION.
   There is established a Department for Mapping and Platting as set forth in
ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1041.
(1980 Code, § 33.20) (1963 pp. 465—466, adopted 8- -1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235,
p. 315)
MACHINE RECORDS DEPARTMENT
§ 33.045 CREATION.
   (A)   There is established a Machine Records Department, which shall operate
in and from the quarters and space assigned to it by the Committee on Public
Property of the County Board, to which Committee the Machine Records Department
shall be subject for administrative purposes.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the Machine Records Department to
manage and control the processing of information and records for the benefit of
the various county officials, offices and departments by means of any
specialized equipment and machines that may be owned or procured by lease or
purchase for this purpose, by the County Board.
   (C)   The services of the Machine Records Department shall be available at
all reasonable times to all officials, offices and departments of the county,
subject to scheduling by the Machine Records Department head; and the costs of
any services rendered by the Machine Records Department shall be charged pro
rata to the officials, offices and departments making use thereof, by the
County Auditor.
   (D)   The Machine Records Department shall be under the supervision of a
qualified department head appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board with
the approval of the Board, and staffed with any personnel the Department head
and the Committee on Public Property with the approval of the Board, deem
necessary.
(1980 Code, § 33.25) (1962 pp. 610—611, adopted 11- -1962) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235,
p. 18)
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
§ 33.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Board of Health of the county.
   DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
   HOME HEALTH AGENCY or AGENCY. The Health Department of the county which is
responsible for providing the home health service in accordance with the
certification standards established by the State Department of Public Health.
   HOME HEALTH SERVICE. Those items and services furnished to individuals,
under the care of a physician, on a visiting basis in a place of residence used
as the individual’s home. These services are provided by the Home Health Agency
under a plan for furnishing items and services to an individual, established
and periodically reviewed by the patient’s physician, and include part-time or
intermittent nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
professional nurse, and the services of one or more of the following: physical,
occupational or speech therapy, medical social work or intermittent services of
a home health aide.
(1980 Code, § 33.30) (1966 pp. 393—394, adopted 6- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237,
p. 169)
§ 33.061 CONTROL OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   (A)   Rules and regulations for the control of communicable diseases issued
and promulgated by the State Department of Public Health, in force and effect
on and after September 1, 1945, are incorporated by reference as though fully
written herein, as the rules and regulations for the control of communicable
disease in and for the county.
   (B)   This resolution shall be referred to and known as County Health
Regulation No. 1.
(1980 Code, § 33.31) (1945 p. 299, adopted 11- -1945) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, pp.
41—42)
Cross-reference:
   Minimum housing requirements, see
Ch. 151
   Mobile home parks, see
Ch. 152
   Restaurants and food handlers, see
Ch. 114
   Sewers and sewage disposal, see
Ch. 51
   Solid waste disposal, see
Ch. 50
Statutory reference:
   Control of disease by State Department of Public Health, see ILCS Ch. 410,
Act 315, §§ 1 and 2
   County health departments, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-25001 et seq.
§ 33.062 FEES FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-25013(B), the Board of Health is
authorized to collect fees for service rendered by the Home Health Agency.
   (B)   The Board of Health has the power to establish a fee schedule which
shall not be more than the actual cost based on accepted cost-accounting
methods of rendering home health service and to collect these fees from persons
who receive these services or from public or private agencies which, pursuant
to contract, agree to pay the fees on behalf of eligible persons.
   (C)   The Board of Health is authorized to:
      (1)   Accept gifts and bequests for the purpose of administering the home
health service program, and to expend the gifts and bequests or invest the
gifts and bequests and expend the income therefrom, for the maintenance of the
home health service; and
      (2)   Deposit all gifts and bequests received which are not otherwise
invested, the income from those gifts and bequests which are invested, and all
fees collected, in the county health fund to the credit of the home health
service.
(1980 Code, § 33.32) (1966 pp. 393—394, adopted 6- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237,
p. 169)
§ 33.063 ANIMAL CONTROL PROGRAM.
   The county animal control program is under the jurisdiction of the County
Board of Health.
(1980 Code, § 33.33) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 636—637, adopted 11-30-1977)
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 90
OFFICE OF JUVENILE SERVICES
§ 33.075 CREATION.
   (A)   The office of Juvenile Services is created within the circuit court
administration. This office shall be charged with the responsibility of
developing a comprehensive program for the youth of this county with emphasis
on prevention and rehabilitation.
   (B)   Staff positions shall be created for the following:
      (1)   Director;
      (2)   Administrative Officer; and
      (3)   Clerical.
   (C)   Line items shall be created for commodities, contractual and travel
shall be commensurate with the positions.
(1980 Code, § 33.40) (Res. 81-169, adopted 9-24-1981)
§ 33.076 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The scope and responsibility of the office of Juvenile Services shall
include the following:
      (1)   Assess existing programs and resources;
      (2)   Coordinate existing programs and resources and make them more
available to the Juvenile Court and the Probation Department;
      (3)   Encourage and develop community programs which are remedial;
      (4)   Investigate and recommend preventative measures;
      (5)   Recommend facilities needed in the county based on statistical
data, mandates and trends in state law, and cost accountability;
      (6)   Research grants and moneys for assistance in funding of programs;
and
      (7)   Formulate a long-range program for the office of Juvenile Services.
   (B)   The County Board Chairperson shall appoint a 12-member advisory
committee of responsible and interested persons (with a County Officers
Committee member as a liaison member) who shall assist in development and will
ensure continued community support and interest, thus guaranteeing a realistic
approach to the needs of this county’s youth.
(1980 Code, § 33.41) (Res. 81-169, adopted 9-24-1981)
ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO REVIEW LOCATIONS FOR LANDFILLS
§ 33.090 CREATION.
   (A)   The County Board approves the creation of an Advisory Committee for
the implementation of Senate Bill 172, “Location of Landfill Sites within the
County”, to be comprised of nine County Board members, one from each County
Board district.
   (B)   The Advisory Committee shall assist in studying the requests for
landfill sites when applications are received from the Environmental Protection
Agency, and if necessary, will hold public hearings to secure input from the
citizens of the affected area.
(1980 Code, § 33.50) (Res. 81-232, adopted 12-17-1981; Res. 82-92, adopted 7-
22-1982)
ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO REVIEW APPLICATIONS FOR URBAN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK
GRANT FUNDS
§ 33.105 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The County Board approves the establishment of an Advisory Committee
for the use of County Community Development Block Grant Entitlement Funds. The
Advisory Committee shall be comprised of nine members, the Chairperson of the
County Board to serve as Chairperson and to make recommendations to the County
Board.
   (B)   The Advisory Committee shall assist in studying the proposed uses of
these block grant funds, and after their evaluation the Committee shall conduct
public hearings concerning those in the areas requesting grants of the
entitlement funds.
   (C)   The Community Development Block Grant Advisory Board Bylaws, as
attached to Resolution 93-174, adopted July 15, 1993, are herefore adopted by
reference as if fully set forth herein. Once adopted, these bylaws shall
supersede any other formal or informal bylaws or operating policies of the
Advisory Board, that might exist.
(1980 Code, § 33.60) (Res. 81-233, adopted 12-17-1981; Res. 93-174, passed 7-
15-1993)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANNING COMMITTEE
§ 33.120 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The County Stormwater Management Committee is hereby established with
current County Board Districts.
(1980 Code, § 33.70) (Res. 93-217, passed 12-16-1993)
§ 33.121 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Stormwater Management Committee is to develop a
comprehensive countywide stormwater management plan and implementation program.
Staff support for the Committee shall be provided by the County Land Use
Department. The County Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
Stormwater Management Plan as developed and forward its recommendation to the
Committee and to the County Board’s Land Use Committee prior to their
consideration.
(1980 Code, § 33.71) (Res. 93-217, passed 12-16-1993)
§ 33.122 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Stormwater Management Planning Committee shall consist of twice
the number of current County Board Districts. One-half of the Committee shall
be appointed by the County Executive from the appropriate districts. The
remaining one-half of the Committee shall be appointed as authorized by ILCS
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062. Members of the Committee shall include a Chair and
Vice-Chair, one of whom shall be a county representative and one a municipal
representative.
   (B)   The districts shall be set up by current County Board Districts, as
adopted by the County Board on November 2, 2021, and as follows.
District Township Precincts
District Township   Precincts
District Channahon   
#1
        Custer      
        Florence    
        Reed        
        Wesley      
        Wilmington  
        Joliet     24 (8-80 right-of-way), 33
        Troy       1, 3, 7, 8 (Shorewood proper residents), 10, 11 (South of Jefferson St), 12
                    (South of Glenwood Ave), 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22
District Jackson     
#2
        Manhattan   
        Peotone     
        Washington  
        Will        
        Wilton      
                    8 (South of LaPorte Rd), 11, 13 (Frankfort proper residents), 16 (West of
        Frankfort  84th Ave, no Tinley Park proper residents), 17 (East of Wolf Rd & South of
                    Hickory Creek), 18, 23 (West of 108th Ave, South of Nebraska, South of Penny
                    Ln), 27
        Joliet     30 (New Lenox residents)
                    7 (East of Marley Rd, South of Francis Rd), 8 (Sans Mokena proper
                    residents), 9 (South of Washington St, South of Old Plank Trail, East of
        New Lenox  Gougar Rd), 10 (South of Haven Ave, West of Nelson Rd), 11 (South of
                    Woodlawn Rd, West of Western Ave), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 (West of Gougar Rd,
                    South of Haven Ave), 17 (South of Illinois Hwy, East of Cedar Rd), 18, 19,
                    20
District Crete       
#3
        Green       
         Garden
        Monee       
        Frankfort  15, 16 (East of 84th Ave), 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 (East of 108th Ave, North of
                    Nebraska Street, Northeast of Shilling Rd), 24, 25, 26, 28
District            1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 (North of LaPorte Rd), 9, 10, 12, 13 (Sans Frankfort
#4       Frankfort  proper residents), 14, 16, 17 (West of Wolf Rd & North of Canadian National
                    Railway)
                    1 (South of Long Run, West of I-355, Southeast of Archer Ave (Sans Lockport
        Homer      Heights residents), 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 (East of I-355) 11, 12, 13
                    (East of I-355, North of 159th St; Section 20 except SW ¼), 14, 16 (Sans
                    Lockport proper residents of New Lenox proper residents East of I-355, 17
                    2 (Sans New Lenox residents, East of Cedar Rd, North of US 6, East of Parker
        New Lenox  Rd), 6 (East of Parker Rd, North of Francis Rd), 7 (North of Francis Rd), 8
                    (Mokena residents)
District            10 (West of I-355), 13 (West of I-355, South of 159th St, SW ¼ Section 20),
#5       Homer      15, 16 (Lockport proper residents or New Lenox proper residents East of I-
                    355; all Lockport and New Lenox proper residents West of I-355), 18
        Joliet     1 (Crest Hill proper residents), 2 (residents Northeast of US 30, North of
                    Boston Ave, West of Helden Ave)
        Lockport   1 (Lockport residents Southeast of Archer Ave), 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
                    17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24
                    1, 2 (West of Cedar Rd, South of US 6, West of Parker Rd), 3, 4, 5, 6 (West
                    of Parker Rd, South of Francis Rd), 7 (South of Francis Rd, West of Marley
        New Lenox  Rd), 9 (North of Washington St, North of Old Plank Trail, West of Gougar
                    Rd), 10 (North of Haven Ave, East of Nelson Rd), 11 (North of Woodlawn Rd,
                    East of Western Ave), 16 (East of Gougar Rd, North of Haven Ave), 17 (North
                    of Illinois Hwy, West of Cedar Rd)
        Plainfield 18 (South of Division St), 24 (Crest Hill proper residents), 34
        Troy       6
                    4 (South of Ingalls Ave, East of Dearborn), 5, 6, 7, 8 (South of Clara Ave,
                    West of Westminster Rd), 9 (West of Westminster Rd), 11 (East of Oakland
                    Ave, North of Ross St, East of Clement St), 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18 (West of
District            Westminster Rd), 19 (East of Wilcox St, Northeast of US 30), 20 (West of
#6       Joliet     Westminster Rd, South of Glenwood Ave, West of Marquette Rd, West of
                    Woodlawn Ave), 21 (South of John St, West of Catherine St, South of Oneida
                    St), 22 (South of Oneida St, East of Wilcox St), 23 (South of Buell Ave,
                    South of Charlotte Ave, East of US 30), 24 (North of I-80), 25, 26, 27, 28,
                    29, 30 (Sans New Lenox residents), 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37
                    1 (Sans Crest Hill proper residents), 2 (North of Boston Ave, West of Helden
                    Ave), 3, 4 (North of Ingalls Ave, West of Dearborn), 8 (North of Clara Ave,
                    East of Westminster Rd), 9 (East of Westminster Rd), 10, 11 (West of Oakland
District            Ave, South of Ross St, West of Clement St), 17, 18 (East of Westminster Rd),
#7       Joliet     19 (West of Wilcox St, Southwest of US 30), 20 (East of Westminster Rd,
                    North of Glenwood Ave, East of Marquette Rd, East of Woodlawn Ave), 21
                    (North of John St, East of Catherine St, North of Oneida St), 22 (North of
                    Oneida St, West of Wilcox St), 23 (North of Buell Ave, North of Charlotte
                    Ave, West of US 30)
                    17 (Sans Plainfield proper residents), 18 (North of Division St), 21, 22
        Plainfield (West of Route 59), 23 (East of I-55), 24 (Sans Crest Hill proper
                    residents), 27 (South of N ½ NW ¼ Section 32), 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35
        Troy       2, 4, 5, 8 (Sans Shorewood proper residents), 9, 11 (North of Jefferson St),
                    12 (North of Glenwood Ave)
                    1, 2, 3 (Sans Bolingbrook proper residents), 4 (Sans Bolingbrook proper
District Plainfield residents), 6 (Sans Romeoville proper residents), 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16,
#8                  17 (Plainfield residents), 19, 20, 22 (East of Route 59), 23 (I-55 right-of-
                    way), 25, 26, 27 (N ½ NW ¼ Section 32)
        Wheatland  1 (West of US 30, South of 111th St), 16 (Sans Naperville proper residents),
                    23, 25, 26 (West of Essington Rd), 27 (Plainfield residents), 28, 29, 30
District DuPage     24 (Romeoville residents), 31, 32, 33 (Sans Bolingbrook or Woodridge proper
#9                  residents), 34, 35, 36, 37
        Homer      1 (North of Long Run, East of I-355, Northwest of Archer Ave; Lockport
                    Heights residents)
        Lockport   1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (Sans Lockport proper residents Northwest of Archer Ave), 6,
                    7, 8, 9
        Plainfield 3 (Bolingbrook residents), 4 (Bolingbrook residents), 5, 6 (Romeoville
                    residents), 7, 11, 12
                    19, 20 (South of Hassert Blvd, East of DuPage River), 21 (South of High
        Wheatland  Meadow Rd, East of Thatcher Dr, South of Hassert Blvd), 22, 24 (South of
                    High Meadow Rd), 26 (East of Essington Rd), 27 (Sans Plainfield residents)
District DuPage     1, 2, 3, 7, 10 (Naperville residents)
#10
                    1 (East of US 30, North of 111th St), 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
        Wheatland  13, 14, 15, 16 (Naperville residents), 17, 18, 20 (North of Hassert Blvd,
                    West of DuPage River), 21 (North of High Meadows Rd, West of Thatcher Dr,
                    North of Hassert Blvd), 24 (North of High Meadow Rd), 31, 32, 33, 34
District            4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 (Sans Naperville proper residents), 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
#11      DuPage     16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 (Sans Romeoville proper residents), 25,
                    26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33 (Bolingbrook or Woodridge proper residents)
 
(1980 Code, § 33.72) (Res. 93-217, passed 12-16-1993; Res. 13-263, passed 10-
17-2013; Ord. 22-450, passed 11-17-2022)
§ 33.123 DUTIES; POWERS.
   (A)   Duties. The duties of the Stormwater Management Committee shall be to
develop a stormwater management plan with the support of the County Land Use
Department and the County Planning and Zoning Commission. The Plan shall be
based on natural drainage areas. The various watersheds shall form the basis
for the development of the county-wide plan. Sub-watersheds and natural
drainage areas shall also be defined and all long range improvements and plans
shall be based on these natural drainage areas. The plan and subsequent
improvement programs shall be presented to the County Board for their approval,
after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Stormwater Management
Committee shall direct the plan’s implementation and revision.
   (B)   Powers. The powers of the Stormwater Management Committee shall be as
authorized by ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062.
(1980 Code, § 33.73) (Res. 93-217, passed 12-16-1993; Ord. 22-450, passed 11-
17-2022)
ROAD IMPROVEMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33.135 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The County Board approves the establishment of a Road Improvement
Impact Fee Advisory Committed pursuant to ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 5-901 et seq.
   (B)   The County Executive shall appoint members to the Advisory Committee
with the advice and consent of the County Board in conformance with the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-907.
   (C)   The Advisory Committee shall assist in the creation of an impact fee
ordinance.
(1980 Code, § 33.80) (Res. 04-110, passed 3-18-2004)
CITY-COUNTY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33.150 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Section 10 of Article VII of the Constitution of the state and the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1973 (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 220, §§ 1 et seq.)
authorize units of local government to enter into intergovernmental cooperation
agreements concerning matters of mutual concern.
   (B)   The city and the county share an overlapping constituency with several
common interests including, but not limited to, public service, economic
development and public safety.
   (C)   The corporate authorities of the city and the county have established
an intergovernmental committee, known as the City-County Advisory Committee,
comprised of representatives from each entity so as to provide a forum and
mechanism for communicating and addressing issues affecting the city and the
county.
   (D)   The County Board hereby appoints the following County Board members as
its representatives to the City-County Advisory Committee established by the
intergovernmental cooperation agreement:
      (1)   Majority Leader: member;
      (2)   Minority Leader: member;
      (3)   Capital Improvements Committee Chairperson: member;
      (4)   County Board member from District #8: alternate; and
      (5)   County Board Chairperson: alternate.
(Res. 10-70, passed 2-18-2010)
COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
§ 33.165 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the County Department of Finance, which shall
function under the direction and control of the County Executive through his or
her Director of Finance.
(Ord. 10-220, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 33.166 DUTIES.
   The County Department of Finance shall have the following duties:
   (A)   Maintain the general ledger system;
   (B)   Enter the accounts payable;
   (C)   Develop and track the county budget;
   (D)   Work with the County Auditor to produce the annual CAFR;
   (E)   Present a monthly report to the County Board which shall include an
overview of revenues to date, projected revenues, expenditures to date,
projected expenditures and an itemized list of paid claims for the previous
month; and
   (F)   Other duties as may be assigned by the County Executive or the County
Board.
(Ord. 10-220, passed 6-17-2010)
CHAPTER 34: AGENCIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Economic Affairs Commission
   
34.001   Composition; meetings; duties and functions
   
34.002   Quorum; representation
   
34.003   Liaison function of municipalities; staff support
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   
34.015   Establishment
   
34.016   Coordinator
   
34.017   Functions
   
34.018   Service as mobile support team
   
34.019   Agreements with other political subdivisions
   
34.020   Emergency action
   
34.021   Compensation
   
34.022   Reimbursement by state
   
34.023   Purchases and expenditures
   
34.024   Oath
   
34.025   Office
   
34.026   Appropriation; levy of taxes
Environmental Control Board
   
34.040   Creation; members
   
34.041   Terms of office; compensation
   
34.042   Board meetings
Industrial Commission
   
34.055   Creation
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
34.070   Creation
County Regional Planning Commission
   
34.085   Re-established
   
34.086   Duties
   
34.087   Per diem payments
   
34.088   Conflicting regulations
   
34.089   Membership
   
34.090   Bylaws
   
34.091   Staff support
   
34.092   Appropriation of budgeted funds
9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System Board
   
34.105   Purpose
   
34.106   Powers and duties
   
34.107   Membership
   
34.108   Organization and terms of office
   
34.109   General administration
   
34.110   Officers
   
34.111   Committees
   
34.112   Amendments
   
34.113   Revisions
Utility Coordination Council
   
34.125   Creation
Workforce Services Advisory Board
   
34.140   Creation
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS COMMISSION
§ 34.001 COMPOSITION; MEETINGS; DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   The County Economic Affairs Commission shall:
   (A)   Consist of those agencies and organizations, or their designees listed
on the enclosure, which is attached to Resolution 85-57 and made a part of this
section;
   (B)   Meet at the call of and be convened by the Chairperson or Vice-
Chairperson of the County Board, or other designee of the Chairperson;
   (C)   Coordinate the exchange of information and effort, related to economic
development throughout the county, in both the private and public sectors, in
order to minimize, if not eliminate, unnecessarily duplicative and otherwise
counterproductive activities;
   (D)   Recommend policies, for adoption by the County Board and other
agencies and organizations, which enhance the economic base of the county,
including, but not limited to, those related to the retention, expansion and
attraction of business enterprises;
   (E)   Develop programs and projects to implement economic development policy
decisions;
   (F)   Oversee economic development policies, programs and projects, which
have been implemented; and
   (G)   Serve as the Overall Economic Development Program (OEDP) Committee, in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Department of
Commerce Economic Development Administration (EDA).
(1980 Code, § 34.01) (Res. 85-57, adopted 5-16-1985)
Cross-reference:
   Overall Economic Development Plan adopted, see §
157.01
§ 34.002 QUORUM; REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   Those members of the County Economic Affairs Commission, present for
any meeting conducted in accordance with the State Open Meetings Act, shall
constitute a quorum.
   (B)   One person may represent more than one agency or organization.
(1980 Code, § 34.02) (Res. 85-57, adopted 5-16-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Open Meetings Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 34.003 LIAISON FUNCTION OF MUNICIPALITIES; STAFF SUPPORT.
   (A)   County municipalities (for incorporated areas) and townships (for
unincorporated areas), or their designees, shall serve as liaison between the
County Economic Affairs Commission and those economic development agencies and
organizations, wholly located within their respective jurisdictions.
   (B)   A county department designated by the Chairperson shall provide staff
support from the County Development Department and coordinate staff support
provided by other agencies and organizations, which is made available to assist
the County Economic Affairs Commission.
(1980 Code, § 34.03) (Res. 85-57, adopted 5-16-1985)
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
§ 34.015 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is created the County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
(ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or from
natural or human-made disaster in accordance with the State Emergency Services
and Disaster Agency Act of 1988, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
   (B)   This ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and those additional
members that may be selected by the Coordinator.
(1980 Code, § 34.05) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
Cross-reference:
   Disaster emergencies, see §§
32.030 and
32.031.
§ 34.016 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the county ESDA shall be appointed by the
Chairperson of the County Board and shall serve until removed by the same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the Chairperson of the County Board as provided by ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, § 10.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the Chairperson of the County Board or any person
designated by him or her, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new
appointment is made as provided in (A) above.
(1980 Code, § 34.06) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.017 FUNCTIONS.
   The county ESDA shall perform those ESDA functions within the county that
are prescribed by the State ESDA Plan and program prepared by the Governor and
any orders, rules and regulations that may be promulgated by the Governor; in
addition, it shall perform any duties outside the corporate limits that may be
required pursuant to any mutual-aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the
State Emergency Services and Disaster Agency Act of 1988, ILCS Ch. 20, Act
3305, §§ 10 and 13.
(1980 Code, § 34.07) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.018 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All or any members of the county ESDA may be designated as members of
a mobile support team created by the Director of the state ESDA as provided by
law under ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 8.
   (B)   The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the county ESDA organization.
   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a county employee or
officer, while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to the employment or office.
   (D)   Any member who is not a paid officer or employee of the county while
so serving, shall receive from the state compensation as provided by law under
S.H.A. Ch. 127, § 1058.
(1980 Code, § 34.08) (Sup. Rec. Bk. pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.019 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual-aid agreements with other
counties or political subdivisions of the state but no agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the County Board and approved in
writing by the State Director of ESDA.
(1980 Code, § 34.09) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Mutual-aid agreements between political subdivisions, see ILCS Ch. 20, Act
3305, § 13
§ 34.020 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists because of actual
enemy attack upon the United States, or the occurrence within the state of a
major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from
human- made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the county ESDA to
cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law under ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 7.
(1980 Code, § 34.10) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.021 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the county, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in the training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held;
members who are not county employees or officers shall receive for training
time compensation as may be established by the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 34.11) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.022 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The County Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the county for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the county in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
ESDA as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident
to ESDA activities as provided by law.
(1980 Code, § 34.12) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Financing, see ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 9
§ 34.023 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The County Board may, on recommendation of the County Coordinator of
ESDA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the county in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of a
disaster or from human-made or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the County Coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the county, to procure those services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for the purposes in view of
the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to county contracts or obligations, as
authorized by ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.; however, if the County Board
meets at a time, the County Coordinator shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.
(1980 Code, § 34.13) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.024 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the county ESDA shall,
before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the following oath as set
forth in ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 20, which shall be filed with the
Coordinator:
      I,                      , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the state, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take the obligation freely without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during the
time as I am affiliated with the county ESDA organization, I will not advocate
nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or
violence.
(1980 Code, § 34.14) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.025 OFFICE.
   The Chairperson of the County Board is authorized to designate space in a
county building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the County Board for
the county ESDA as its office.
(1980 Code, § 34.15) (Sup. Rec. Bk.   , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
§ 34.026 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The County Board may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner
provided by law under ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10, and may levy in addition for
ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of
all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by ILCS Ch.
20, Act 3305, §§ 11 et seq.; however, the amount collectible under the levy
shall in no event exceed $0.25 per capita.
(1980 Code, § 34.16) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 532—534, adopted 11-10-1976)
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL BOARD
§ 34.040 CREATION; MEMBERS.
   (A)   There is created an agency to be known as the County Environmental
Control Board.
   (B)   The members of the Environmental Control Board shall be the Health
Officer of the County Health Department, and eight members who shall be
appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board, with the advice and consent
of the County Board, as follows:
      (1)   One shall be a registered professional engineer as defined in the
State Professional Engineering Act filed July 24, 1941, as amended, who is
experienced in the field of air pollution control;
      (2)   One shall be a physician, licensed in compliance with the Medical
Practice Act approved June 30, 1923, as amended, who shall be experienced in
the field of industrial medicine;
      (3)   One shall be engaged in a field which directly relates to
agriculture or conservation;
      (4)   One shall be actively engaged in the management of a private
manufacturing concern;
      (5)   One shall be representative of labor;
      (6)   One shall be engaged in municipal government; and
      (7)   Two others shall be selected at large.
(1980 Code, § 34.20) (1970 pp. 1313—1314, adopted 2-25-1970) (Sup. Rec. Bk.
238, pp. 345—346)
§ 34.041 TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The appointed members’ terms of office shall be four years and until
their successors are selected and qualified; however, the terms of those first
appointed shall expire as follows:
      (1)   Two at the end of one year after date of appointment;
      (2)   Two at the end of two years after date of appointment;
      (3)   Two at the end of three years after date of appointment; and
      (4)   Two at the end of four years after date of appointment as
designated by the Chairperson of the County Board of Supervisors at the time of
appointment. The terms of all members shall continue until their respective
successors have been duly appointed and qualified.
   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in the appointed membership, the Chairperson of
the County Board may, with the advice and consent of the Board, appoint a
member for the remaining portion of the unexpired term created by the vacancy.
The Chairperson of the County Board may, with the advice and consent of the
Board, remove any appointed member for cause.
   (C)   The members of the Environmental Control Board shall receive no
compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for expenses
necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.
(1980 Code, § 34.21) (1970 pp. 1313—1314, adopted 2-25-1970) (Sup. Rec. Bk.
238, pp. 345—346)
§ 34.042 BOARD MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Environmental Control Board shall hold at least four regular
meetings each calendar year at a place and time to be fixed by the Board.
Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by three members of the
Board. Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
   (B)   The Board shall select at its first meeting one of its members to
serve as Chairperson and another of its members to serve as Vice-Chairperson.
At the first regular meeting in each calendar year thereafter, the Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson for the ensuing year shall be elected. The Chief
Sanitarian of the County Health Department shall be technical secretary of the
Board. He or she shall receive no additional compensation for his or her
services.
(1980 Code, § 34.22) (1970 pp. 1313—1314, adopted 2-25-1970) (Sup. Rec. Bk.
238, pp. 345—346)
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
§ 34.055 CREATION.
   (A)   There is established an Industrial Commission consisting of nine
members appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board.
   (B)   The purpose of the Commission shall include:
      (1)   Seeking increases in local employment opportunity;
      (2)   Providing research and other assistance to the private market-
oriented industrial use;
      (3)   Coordinating and cooperating with both the private market and other
governmental agencies in order to stimulate and promote additional well planned
industrial development in the county; and
      (4)   Cooperating with other existing groups, such as local chambers of
commerce and the Will-Grundy Manufacturers Association in the development of
research and promotional activities.
(1980 Code, § 34.25) (Sup. Rec. Bk. pp. 463—464, adopted 10-15-1975)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 34.070 CREATION.
   For provisions concerning the Planning and Zoning Commission, see §§ 155.15
through 155.22.
(1980 Code, § 34.30)
COUNTY REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 34.085 RE-ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The County Regional Planning Commission is hereby re-established.
   (B)   (1)   The County Regional Planning Commission (RPC) and the Zoning
Board of Appeals (ZPA) shall be combined and comprised of the same members,
known as the Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC), who shall continue their
present terms, in accordance with law.
      (2)   For purposes of clarity, the Commission and the Board acting
together shall be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission. This
redesignation does not affect the current members of the County Planning and
Zoning Commission, who shall continue their present terms, in accordance with
the law.
(1980 Code, § 34.40) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.086 DUTIES.
   The County Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby assigned to perform
those duties which are set forth by the Regional Planning Commission and the
Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to I.R.S. Ch. 34 and implemented by county
ordinances and resolutions, which have been or may be from time to time adopted
and/or amended.
(1980 Code, § 34.41) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.087 PER DIEM PAYMENTS.
   Per diem payments in an amount established by the County Board:
   (A)   Shall only be authorized and approved for members of the County
Planning and Zoning Commission when the agenda for and/or minutes of meetings
that reflect specific zoning appeal cases or specific amendments and the
adoption of all county ordinances and plans; and
   (B)   Shall not be paid to the County and Zoning Board of Appeals members
for meetings which only involve the planning advisory or similar functions.
(1980 Code, § 34.42) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.088 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where other conflicts may statutorily exist, between authorizations for the
Regional Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, the County
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be governed by the more explicit or
restrictive provisions of law.
(1980 Code, § 34.43) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.089 MEMBERSHIP.
   In order to provide broadly-based and representative participation in its
deliberation and recommendation, subsequent members of the County and Planning
and Zoning Commission shall be appointed to five-year terms, from among
residents of the county as follows.
   (A)   One member from each of the five geographical areas of the county,
designated as:
      (1)   The northwestern area, consisting of the townships of Wheatland,
DuPage, Plainfield, Lockport, Troy and Joliet;
      (2)   The southwestern area, consisting of the townships of Channahon,
Jackson, Wilmington, Florence, Reed, Custerand Wesley;
      (3)   The north central area. consisting of the townships of Homer, New
Lenox and Frankfort;
      (4)   The south central area, consisting of the townships of Manhattan,
Green Garden Wilton and Peotone; and
      (5)   The eastern area, consisting of the townships of Monee, Crete, Will
and Washington.
   (B)   Two members from any of the five designated geographical areas of the
county, except
that the members may not be from the same township as any other serving member,
and that none of the five designated geographical areas of the county shall be
represented by more than two of the seven Planning and Zoning Commission
members.
   (C)   All five designated geographical areas of the county shall be
represented on the Planning and Zoning Commission, before any area may be
represented by a second member.
(1980 Code, § 34.44) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.090 BYLAWS.
   (A)   The County Planning and Zoning Commission member shall establish their
own sets of bylaws not otherwise in conflict with the Illinois Revised Statutes
or related county ordinances and resolutions which have been or may from time
to time be adopted and/or amended.
   (B)   The County Planning Commission members may establish their own sets of
bylaws for the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Regional Planning Commission.
The bylaws may not be in conflict with the Illinois Revised Statutes or related
county ordinances and resolutions which have been or may be from time to time
adopted and/or amended.
(1980 Code, § 34.45) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.091 STAFF SUPPORT.
   Staff support for the County Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
provided principally from the County Land Use Departments.
(1980 Code, § 34.46) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 34.092 APPROPRIATION OF BUDGETED FUNDS.
   Budgeted funds to support the activities of the County Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be reflected in appropriations authorized to the County Land
Use Department.
(1980 Code, § 34.47) (Ord. 92-195, passed 9-17-1992)
9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE  SYSTEM BOARD
§ 34.105 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The County Emergency Telephone System Board (hereinafter referred to
as the ETS Board) is established pursuant to ILCS Ch. 50, Act 750, as amended
by P.A. 85-978 and P.A. 86-101 and pursuant to Resolutions 89-193 and 89-214 of
the County Board, adopted August 17, 1989, and Resolution 90-11 of the County
Board adopted January 18, 1990.
   (B)   The County Executive is the appointing authority for the ETS Board
with the advise and consent of the County Board, in accordance with ILCS Ch.
50, Act 750, as amended in P.A. 85-978 and 86-101 and as may be subsequently
amended and pursuant to Resolutions 89-193 and 89-214 of the County Board
adopted January 18, 1990.
(1980 Code, § 34.55) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
§ 34.106 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the ETS Board shall be those powers and duties
necessary and incidental to carry out the purpose and responsibilities of the
ETS Board provided by ILCS Ch. 50, Act 750, as amended in P.A. 85-978 and P.A.
86-101 and as may be subsequently amended and pursuant to in Resolutions 89-193
and 89-214 of the County Board adopted January 18, 1990.
(1980 Code, § 34.56) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
§ 34.107 MEMBERSHIP.
   The ETS Board shall be reorganized effective October 18, 2007 and shall have
16 members as set forth below.
   (A)   Public safety representation.
      (1)   Law enforcement. Two law enforcement representatives shall be
appointed by the County Executive with the advice and consent of the County
Board. The representatives will be selected from a list of three names
submitted by the Police Chiefs Association of the county.
      (2)   Fire service. Two fire service representatives shall be appointed
by the County Executive with the advice and consent of the County Board. The
representative will be selected from a list of three names with one name being
submitted from each of the three county MABAS Divisions (15, 18 and 27).
      (3)   Emergency management. The County Emergency Management Agency
Director or his or her designee will serve on the ETSB with the approval and
appointment of the County Executive and with the advice and consent of the
County Board.
   (B)   PSAP representation.  
      (1)   The county-wide PSAPs will have seven positions on the ETSB. All
nine of the 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System PSAPs will have representation on
the ETSB as follows. Each will be represented on the ETSB by the individual
PSAP Director or his or her designee.
         (a)   Joliet;
         (b)   Wescom;
         (c)   Sheriff’s office;
         (d)   Lincolnway;
         (e)   Eastcom; and
         (f)   Romeoville.
      (2)   The remaining PSAPs will work together to select one PSAP director
or his or her designee as their representative on the ETSB.
      (3)   In the event that any member PSAP dissolves or merges with another
member PSAP, the size of the Board shall decrease by one number.
      (4)   The PSAP directors or their designee’s names will be submitted to
the County Executive for approval and appointment with the advice and consent
of the County Board.
   (C)   Elected officials representation. Two representatives from county
government will serve on the ETSB as follows.
      (1)   One ETS Board member will represent the County Executive’s office
as designated and appointed by the County Executive with the consent and
approval of the County Board.
      (2)   One ETS Board member will represent the County Board as designated
and appointed by the County Executive in consultation with the County Board
Chairperson and the consent and approval of the County Board.
   (D)   Citizen-at-large representation. One representative from the citizens
of the County Emergency Telephone System will be appointed by the County
Executive from a list of applications submitted. The appointment will be
approved with the advice and consent of the County Board.
   (E)   Technology representation.
      (1)   The ETSB shall form a committee of the Board designated as the
Technology Committee. Members serving on this Committee shall include:
         (a)   Director of the county 800 MHZ radio department or his or her
designee;
         (b)   Director of the county GIS Department or his or her designee;
         (c)   Director of the county ICT Department and his or her designee;
and
         (d)   Other technology experts from agencies within the county who may
be appointed to the ETSB.
      (2)   The Chairperson of the Technology Committee will serve as a
representative on the ETSB. The Chair of the Technology Committee shall be
submitted to the County Executive for appointment to the ETSB with the advice
and consent of the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 34.57) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996; Res. 02-82, passed 2-21-
2002; Res. 07-415, passed 10-8-2007)
§ 34.108 ORGANIZATION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Vacancy. A vacancy on the ETS Board may be occasioned by the
resignation, death, physical or mental incapacity of three consecutive
unexcused absences from scheduled meetings by the member. The units of local
government represented by the members shall have the power to determine the
existence of a vacancy consistent with the above conditions. They shall within
60 days recommend a replacement to the county executive for appointment to the
unexpired term.
   (B)   Voting.
      (1)   A quorum shall be a majority of the membership of the ETS Board.
      (2)   Each member of the ETS Board shall have one vote.
      (3)   Proxy votes will not be allowed.
   (C)   Terms of office. The reorganized Board shall be appointed to three-
year staggered terms. To begin the terms a lottery will be held for five
members to serve one-year terms, five members to serve two-year terms and six
members to serve three-year terms. Members appointed after the first three
staggered terms will then serve a three-year appointment.
(1980 Code, § 34.58) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996; Res. 07-415, passed 10-18-
2007)
§ 34.109 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The principal location shall be the County 9-1-1 Administrative
Offices, 830 South State Street, Lockport, Illinois 60441.
   (B)   Meetings will be held bi-monthly on the second Thursday of every even
numbered month at 8:30 a.m. Special meetings may also be called by the
Chairperson or by one-third of the membership of the ETS Board. Bi-monthly date
and time may be changed by the majority of the ETS Board present.
   (C)   Meetings of the ETS Board shall be subject to the provisions of the
State Open Meetings Act.
   (D)   Except as otherwise required by these bylaws, laws of the state or
ordinances of the county, meetings shall be conducted by the latest revised
edition of Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (E)   Proceedings of the meetings shall be recorded and copies distributed
to each member of the ETS Board.
(1980 Code, § 34.59) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
§ 34.110 OFFICERS.
   (A)   A Chairperson shall be elected for two years at the ETS Board’s annual
meeting in April of even numbered years. The Chairperson shall preside over
meetings of the ETS Board and authenticate by his or her signature when
necessary, all the acts, orders and proceedings of the ETS Board. The
Chairperson may be re-elected.
   (B)   A Vice-Chairperson shall be elected for two years as the ETS Board’s
annual meeting in April in even numbered years and shall act for the
Chairperson during his or her absence from the chair, and in case the position
of Chairperson becomes vacant shall act as Chairperson until the position is
again filled as set forth below. The Vice- Chairperson may be re-elected.
   (C)   A Secretary shall be elected for two years at the ETS Board’s annual
meeting in April in even numbered years. The Secretary shall be the recording
officer of the ETS Bard and shall oversee the filing of its records to be kept
at the location of the ETS Board’s principal offices as stated in §
34.109(A). The Secretary may be re-elected.
   (D)   The Treasurer of the ETS Board shall be the County Treasurer as
provided for in ILCS Ch. 50, Act 750 as amended in P.A. 85-978 and 86-101 and
as may be subsequently amended.
   (E)   In the event there exists a vacancy in the position of Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson or Secretary, the ETS Board shall elect from among its
membership someone to fill the unexpired term of the vacancy.
(1980 Code, § 34.60) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
§ 34.111 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Standing committees of the ETS Board shall be:
      (1)   Equipment Review/Finance Committee;
      (2)   Long Range Planning/Consolidation/ Standards Enforcement Committee;
and
      (3)   Training/Public Education Committee.
   (B)   Other committees may be established, by the Chairperson, upon the
advise and consent of the majority of the ETS Board.
   (C)   Appointments to the Committee are made by the Chairperson with the
consent of the ETS Board.
(1980 Code, § 34.61) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
§ 34.112 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Any proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Secretary of the ETS
Board at least 30 days prior to the next regular meeting of the ETS Board and
placed on the agenda for the meeting, at which the amendment is to be
considered.
   (B)   A three-fifths vote of the ETS Board shall be required to adopt any
amendments to these bylaws.
(1980 Code, § 34.62) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
§ 34.113 REVISIONS.
   These bylaws shall be reviewed in their entirety every two years immediately
after the election of the officers.
(1980 Code, § 34.63) (Res. 96-135, passed 6-20-1996)
UTILITY COORDINATION COUNCIL
§ 34.125 CREATION.
   (A)   There is established a Utility Coordination Council.
   (B)   The Council shall include the County Engineer, County Executive or his
or her designee, and the utility companies as determined by the County Engineer
to be facilitate and accomplish the requirements of the county highway
authority. Utility company members may be added to or removed from the
Coordination Council as determined by the County Engineer.
(1980 Code, § 34.70) (Res. 01-470, passed 11-15-2001)
WORKFORCE SERVICES
ADVISORY BOARD
§ 34.140 CREATION.
   (A)   There is created the Workforce Services Advisory Board to develop,
review and recommend Workforce Service Department policies, contracts and
agreements to the County Board for final approval.
   (B)   The Workforce Services Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairperson
and six members to be appointed by the County Executive subject to the advice
and consent of the County Board representing the business, labor and youth
service/education communities.
   (C)   The County Executive shall present to the County Board for approval
bylaws appropriate for the governance and operation of the Workforce Services
Advisory Board and its members.
(1980 Code, § 34.80) (Res. 03-295, passed 6-19-2003)
CHAPTER 35: COUNTY HOME
Section
   
35.01   Admission policies
   
35.02   Removal of inmates
   
35.03   Authorized investigations
   
35.04   Medical care
   
35.05   Physical alterations of County Home
   
35.06   Rates for nursing home care
   
35.07   Medical Director
§ 35.01 ADMISSION POLICIES.
   (A)   No person, either eligible or ineligible to receive old age or blind
assistance from the state, may be admitted to the County Home without the
written consent of the Supervisor of the township of which the inmate was a
resident at the time checks for payment of old age or blind assistance from the
state were made.
   (B)   An applicant for admission to the County Home who is eligible for or
is receiving either old age or blind assistance, shall not be deemed eligible
for admission if the number of inmates receiving assistance from the state
exceeds 40% of the total capacity of the Home.
      (1)   However, this limitation shall not be applicable to persons who are
inmates of the Home; i.e., if an inmate is eligible for or becomes eligible to
receive an old age or blind pension from the state, he or she shall be entitled
to apply for and receive this aid without prejudice to his or her remaining as
an inmate in the County Home.
      (2)   The County Board may from time to time, as changing conditions
warrant, increase or decrease the authorized percentage of recipients of old
age benefits and blind pensions.
   (C)   An applicant for admission to the County Home, who may be otherwise
eligible, will not be admitted to the Home if he or she is bedridden, except in
county homes being properly equipped for cases of that description.
   (D)   The County Board has adopted the following admission policy for
noncounty residents.
      (1)   The total census of the nursing home is below 225, with no waiting
list (for immediate placement) existing for county residents, and the noncounty
resident at one time resided in the county and was a taxpayer for five years,
(first preference).
      (2)   The total census is below 225, with no waiting list (for immediate
placement) existing for county residents and an immediate family member
(mother, father, daughter, son, sister or brother) of the noncounty resident is
residing in the county and is a taxpayer.
(1980 Code, § 35.01) (1946 pp. 282—283, adopted 11- -1946) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 223,
pp. 293—294) (Res. 85-39, passed 4-18-1985; Res. 11-34, passed 1-20-2011)
Statutory reference:
   County homes for the aged, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-22001 et seq.
§ 35.02 REMOVAL OF INMATES.
   No inmate of the County Home shall be removed from the Home by any person or
persons, without giving written notice of the intention of the person or
persons to the Supervisor of the township of which the inmate was a resident at
the time of his or her admission. Notice shall be delivered to the Supervisor
or to his or her office, at least five days prior to the date upon which it is
proposed that the inmate be removed.
(1980 Code, § 35.02) (1946 pp. 282—283, adopted 11- -1946) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 223,
pp. 293—294)
§ 35.03 AUTHORIZED INVESTIGATIONS.
   Any authorized representative or staff member of the State Public Aid
Commission may make any investigations at the County Home that are deemed
necessary in performing their duties; however, these investigations shall be
made between the hours of 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on week days, not including
Saturday and Sunday, of each week. Visits of investigators during any other
hour will not be permitted.
(1980 Code, § 35.03) (1946 pp. 282—283, adopted 11- -1946) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 223,
pp. 293—294)
§ 35.04 MEDICAL CARE.
   In county homes having an established medical staff, the medical staff shall
be responsible for the medical care and attention of the inmates thereof, and
no different or additional care shall be provided any inmate, except upon
consultation with the chief of the medical staff and under his or her
direction.
(1980 Code, § 35.04) (1946 pp. 282—283, adopted 11- -1946) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 223,
pp. 293—294)
§ 35.05 PHYSICAL ALTERATIONS OF COUNTY HOME.
   No additions or changes to the buildings, lands and improvements of the
County Home, and no changes in the personnel comprising the staff of this
institution, will be made except by the direction of the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 35.05) (1946 pp. 282—283, adopted 11- -1946) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 223,
pp. 293—294)
§ 35.06 RATES FOR NURSING HOME CARE.
   Rates for all privately supported residents at Sunny Hill Nursing Home shall
be as established by resolution of the County Board from time to time.
(1980 Code, § 35.06)
§ 35.07 MEDICAL DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Medical Director will serve Sunny Hill Nursing Home (the Home) on
a part-time basis.
   (B)   The Medical Director will provide consultation to the Director of
Nursing and the Administrator in a way as to ensure the coordination of medical
care within the Home, the adequacy and appropriateness of medical services to
the patients, and the surveillance of the health status of employees.
   (C)   The Medical Director will participate in the development of policies
and procedures related to the responsibilities of attending physicians and
function as a liaison between the Home and the medical community.
   (D)   The Medical Director will review reports of incidents and accidents
involving residents and employees in an effort to identify hazards to health
and safety.
   (E)   The Medical Director will provide appropriate advice to the
Administrator to ensure a safe and sanitary environment for patients and
employees.
   (F)   The Medical Director will serve as the Chairperson of the Home’s
Patient Care Committee and Utilization Review Committee.
   (G)   The Medical Director will participate in staff development programs.
   (H)   The Home will take appropriate action on advice and recommendation of
the Medical Director.
   (I)   The Home will pay the Medical Director a set fee per month and an
additional fee per contract hour for his or her services as described above.
(1980 Code, § 35.07) (Res. 89-208, adopted 8-17-1989)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
Section
Personnel Service System
   
36.001   Establishment
   
36.002   Definitions
   
36.003   Classified and unclassified service
   
36.004   Classified service
   
36.005   County Board duties
   
36.006   Director of Personnel
   
36.007   Incumbent employees
   
36.008   Prohibited activities
   
36.009   Labor relations negotiations by State’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecution
Personnel Policies
   
36.015   Policy
   
36.016   Jurisdiction
   
36.017   Work week; office hours
   
36.018   Longevity
   
36.019   Overtime
   
36.020   Vacations; holidays
   
36.021   Leave of absence
   
36.022   Disability
   
36.023   Hospital plan; health insurance coverage
   
36.024   Equal opportunity employment
   
36.025   Recognition of County Employees Union
   
36.026   Deduction of monthly union dues
   
36.027   Business/travel reimbursement
   
36.028   Payment for mileage
   
36.029   Fiscal year
   
36.030   Worker’s compensation claims; Insurance Reserve Fund
   
36.031   Central Credit Union
   
36.032   Public works wages
   
36.033   Deferred compensation plan
   
36.034   Contributions to Retirement Fund
   
36.035   Membership of elected officials in Retirement Fund
   
36.036   Grant-funded employment
   
36.037   Federal Age Discrimination Act
   
36.038   Sexual harassment policy
   
36.039   County health benefit plan
   
36.040   Retirement Fund included under section 125 plan
   
36.041   Post-offer pre-employment criminal background and drug screening
   
36.042   Conversion of military service to IMRF service credit
   
36.043   Bright Start Illinois 529 College Savings Plan payroll deduction
Wage Rates
   
36.055   Determination of rates
   
36.056   Application
   
36.057   Copies available for inspection
   
36.058   Mailing of copies
   
36.059   Filing of ordinance
   
36.060   Publication in newspaper
E-Mail and Internet Usage
   
36.075   Use of electronic communications
   
36.076   Prohibited communications
   
36.077   Privacy
   
36.078   Right to monitor
   
36.079   Prohibited activities
   
36.080   Licensing fees
   
36.081   Passwords
   
36.082   Viruses and tampering
   
36.083   Use of the internet
   
36.084   Duty not to waste electronic communications resources
   
36.085   E-mail addresses
   
36.086   Record retention
   
36.087   Freedom of Information Act requests
   
36.088   Violations
   
36.089   Policy changes
   
36.090   Definitions
Cross-reference:
   Contracts with companies to provide insurance for county employees, see
TSO Table III
PERSONNEL SERVICE SYSTEM
§ 36.001 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established the County Personnel Service System as set forth
herein or as hereinafter modified by amendment hereto.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The officer, individual, board or group, who by law or
legally delegated authority, has the authority to appoint or to remove
personnel from positions as county employees.
   APPOINTMENT. The offer and the acceptance of employment in the county
service.
   BOARD. The Will County Board.
   CLASS. One or more positions sufficiently similar with respect to duties and
responsibilities that the same descriptive title may be used with clarity to
designate each of the positions; that the same minimum qualifications are
appropriate for the performance of each position; that the same test of fitness
may be used to rank applicants on the basis of merit; and that the same
schedule of pay may be applied to similar positions.
   CLASSIFICATION PLAN. A list of classes in the classified service by official
title. For each class, a specification shall be prepared which shall set forth
the duties, responsibilities and authority thereof, and the minimum
qualifications necessary for entry into any of the positions in the class.
   CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEE. Any employee, in the classified service, who has
satisfactorily completed the probationary period and has been so certified by
the appointing authority.
   CLASSIFIED SERVICE. All positions and employees in the county services,
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   COUNTY. The Will County government.
   DEPARTMENT. A county governmental unit, under the control of an appointing
authority, which has a separate operating budget, approved by the Board.
   DIRECTOR. Director of Personnel.
   ELIGIBLE. A person who is deemed qualified for entry into a specific class.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is paid a wage, salary or stipend from public monies,
in accordance with official entries on a county payroll.
   LIST OF ELIGIBLES. The persons, who have met the minimum requirements, for
entry into a class.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee, who works less than 30 hours per week,
unless elsewhere defined otherwise.
   PERSONNEL. The Personnel Director and related employees.
   POSITION. A specific employment, whether occupied or vacant, involving the
duties requiring the services of one person.
   PROBATION. A specified period of employment, following appointment re-
employment, transfer, promotion or demotion, it is the final step in the
qualification process, during which work performance of an employee is
evaluated.
   PROMOTION. A change in the assignment of an employee from a position in one
class to a position in another class having a higher range of pay; the converse
is DEMOTION.
   SUSPENSION. The temporary separation of employees from their duties and
position.
   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. An employee who, by prearrangement, works at given
position for not more than four months per year, unless elsewhere defined
otherwise.
   UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE. All positions, in the county service, which are exempt
from the provisions of this subchapter and from the rules pertaining thereto.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.003 CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   The County Personnel Service shall be divided into classified and
unclassified service.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.004 CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   All offices and positions of the County Personnel Service shall be in the
classified service, except for those employees defined as “Excluded” in the
United States Fair Labor Standards Act (USFLSA), as now or hereinafter amended,
i.e.:
   (A)   Elected officials;
   (B)   Appointed Board and Commission members;
   (C)   Retained legal counsel and/or legal advisors;
   (D)   Other bona fide independent contractors;
   (E)   Bona fide volunteer workers;
   (F)   Convict laborers; and
   (G)   Certain part-time/provisional/recreational/ seasonal/temporary
workers.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.005 COUNTY BOARD DUTIES.
   The County Board shall:
   (A)   Be empowered to promulgate and amend rules, pertaining to the County
Personnel Service System, which, upon adoption by a majority vote of the Board,
shall:
      (1)   Be submitted to the County Executive; and
      (2)   Become effective 60 days thereafter, unless otherwise vetoed.
   (B)   By its rules or legislation, provide for provisions, on the basis of
ascertained qualifications, which shall include education and experience and
which may include seniority considerations;
   (C)   When and where practicable, favor the filling of vacancies, by
promotions, in those cases in which all candidates are qualified;
   (D)   Provide for the review of any grievance or disciplinary actions,
concerning an employee, when appealed by that employee, and issue a final
determination;
   (E)   Investigate or require the Director of Personnel to investigate any
matter, as it deems appropriate or considers necessary concerning the
management and administration of county personnel; and
   (F)   Perform other duties, as may be expressly set forth, in rules or
regulations, adopted pursuant hereto.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.006 DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL.
   The Director of Personnel shall:
   (A)   Be appointed and removed by the County Executive, only with the advice
and consent of a majority of the County Board;
   (B)   Be a person, experienced in the field of personnel management and
administration, particularly in the application of merit principles and labor
relations;
   (C)   Perform those duties, as may be assigned, including to:
      (1)   Apply and carry out the provisions of this chapter, and the rules
and regulations adopted hereunder;
      (2)   Develop in cooperation with appointing authorities and others,
programs for improvement of employee effectiveness and efficiency;
      (3)   Review, as necessary, the operations and effect of this chapter and
of the rules promulgated pursuant thereto and report accordingly to the County
Board and appointing authorities;
      (4)   Encourage and exercise leadership, in the development and
implementation of effective and efficient personnel management and
administration, with among county appointing authorities and others; and
      (5)   Perform other lawful acts, which the Director may consider
necessary, desirable or appropriate to carry out the purpose of this chapter
and other, subsequently adopted, implementing measures.
   (D)   Prepare and submit to the County Board proposed rules for the
classified service;
   (E)   Give at least ten days’ notice to appointing authorities and others
affected, or proposed rules and give them the opportunity, upon their request
to appear before the County Board or its designated Committee(s), to express
their views thereon, before action is taken by the County Board;
   (F)   Recommend rules, which shall provide for:
      (1)   Preparation, maintenance and revision of a position classification
plan for all positions in the classified service, based upon the similarity of
duties performed and responsibilities assumed, so that the same qualifications
may reasonably be required and the same schedule of pay may be applied to all
positions in the same class. Each position authorized by the Board shall be
allocated by the Director to the proper class;
      (2)   Promotion which shall give appropriate consideration to the
applicant’s qualifications, record of performance, seniority and conduct.
Vacancies shall be filled by promotion whenever practicable and in the best
interest of the county service, and preference may be given to employees within
the department in which the vacancy occurs;
      (3)   Open, competitive examinations, to determine the relative fitness
of applicants for the respective competitive positions, when necessary and/or
appropriate;
      (4)   Competitive selection of employees for all classes in the
classified service;
      (5)   Establishment of lists of eligibles for appointment and promotion,
upon which lists shall be placed the names of successful candidates in the
order of their relative excellence in their respective qualifications. The
duration of eligible list for initial appointment shall be for no more than one
year, unless extended by the Director for no more than one additional year;
lists of eligibles for promotion shall be maintained for as long as they are
considered valid by the Director;
      (6)   Certification by the Director to the appointing authorities of not
more than the top five names from the list of eligibles for a single vacancy;
      (7)   The rejection of candidates who do not comply with reasonable job
requirements or are illegal aliens;
      (8)   Period of probationary employment. During the initial probation
following appointment any employee may be discharged or demoted without charges
or hearing except that applicants or employees, regardless of status, who have
reason to believe that they have been discriminated against because of
religious opinions or affiliation, or race, sex or national origin in any
personnel action may appeal to the Board in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter, or in appropriate rules established by the Board pursuant
thereto.
      (9)   Provisional employment without competitive examinations when there
is no appropriate eligible list available. No person hired as a provisional
employee shall continue on the county payroll longer than six months per
calendar year nor shall successive provisional appointment be allowed;
      (10)   Transfer from a position in one department to a position in
another department involving similar qualifications, duties, responsibilities
and pay;
      (11)   Procedures for authorized reinstatement, within one year, of
persons who resign in good standing;
      (12)   Layoff by reason of lack of funds or work or abolition of the
position, or material changes in the duties or organization, and for the layoff
of non-tenured employees first, and for the re-employment of permanent
employees so laid off, giving consideration in both layoff and re- employment
to performance record and seniority in service;
      (13)   Keeping records of performance on all employees in the classified
service;
      (14)   Suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee for misconduct,
inefficiency, incompetence, insubordination, misfeasance, malfeasance or other
unfitness to render effective service and for the investigation and hearing of
appeals of any employee recommended for suspension, demotion or dismissal by a
department head for any of the foregoing reasons;
      (15)   Establishment of a plan for resolving employee grievances and
complaints, including an appeals procedure;
      (16)   Hours of work, holidays and attendance regulations, and for annual
sick and special leaves of absence, with or without pay, or at reduced pay;
      (17)   Development of employee morale, safety and training programs;
      (18)   Establishment of a period of probation, the length of which shall
be determined by the complexity of the work involved, but which shall not
exceed one year without a special written approval from the Board; and
      (19)   Any other rules, not inconsistent with this chapter, as may be
proper and necessary for its enforcement.
   (G)   Acting by and on behalf of the county, shall as practicable, cooperate
with other governmental agencies, charged with public personnel management and
administration.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.007 INCUMBENT EMPLOYEES.
   Upon the initial implementation of this subchapter, incumbent employees may
obtain classified status, as follows.
   (A)   Employees, holding position in the county classified service, who have
satisfactorily completed their prescribed probationary period shall, upon the
certification of the manager or the head of the agency or department in which
they are employed, be continued to their positions in the classified service.
   (B)   Employees, holding positions in the county classified service, for
less than their prescribed probationary period shall, upon certification of the
manager or head of the agency or department in which they are employed, be
continued in their positions in the classified service until they have
satisfactorily completed their prescribed probationary period.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.008 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No employee shall use any political endorsement with any appointment
to a position in the county classified service.
   (B)   No employee shall use or promise to use any official authority or
influence for the purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any
person or for any consideration.
   (C)   No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or
report with regard to any test, certification or appointment made under any
provision of this chapter, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any
fraud preventing the impartial execution of this chapter.
   (D)   No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, offer, solicit
or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for or on account
of any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion, to,
or any advantage in, a position in the county classified service.
   (E)   No employee in Personnel, examiner or other person shall defeat,
deceive or obstruct any person in high right to examination, eligibility,
certification or appointment under this resolution, or furnish to any person
any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or
prospects of any persons with respect to employment in the county classified
service.
   (F)   No person shall discharge, degrade or promote or in any manner change
the official rank or compensation of any person in the classified service or
subject to this subchapter, or promise or threaten to do so, for giving or with
holding or neglecting to make any contribution or money or any other valuable
thing for any party or political purpose, or for rendering, refusing or
neglecting to render any party or political service.
   (G)   No unlawful discrimination, as that term defined in the State Human
Rights Act, as amended, shall be exercised in any manner by any county
official, appointing authority or employee.
(Res. 88-173, passed 11-17-1988)
§ 36.009 LABOR RELATIONS NEGOTIATIONS BY THE STATE’S ATTORNEYS APPELLATE
PROSECUTOR.
   (A)   The County Board hereby authorizes and empowers the State’s Attorneys
Appellate Prosecutor to represent the county in all labor negotiations and
other labor matters in the county including, but not limited to, matters prior
to a representation election, any negotiations with the union concerning wages,
hours and other conditions of employment and any proceedings before the Labor
Relations Board, cases in the courts of the state and any and all other matters
incident to and arising out of county activities under and by virtue of the
State Public Labor Relations Act, including the resolution of disputes arising
out of and under collective bargaining agreements, if any.
   (B)   That as and in consideration for the above the services provided by
the State’s Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, the county shall pay to the
Appellate Prosecutor the sum of $125 per attorney or negotiator for two hours
or less on each day; $175 per attorney or negotiator for more than two hours
but less than four hours on each day; $225 per attorney or negotiator in excess
of four hours on each day; an initial $250 charge for the first draft of the
employer proposal; a $75 charge for major revisions in the employer proposals
or major memoranda to the bargaining terms; and a $50 per hour charge for all
work pertaining to arbitration.
   (C)   It is mutually understood and agreed between the parties that the
labor negotiator(s) and/or attorney(s) shall serve at the pleasure of the
County Board and any and all services provided for herein may be terminated by
the County Board upon ten days’ prior written notice to the Director of the
State’s Attorney Appellate Prosecutor by registered mail and a copy to the
State’s Attorney of the county.
   (D)   It is further understood and agreed that the State’s Attorney
Appellate Prosecutor in any and all services rendered herein shall obtain
direction in the negotiations and other labor matters from the County State’s
Attorney and the Appellate Prosecutor through its agents and employees shall
advise the State’s Attorney and the County Executive and Executive Pro Tem of
all of the Appellate Prosecutor activities, functions and duties pursuant to
this section.
(1980 Code, § 36.04) (Res. 89-252, adopted 9-21-1989)
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 36.015 POLICY.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide equitable personnel policies to
govern the conditions of employment of individuals engaged in county service.
(1980 Code, § 36.10) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 179, adopted 4-24-1974)
§ 36.016 JURISDICTION.
   Persons who are subject to this subchapter are all employees engaged in
county service with the exclusion of those persons exempted by county ordinance
or state or federal statutes.
(1980 Code, § 36.11) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 179, adopted 4-24-1974)
§ 36.017 WORK WEEK; OFFICE HOURS.
   (A)   The actual hours that an employee will work will be determined by the
department head in accordance with the hours established by the County Board.
   (B)   All offices under the jurisdiction of the County Board, during the
standard time season, shall open at 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and remain
open all day until 4:30 p.m.
(1980 Code, § 36.12) (1968 p. 709, adopted 11- -1968) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p.
52; Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 179, adopted 4-24-1974; Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 437,
adopted 10-15-1975) (Res. 79- , adopted 11-14-1979)
§ 36.018 LONGEVITY.
   (A)   The County Board authorizes the payment of longevity to all
nonelective full-time monthly salaried employees of the county, upon the same
terms and conditions as from time to time may be negotiated and enforced
through the collective bargaining agreement with Local 1028, Council 44 of the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employment, whether they are
covered by the collective bargaining agreement or not. These payments shall
commence December 1, 1969.
   (B)   It is the policy of the County Board to recognize long service.
Recognition is given in the form of a money payment as specified below.
      (1)   Longevity payments go into effect on December 1 or June 1 following
the completion of three years of full-time service.
      (2)   The longevity payment is computed on the basis of $2 per month for
every year of work completed.
      (3)   The initial payment is $6 per month.
      (4)   The maximum payment is $40 per month.
(1980 Code, § 36.13) (1969 p. 867, adopted 11-5-1969) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p.
180, adopted 4-24-1974; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 271)
§ 36.019 OVERTIME.
   (A)   Generally. If an employee is required to work overtime (time in excess
of eight hours per day or 40 hours per week), he or she shall be paid at the
rate of time and one-half his or her regular rate for the overtime or be
allowed to take time off at the rate of time and one-half for each hour worked.
Overtime pay or time off shall be taken at the employee’s election. If time off
is elected, it shall be taken at the discretion of the employer. Records are to
be kept by the department head.
   (B)   Highway Department. An employee in the Highway Department shall work
an eight-hour shift per day with a regular starting time and a regular quitting
time. Any time before or after the regular shift shall be time and one-half his
or her hourly rate. All hours worked in excess of eight hours per day or 40
hours per week shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half his or her hourly
rate, or equal time off.
      (1)   Call out time shall be a minimum of two hours. Any employee working
two hours or more shall be paid time and one-half his or her hourly rate for
that period of time. Call out time is defined as all time prior to two hours
before regular shift time, Saturdays, Sundays, holidays and any time called
back to work after regular shift.
      (2)   Employees in the Highway Department shall report and check out for
work at a regular reporting location, and if they are assigned to temporarily
work in another part of the county, the employer shall furnish a vehicle or
other transportation during the temporary employment, or pay $0.15 per mile.
   (C)   Sheriff’s Department. Employees in the Sheriff’s Department that must
appear in court, inquests or pre-trial conferences on their off-time, shall
receive a minimum of two hours pay; all time over this two hours shall be paid
at the rate of time and one-half his or her hourly rate. Overtime shall only be
paid after completion of a normal 40-hour week, and time spent in court,
inquest time and pre- trial conference must be verified by the Sheriff.
      (1)   If requested by the Sheriff, the deputy may at his or her option,
work eight additional hours on his or her day off, at straight time, to be
coordinated with the shift commander and union steward on each shift.
      (2)   Holidays listed in §
36.020 shall be observed by the employees of the Sheriff’s Department. Holidays
falling on Sunday shall be observed on Monday. Employees that are required to
work on a calendar holiday shall be paid at the rate of double time his or her
hourly rate.
   (D)   Nursing home. Employees in the nursing home who work in excess of
eight hours per day shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half their hourly
rate. All hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week shall be paid at the rate
of time and one- half his or her hourly rate. Any part-time employee in the
nursing home working 15 hours a week, or a minimum of 750 hours per year, shall
be eligible to receive a pro-rated percentage of the vacation and sick leave
benefits of a full-time employee.
(1980 Code, § 36.14) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 180, adopted 4-24-1974)
§ 36.020 VACATIONS; HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All employees of the county employed for more than one year shall be
allowed one week’s vacation with pay; employees having two years or more shall
be allowed two weeks’ vacation with pay; employees having seven or more years
of service are to be allowed three weeks’ vacation with pay; and employees with
12 or more years of service are to be allowed four weeks’ vacation with pay.
      (1)   If an observed holiday falls within an employee’s vacation and if
the employee is entitled to holiday pay for that holiday under (B) below, he or
she shall, at the option of the employer, receive either one additional day of
paid vacation, or an amount of money equal to his or her regular base rate of
pay for one working day.
      (2)   An employee whose employment is terminated shall be paid his or her
earned vacation pay, if any.
   (B)   New Year’s Day, Lincoln’s Birthday, Washington’s Birthday, Good
Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans’ Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas Day shall be observed as holidays when falling on
regular working days.
      (1)   Employees who have been employed by the employer for at least 30
consecutive days shall receive holiday pay for each holiday which falls on a
regular work day. An employee’s holiday pay shall be his or her regular base
rate of pay for one working day.
      (2)   In order to qualify for holiday pay, an employee must work his or
her last regularly scheduled shift before the holiday and his or her first
regularly scheduled shift after the holiday; however, proven sickness or
disability which prevents an employee from working on either day shall not
disqualify him or her from holiday pay.
         (a)   Holidays falling on Sunday. Holidays falling on Sunday shall be
observed on Monday. Employees required to work on the calendar holiday shall be
paid at the rate of double time his or her hourly rate.
         (b)   Holiday schedule. Annually, the County Board specifies the paid
holidays for the coming year. All employees shall have time off, with full
salary payment, on the following holidays:
            1.   New Year’s Day;
            2.   Lincoln’s Birthday;
            3.   Washington’s Birthday;
            4.   Good Friday;
            5.   Memorial Day;
            6.   Independence Day;
            7.   Labor Day;
            8.   Columbus Day;
            9.   Veterans’ Day;
            10.   Thanksgiving Day; and
            11.   Christmas Day.
(1980 Code, § 36.15) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 181-182, adopted 4-24-1974)
§ 36.021 LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Sick leave. Eligible employees (full-time and permanent part-time) may
be entitled to receive sick leave with pay during periods of illness and
excused absence.
      (1)   Sick leave will accumulate at the rate of one day for each month of
creditable service, up to a maximum of 90 days, but employees shall not use
sick leave until after six months of continuous employment.
      (2)   If an employee who claims sickness leave pay has been absent for
three consecutive working days, he or she shall furnish, at the employer’s
request, proof of his or her sickness or disability to the employer. Recurring
absence of less than three consecutive working days without a doctor’s
certificate, shall be cause for loss of pay for those days or discharge.
      (3)   When an employee returns to work he or she will be required to
complete a “leave of absence” form which must be signed by the department head
to approve the absence; the form shall then be filed in the personnel file.
One-half of accumulated sickness leave shall be payable on retirement, death or
permanent disability. To retire, a person must have attained age 60 or have 20
years service.
      (4)   The County Board hereby grants to all county employees elected or
appointed to county office a deferral of compensation for accrued sick days
upon the request of the employee/county officer until separation from the
county.
   (B)   Bereavement leave. An employee may take a bereavement leave of absence
which shall not affect his or her seniority, up to a maximum of three days
(which may be extended to five days, depending on distance to travel) caused by
a death in the immediate family or the spouse’s family. If the employee has
been employed by the employer for at least one year, he or she shall be paid
his or her regular base rate of pay for each working day while he or she is on
bereavement leave. The immediate family shall include spouse, mother, father,
child, sister, brother, spouse’s family and grandparents.
   (C)   Personal leave. An employee may take three days personal leave each
year, subject to the approval of the county officer or department head. At the
beginning of each fiscal year, each employee shall be credited with three days
of leave to be used for the employee’s personal business.
      (1)   A personal leave day may be used for any purpose, excluding
recreational purposes, at the discretion of the employee; however, use of any
personal leave day on a day adjacent to a holiday shall not be allowed. An
employee planning to use a personal leave day shall notify his or her
supervisor at least 24 hours in advance, except in cases of emergency. The
employee shall suffer no loss of pay for the leave.
      (2)   Personal leave days may not be applied to scheduled vacation days,
may not be accrued from year to year, and may not be used for other employment.
(1980 Code, § 36.16) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 181, adopted 4-24-1974; Res. 94-23,
adopted 1-20-1994)
§ 36.022 DISABILITY.
   (A)   Under the State Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF) provisions, any full-
time or permanent part- time employee who is participating in the IMRF and who
is disabled due to accident or sickness for more than 30 days, may apply for a
temporary disability benefit. This benefit amounts to 50% of the regular pay.
However, it is necessary to have been under the IMRF program for one year prior
to the date of disability.
   (B)   All other compensations for the employee must have ceased, including
sick pay and vacation pay.
   (C)   The disability benefit will cease if the following occurs:
      (1)   The employee reaches the age of 65;
      (2)   A physician indicates the employee is able to return to work; or
      (3)   The employee has received benefits for a period equal to one-half
his or her total service, or 30 months, whichever is the lesser.
   (D)   In all cases covered by the Worker’s Compensation Law, the employee
shall only be paid the difference between the amount of weekly worker’s
compensation benefit to which the employee would be entitled and the employee’s
full weekly salary at the time of the disability.
(1980 Code, § 36.17) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 181, adopted 4-24-1974)
Cross-reference:
   Worker’s compensation claims, see §
36.030
Statutory reference:
   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, see ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 7-101 et seq.
   Worker’s Compensation, see ILCS Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 36.023 HOSPITAL PLAN; HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.
   The County Group Health Care Indemnity Self- Insurance Plan, adopted by
Resolution 90-160 effective 7-19-1990, is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully set forth herein and as may be amended from time to time.
(1980 Code, § 36.18) (Res. 90-160, adopted 7-9-1990; Res. 90-161, adopted 7-19-
1990; Res. 90-207, adopted 9-20-1990; Res. 90-287, adopted 12-20-1990; Res. 91-
51, adopted 2-21-1991; Res. 91-109, adopted 4-18-1991; Res. 91-215, adopted 8-
15-1991; Res. 93-179, adopted 8-12-1993; Res. 95-307, adopted 12-21-1995; Res.
01-486, adopted 11-15-2001; Res. 03-468, adopted 10-16-2003)
§ 36.024 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   General. The county represents that it and the employing agencies
responsible to it conform to the following regulations.
      (1)   It will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, creed, color, political affiliation or beliefs, sex
or national origin. It will take whatever action is necessary to ensure that
applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment,
without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin or sex, or
political affiliation or belief.
         (a)   Action shall include, but not be limited to, employment,
assignment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment
advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of
compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship.
         (b)   They agree to post in conspicuous places, available to employees
and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this
section.
      (2)   It will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by or on behalf of the applicant or the employing agencies, state that
all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without
regard to race, creed, color, national origin or sex, or political affiliation
or beliefs.
   (B)   Adoption of plan. The Equal Employment Opportunity Plan, 2008, a copy
of which is on file in the office of the County Clerk, is hereby established
and adopted by reference.
(1980 Code, § 36.19) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 182, adopted 4-24-1974) (Res. 04-
247, adopted 6-17-2004; Res. 06-448, adopted 10-19-2006; Res. 08-421, adopted
10-16-2008)
§ 36.025 RECOGNITION OF COUNTY EMPLOYEES UNION.
   The County Board recognizes Local 1028 American Federation of State, County
and Municipal Employees as the sole bargaining representative for the employees
of the county.
(1980 Code, § 36.20) (1968 p. 91, adopted 2- -1968) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 425)
§ 36.026 DEDUCTION OF MONTHLY UNION DUES.
   (A)   The County Board, to the extent permitted by law, authorizes the
deduction of union dues from the employees’ pay each pay period from the
employees of the county who have, according to law, signified their intention
and desire to have union dues deducted from their county wages.
   (B)   The written authorization by the county employees to deduct union dues
must in all ways conform to the law authorizing the deduction and must be in
writing and cancelable at the will of the employee. Proof in writing of the
authorization must be filed with the county.
   (C)   This resolution is intended to permit the deduction of union dues in
accordance with Article II, § 3, of the agreement entered into between the
County Board and Local 1028, Council No. 44 of the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO and to the extent necessary,
Article II, § 3, is incorporated by reference and made a part of this section.
   (D)   A certified copy of this section shall be transmitted to the County
Treasurer and the County Auditor by the County Clerk.
   (E)   Request for deductions from pay-checks of county employees will not be
considered unless the request is signed by 51% of the employees of the county.
(1980 Code, § 36.21) (1970 p. 1907, adopted 11-18-1970) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p.
510; Sup. Rec. Bk. p. 11, adopted 1-26-1977) (Res. 81-70, adopted 4-23-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Union dues, see ILCS Ch. 50, Act 125, § 2
§ 36.027 BUSINESS/TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT.
   The county business and travel expense regulations shall apply to all
elected or appointed officials, and all employees of the county. Copies of the
regulations are available in the county offices for public inspection during
regular business hours.
(1980 Code, § 36.22) (1966 pp. 123—124, adopted 5- -1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237,
p. 125; Sup. Rec. Bk. p. 51, adopted 2-23-1977) (Res. 08-130, passed 3-20-2008)
§ 36.028 PAYMENT FOR MILEAGE.
   All county employees using private cars in county business shall be paid
their mileage, upon presentation of their claim, at the close of each month,
with the claim being subsequently reviewed by the proper committee and the
County Board.
(1980 Code, § 36.23) (1967 pp. 378—379, adopted 8- -1967) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237,
p. 326) (Res. 80-106, adopted 6-25-1980; Res. 81-33, adopted 8-27-1980; Res.
81-57, adopted 9-24-1980; Res. 93-151, adopted 7-15-1993; Res. 96-10, passed 1-
18-1996; Res. 98-56, adopted 3-19-1998)
§ 36.029 FISCAL YEAR.
   The county fiscal year, December 1 through November 30, is adopted for the
purpose of vacation and sick leave.
(1980 Code, § 36.24) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 62, adopted 1-13-1971)
§ 36.030 WORKER’S COMPENSATION CLAIMS; INSURANCE RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   The procedures for payment of worker’s compensation claims are as
follows.
      (1)   After approval by Scott Wetzel Services, Inc., the County Treasurer
is authorized to immediately issue a check for payment of worker’s compensation
claims, up to an amount of $500.
      (2)   After approval by Scott Wetzel Services, Inc., or the State’s
Attorney’s office, the Purchasing and Inventory Control Committee is authorized
to approve claims for worker’s compensation in excess of $500 and not exceeding
$5,000, and the County Treasurer is authorized to make immediate payment upon
approval by the Purchasing and Inventory Control Committee.
      (3)   All claims in excess of $5,000 for worker’s compensation which have
been awarded by the State Industrial Commission or awarded by the County
Circuit Court and approved by the County State Attorney’s office shall be paid
immediately by the County Treasurer.
      (4)   All other claims or settlements in excess of $5,000 will be
approved by the Purchasing and Inventory Control Committee, and after approval,
payment will be made immediately by the County Treasurer.
   (B)   The County Board hereby establishes the Worker’s Compensation
Insurance Reserve Fund to cover payment of worker’s compensation claims
outstanding as of November 30, 1981.
(1980 Code, § 36.25) (Res. 79-144, adopted 7-25-1979; Res. 81-34, adopted 2-26-
1981; Res. 81-210, adopted 11-19-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Disability claims, see §
36.022
Statutory reference:
   Illinois Industrial Commission, see ILCS Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 13 et seq.
   Worker’s Compensation, see ILCS Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 36.031 CENTRAL CREDIT UNION.
   (A)   County employees may become members of the Central Credit Union of the
county. The Payroll Department is authorized to make deductions from employee’s
pay after receiving proper authorization.
   (B)   The county will not be involved with any phase of the day-to-day
operation of the Credit Union. The county’s participation will be limited to
the payroll deduction function only. All employee questions and business will
be handled directly by the Credit Union.
   (C)   The county assumes no responsibility for the application of the
deduction to either savings or loan repayment. The Credit Union agrees to hold
the county free from all liability in connection with the Credit Union
deductions except for the ordinary diligence and care in making proper
deductions and transmitting money and listing to the Credit Union.
   (D)   The following procedures shall be followed.
      (1)   Informational packets with membership cards shall be initially
distributed to all employees with their paychecks. Additional packets will be
sent to the Personnel Department for future new employees.
      (2)   Membership data and payroll deduction authorizations will be
forwarded to the Credit Union. The county will start, change or stop deductions
only when a signed employee authorization, approved by the Credit Union, has
been filed with the Payroll Department for at least ten days prior to the
effective paydate.
      (3)   The county will make the approved payroll deductions only from the
mid-month paycheck, only in whole dollars, and only when there is enough net
pay to make the deductions.
      (4)   Checks and deduction listings will be made available to the Credit
Union no later than the paydate.
(1980 Code, § 36.26) (Res. 80-34, adopted 3-26-1980)
§ 36.032 PUBLIC WORKS WAGES.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   To the extent and as required by ILCS Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 1
through 12, as amended, the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality
for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in the construction of public
works within the jurisdiction of the county is hereby ascertained to be the
same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the county area
as determined by the Department of Labor of the state as of June of the current
year, a copy of that determination being incorporated herein by reference.
      (2)   As required by state law, any and all revisions of the prevailing
rate of wages by the State Department of Labor shall supersede the Department’s
June determination and apply to any and all public works construction
undertaken by the county.
      (3)   The definition of any terms appearing in this section which are
also used in the aforementioned state law, shall be the same as in state law.
      (4)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply the general
prevailing rate of wages, as herein ascertained, to any work or employment,
except public works construction of the county to the extent required by the
aforementioned state law.
      (5)   This section, and every provision thereof, shall be considered
separable, and the invalidation of any portion of this section shall not affect
the validity of the remainder.
      (6)   All ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict
herewith, are hereby repealed.
      (7)   This section shall take effect following its passage, approval,
adoption, recording inspection and publication, as may be required by law.
   (B)   Application and implementation. In any and all bid calls and related
contracts awarded, including those funded by bonds, grants, loans or other
means, pursuant to the State Municipal Code (Division 74), the State Building
Revenue Bond Act, the State Development Finance Authority Act, the Build
Illinois Bond Act and the Build Illinois Act, involving pubic works building,
construction or improvement projects, the county shall require that:
      (1)   A copy of this determination or its current revision(s), then in
effect, shall be attached to all bid or contract specifications;
      (2)   No less than the general prevailing rates of wages in the county,
shall be paid for each craft or type of worker or mechanic needed to execute
the contract or perform the work;
      (3)   Bonds or other appropriate sureties including provisions as shall
guarantee the faithful performance of the prevailing wage clause; and
      (4)   Unless it can be shown, in accordance with the aforementioned state
law, that an insufficiency of qualified workers are reasonably available,
public works project workers shall be employed, in the following priority:
         (a)   First: County residents; then
         (b)   Second: Residents from immediately adjacent state counties; then
         (c)   Third: Other residents of the state; then
         (d)   Fourth: All others.
      (5)   Failure to comply with these provisions shall render any contractor
or sub-contractor liable to the penalties, set forth in the aforementioned
state law.
   (C)   County Clerk’s duties. The County Clerk shall:
      (1)   Publicly post or keep available for inspection, by an interested
party, in the main office of the county this determination or any revisions of
the prevailing rate of wage;
      (2)   Mail a copy of this determination to any employer and to any
association of employers, and to any person or association of employees, who
have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination,
stating the particular rates and the particular classes of workers whose wages
shall be affected by the rates;
      (3)   Promptly file a certified copy of this section with both the State
Secretary of State (Index Division) and the State Department of Labor;
      (4)   Distribute copies of this section and any amendatory wage revisions
to all elected and appointed department heads, the County Pubic Building
Commission and other agencies of county government, as appropriate; and
      (5)   Cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the area a copy of this section, and the publication shall constitute notice
that the determination is effective and that this is the determination of the
public body.
(1980 Code, § 36.27) (Res. 80-169, adopted 10-29-1980; Res. 81-122, adopted 7-
23-1981; Res. 83-67, adopted 7-21-1983; Res. 84-74, adopted 6-21-1984; Res. 86-
89, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 89-113, adopted 6-15-1989; Res. 90-134, adopted 6-
21-1990; Res. 91-138, passed 5-16-1991; Res. 01-267, passed 6-21-2001; Res. 03-
429, passed 9-18-2003; Res. 04-257, passed 6-17-2004; Ord. 13-161, passed 6-20-
2013)
§ 36.033 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.
   (A)   The County Board hereby establishes a deferred compensation plan for
all its elected officials, and all full-time employees, not governed by county
working agreements, currently or subsequently in force and effect. The County
Board Chairperson is authorized to execute a deferred compensation plan with
certain companies or corporations, as established by resolution from time to
time.
   (B)   The Director of Administrative Services may, on behalf of the county,
execute all joinder agreements with all eligible personnel, which are necessary
for that person’s participation in the deferred compensation plan; except that
any joinder agreement for the Director of Administrative Services shall be
executed by the County Board Chairperson.
(1980 Code, § 36.28) (Res. 81-85, adopted 5-28-1981; Res. 82-15, adopted 1-28-
1982; Res. 94-80, adopted 3-17-1994)
§ 36.034 CONTRIBUTIONS TO RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   Employee contributions to the State Municipal Retirement Fund shall be
paid by the county on behalf of all of the employees enrolled in the Fund.
   (B)   The payment shall be made by reducing the amount of the gross earnings
payable to employees by the amount of contributions and making payment of this
amount directly to the Fund.
   (C)   The payment of employee contributions provided shall be effective for
all compensation paid to employees beginning July 1, 1984.
(1980 Code, § 36.29) (Res. 84-50, adopted 5-17-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, see ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 7-101 et seq.
§ 36.035 MEMBERSHIP OF ELECTED OFFICIALS IN RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   Elected officials may participate in the State Municipal Retirement
Fund if they are in positions normally requiring performance of duty for 600
hours or more per year; and, the governing body can determine what hourly
requirements of its elected officials are, and should make the determination
for the guidance of the Board of Trustees of the State Municipal Retirement
Fund.
   (B)   The County Board finds that the following elected positions qualify
for membership in IMRF:
 
State’s Attorney   Circuit Clerk
Sheriff              Auditor
Coroner              Treasurer
County Clerk         Recorder of Deeds
1 County Chairperson 26 Elected Board Members
 
(1980 Code, § 36.30) (Res. 91-47, adopted 2-21-1991)
§ 36.036 GRANT-FUNDED EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   The county shall require all new hires for grant-funded positions to
sign a statement acknowledging the conditions of the grant funding at the time
of initial employment.
   (B)   The statement of acknowledgment shall be in substantially the
following form:
      I,                , acknowledge the circumstances and the requirement of
the grant-funded position which I hereby accept; and further, I understand that
if the grant is reduced or discontinued, the position which I fill could be
abolished, subject to the decision of the Will County Board.
(1980 Code, § 36.31) (Res. 90-251, adopted 11-15-1990)
§ 36.037 FEDERAL AGE DISCRIMINATION ACT.
   (A)   The County Board agrees to accept the obligation due State Municipal
Retirement Fund for the omitted service employer contributions payable through
future employer contribution rates and to accept the charges for employer and
employee Social Security taxes if the taxes have not been paid on the omitted
service earnings.
   (B)   Further, the authorized agent is hereby authorized and directed to
file a certified copy of this section and all other pertinent forms and
documents with the State Municipal Retirement Fund.
(1980 Code, § 36.32) (Res. 90-75, adopted 4-19-1990)
§ 36.038 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   The following sexual harassment policy is hereby established for all
employees of county government.
   (A)   It is illegal, and against the county’s policy, for any worker, male
or female, to harass another worker by making unwelcome sexual advances or
favors, or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature, a condition of
employment; by using a worker’s submission to or rejection of the conduct as
the basis for or a factor in any employment decision affecting the individual;
or be creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment by
engaging in the conduct.
   (B)   The creation of an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment
may include the actions as persistent comments on a worker’s sexual
preferences, or the display of obscene or sexually oriented photographs or
drawings. Conduct or actions that arise out of a personal or social
relationship and that are not intended to have a discriminatory effect on
employment may not be viewed as harassment. The employer will determine whether
certain conduct constitutes sexual harassment, based on a review of the facts
and circumstances of each situation.
   (C)   The county will not condone any sexual harassment of employees. All
workers, including supervisors, will be subject to severe discipline, including
discharge, for any sexual harassing behavior.
   (D)   Any employee who feels victimized by sexual harassment should
immediately report the alleged harassment to his or her supervisor. If the
first-line supervisor is the source of the alleged harassment, the employee
should report the problem to the supervisor’s superior.
   (E)   Supervisors and managers who receive a sexual harassment complaint
should carefully investigate the matter, questioning all employees who may have
knowledge of the alleged incident or similar problems. Both the complaint and
the investigative steps and findings should be documented as thoroughly as
possible.
   (F)   Employees who are dissatisfied with an investigating supervisor’s
resolution of a sexual harassment problem may file a complaint in accordance
with established grievance procedures.
   (G)   No employee will be subject to any form of retaliation of discipline
for pursuing a sexual harassment complaint.
(1980 Code, § 36.33) (Res. 93-176, adopted 7-15-1993)
§ 36.039 COUNTY HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN.
   The County Board adopts a cafeteria plan, within the meaning of § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code, substantially in the form attached hereto (the 125 Plan)
to permit employees of the county to pay with per-tax dollars their share of
the Health Care Coverage under the County Health Benefit Plan.
(1980 Code, § 36.34) (Res. 95-302, adopted 12-21-1995)
§ 36.040 RETIREMENT FUND INCLUDED UNDER SECTION 125 PLAN.
   The County Board does hereby elect to include as earnings reportable to
State Municipal Retirement Fund compensation paid under an Internal Revenue
Code § 125 Plan, and/or compensation directed into a premium conversion plan or
flexible spending account effective retroactively to January 1, 1996.
(1980 Code, § 36.35) (Res. 96-37, adopted 2-15-1996)
§ 36.041 POST-OFFER PRE-EMPLOYMENT CRIMINAL BACKGROUND AND DRUG SCREENING.
   (A)   Before awarding any position, the County Human Resources Department
will conduct the following post-offer pre-employment background checks on all
incumbents: Social Security verification, prior employment verification,
education verification, residence verification, fingerprint criminal background
investigation (local, state and federal), sexual offender database search and
drug screening.
   (B)   In addition, candidates for designated positions may also be subject
to the following additional types of checks depending on the requirements of
the position: post-offer pre- employment physical, motor vehicle record,
professional reference checks and professional licensing check.
   (C)   All offers are contingent on the successful outcome of all post-offer
pre-employment screening.
   (D)   The county will adhere to all the requirements of the Fair Credit
Reporting Act and, in determining whether conviction of a criminal offense will
disqualify an applicant for a particular position, the following factors will
be considered:
      (1)   The nature of the offense and its relationship to the position;
      (2)   The degree to which the applicant has been rehabilitated; and
      (3)   The length of time elapsed since conviction.
(1980 Code, § 36.36) (Res. 06-223, adopted 5-18-2006)
§ 36.042 CONVERSION OF MILITARY SERVICE TO IMRF SERVICE CREDIT.
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, § 7-139, the County Board elects to
allow service credit to members who served in the armed forces of the United
States for up to four years of service, prior to their participation in the
State Municipal Retirement Fund.
   (B)   This section shall not be limited to a specific military operation.
(1980 Code, § 36.37) (Res. 07-417, adopted 10-18-2007)
§ 36.043 BRIGHT START ILLINOIS 529 COLLEGE SAVINGS PLAN PAYROLL DEDUCTION.
   The Human Resources Department shall implement voluntary employee payroll
deductions for employees who with to enroll and participate in the Bright Start
Illinois 529 College Savings Plan.
(1980 Code, § 36.38) (Res. 08-129, adopted 3-20-2008)
WAGE RATES
§ 36.055 DETERMINATION OF RATES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by state, county, city
or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works” approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the county is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in the county areas as determined by the State Department of
Labor as of June of the current year, a copy of that determination being
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate
of wages by the State Department of Labor shall supersede the Department’s June
determination and apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by
the county.
   (C)   The definition of any terms appearing in this subchapter which are
also used in the Act shall be the same as in the Act.
(1980 Code, § 36.50) (Res. 92-139, adopted 6-18-1992; Res. 93-144, adopted 6-
17-1993; Res. 95-127, adopted 6-15-1995; Res. 03-289, adopted 6-19-2003; Res.
05-291, adopted 6-16-2005; Res. 06-266, adopted 6-15-2006; Res. 07-257, adopted
6-21-2007; Res. 08-249, adopted 6-19-2008; Res. 09-171, adopted 6-18-2009; Ord.
11-220, passed 6-16-2011; Ord. 12-213, passed 6-21-2012)
§ 36.056 APPLICATION.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of the county to the extent required by the Act.
(1980 Code, § 36.51) (Res. 92-139, adopted 6-18-1992; Res. 93-144, adopted 6-
17-1993; Res. 95-127, adopted 6-15-1995; Res. 03-289, adopted 6-19-2003; Res.
06-266, adopted 6-15-2006; Res. 08-249, adopted 6-19-2008; Res. 09-171, adopted
6-18-2009)
§ 36.057 COPIES AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION.
   The County Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of the county this determination or any
revisions of the prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of
the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
(1980 Code, § 36.52) (Res. 92-139, adopted 6-18-1992; Res. 93-144, adopted 6-
17-1993; Res. 95-127, adopted 6-15-1995; Res. 03-289, adopted 6-19-2003; Res.
06-266, adopted 6-15-2006; Res. 08-249, adopted 6-19-2008; Res. 09-171, adopted
6-18-2009)
§ 36.058 MAILING OF COPIES.
   The County Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer,
and to any association of employees and to any person or association of
employers who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by the rates.
(1980 Code, § 36.53) (Res. 92-139, adopted 6-18-1992; Res. 93-144, adopted 6-
17-1993; Res. 95-127, adopted 6-15-1995; Res. 03-289, adopted 6-19-2003; Res.
06-266, adopted 6-15-2006; Res. 08-249, adopted 6-19-2008; Res. 09-171, adopted
6-18-2009)
§ 36.059 FILING OF ORDINANCE.
   The County Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this subchapter
with both the Secretary of State Index Division and the State Department of
Labor of the state.
(1980 Code, § 36.54) (Res. 92-139, adopted 6-18-1992; Res. 93-144, adopted 6-
17-1993; Res. 95-127, adopted 6-15-1995; Res. 03-289, adopted 6-19-2003; Res.
06-266, adopted 6-15-2006; Res. 08-249, adopted 6-19-2008; Res. 09-171, adopted
6-18-2009)
§ 36.060 PUBLICATION IN NEWSPAPER.
   The County Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the area a copy of this subchapter, and the publication
shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and that this is
the determination of this public body.
(1980 Code, § 36.55) (Res. 92-139, adopted 6-18-1992; Res. 93-144, adopted 6-
17-1993; Res. 95-127, adopted 6-15-1995; Res. 03-289, adopted 6-19-2003; Res.
06-266, adopted 6-15-2006; Res. 08-249, adopted 6-19-2008; Res. 09-171, adopted
6-18-2009)
E-MAIL AND INTERNET USAGE
§ 36.075 USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   The county’s electronic communication systems, including e-mail and
the internet, are intended for business use only. Incidental and occasional use
of these systems for non-work purposes may be permitted with the approval of
the department head. Before using these systems for business or personal use,
employees must understand that any information that is created, sent, received,
accessed or stored in these systems will be the property of the county, will
not be private, and may be subject to a Freedom of Information Act disclosure.
If employees are permitted to use electronic communication systems for non-work
purposes, the use shall not violate any section of this policy or interfere
with the employee’s work performance.
   (B)   Employees should use the same care and discretion when writing e-mail
and other electronic communications as they would for any formal written
communication. Any messages for information sent by employees to other
individuals via electronic communication systems such as the internet or e-mail
are statements identifiable and attributable to the county. Consequently, all
electronic communications sent by employees, whether business or personal, must
be professional, comply with this policy, and contain the employees electronic
signature.
(1980 Code, § 36.70) (Res. 01-164, adopted 4-19-2001)
§ 36.076 PROHIBITED COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Under no circumstances may employees use the county’s electronic
communication systems for creating, possessing, uploading, downloading,
accessing, transmitting or distributing material that is offensive, illegal,
sexually explicit, discriminatory, defamatory or interferes with the
productivity of co-workers. Employees may not use these systems for illegal
activities, political causes, football pools or other sorts of gambling, the
creation or distribution of chain letters, or for solicitations or
advertisements for non-work purposes. Employees may not engage in any use which
violates copyright or trademark laws.
   (B)   Employees are also prohibited from posting information, opinions or
comments to internet discussion groups (for example: news groups, chat, list
servers or electronic bulletin boards) without prior authorization from the
employee’s department head.
   (C)   Employees may not use e-mail or other electronic communications to
disclose confidential or sensitive information. Personal information such as
the home addresses, phone numbers and Social Security numbers of county
employees should never be disclosed on the internet.
(1980 Code, § 36.71) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.077 PRIVACY.
   Although employees may use passwords to access electronic communication
systems, these communications should not be considered private. Employees
should always assume that any communications, whether business-related or
personal, created, sent, received or stored on the county’s electronic
communication systems may be read or heard by someone other than the intended
recipient.
(1980 Code, § 36.72) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.078 RIGHT TO MONITOR.
   (A)   The county reserves the right to monitor, intercept, access and
disclose all information created, sent, received or stored on its electronic
communication systems at any time, with or without employee notice. The
contents of computers, e-mail and other electronic communications will be
inspected when there are allegations that there have been violations of law,
breaches of confidentiality or security, violations of this subchapter. These
inspections will also be conducted when it is necessary to locate substantive
information that is not more readily available by less intrusive means.
   (B)   Before initiation of monitoring of stored electronic communications
such as e-mail messages, written authorization will be requited from the
elected official for their respective area.
   (C)   Internet use will be monitored in the same manner as other electronic
communications. However, in addition, the county will regularly monitor and
maintain a log of employees’ internet access. Department heads will have access
to this log upon request.
   (D)   Information obtained through monitoring may be used as a basis for
employee discipline up to and including termination.
(1980 Code, § 36.73) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.079 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Employees may not, without their department head’s authorization,
upload, download or otherwise access and/or transmit copyrighted, trademarked
or patented material, trade secrets or confidential, private or proprietary
information or materials. Employees may not upload, download or otherwise
transmit any illegal information or materials. Employees may not use the
county’s electronic communication systems to gain unauthorized access to remote
computers or other systems or to damage, alter or disrupt the computers or
systems in any way, nor may employees, without authorization from their
department head, use someone else’s code or password or disclose anyone’s code
or password including their own. Passwords can be released to Information
Technology technicians for problem solving.
   (B)   It is a violation of this policy for employees to intentionally
intercept, eavesdrop, record or alter another person’s internet and e-mail
messages. Employees may not enable unauthorized individuals to have access to
or use the county’s electronic communication systems, or otherwise permit any
use which would jeopardize the security of the county’s electronic
communication systems.
   (C)   Employees must use their real names when sending e-mail messages or
other electronic communications and may not misrepresent, obscure or in any way
attempt to subvert the information necessary to identify the real person
responsible for the electronic communication. Likewise, using another users
account or login ID constitutes a violation of this policy.
(1980 Code, § 36.74) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.080 LICENSING FEES.
   (A)   Employees may not install any software, for which the county has not
paid the appropriate licensing fee. Additional licensing fees may be incurred
every time software is installed for a new user. Consequently, before software
is installed on their computer, employees have a duty to ensure that all
appropriate licensing fees have been paid. Employees should notify their
department head if they discover unlicensed software in their department.
   (B)   Employees may not copy software for distribution to any third party or
for home use unless the copying is permitted by the software’s license
agreement.
   (C)   The installation of software for trial periods authorized by the
vendor would not be a violation of this policy.
(1980 Code, § 36.75) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.081 PASSWORDS.
   The use of passwords can be used to control access or encrypt data with
prior authorization of their department head. When an employee uses passwords
these passwords must be given to his or her department head.
(1980 Code, § 36.76) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.082 VIRUSES AND TAMPERING.
   Any personal computer that has access to the internet or e-mail must have
anti-virus software installed on that computer. This software would be the
software recommended by the Information Technology Department. The intentional
introduction of viruses, attempts to breach system security, or other malicious
tampering with any of the county’s electronic communications systems are
expressly prohibited. Employees must immediately report any viruses, tampering
or other system breaches to their department head.
(1980 Code, § 36.77) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.083 USE OF THE INTERNET.
   The county is not responsible for material viewed or downloaded by users
from the internet. The internet provides access to a significant amount of
information, some of which contains offensive, sexually explicit and
inappropriate material. It is difficult to avoid contact with this material,
therefore users of the internet do so at their own risk.
(1980 Code, § 36.78) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.084 DUTY NOT TO WASTE ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS RESOURCES.
   Users must not deliberately perform actions that waste electronic
communication resources or unfairly monopolize resources to the exclusion of
other employees. This includes, but is not limited to, subscribing to list
servers, mailing lists or web sites not directly related to the employee’s job
responsibilities, spending extensive non-productive time on the internet, and
doing large non-work related file downloads or mass mailings. Data streaming of
video or audio (listening to radio) is not to be done routinely. Electronic
communication resources are limited and employees have a duty to conserve these
resources.
(1980 Code, § 36.79) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.085 E-MAIL ADDRESSES.
   The county reserves the right to keep an employee’s e-mail address active
for a reasonable period of time following an employee’s departure to ensure
that important business communications reach the county.
(1980 Code, § 36.80) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.086 RECORD RETENTION.
   Generally, e-mail messages are temporary communications which are non-vital
and may be discarded routinely. However, depending on the content of the e-mail
message, it may be considered a more formal record and should be retained
pursuant to a department’s record retention schedule. Therefore, for purposes
of this policy, the county employees should treat e-mail messages and other
electronic records in the same manner as if these messages had originated on
paper. Employees should consult their supervisor or department head for
guidance in determining what records are subject to retention.
(1980 Code, § 36.81) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.087 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT REQUESTS.
   The county will not accept Freedom of Information Act (F.O.I.A.) requests
from the public via the internet. If a citizen e-mails a F.O.I.A. request to an
employee, the employee should notify the citizen that these requests must be
made in writing to the proper elected official for their respective area.
(1980 Code, § 36.82) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.088 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violations of this policy may subject employees to disciplinary action
from the removal of privileges up to and including dismissal from employment
and, if applicable, any criminal or civil penalties or other legal action.
   (B)   Employees who observe violations of this policy are obligated to
report those violations to their department head.
   (C)   The elected county official may authorize individuals, for
investigative purposes, to engage in activities otherwise prohibited by this
policy.
(1980 Code, § 36.83) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.089 POLICY CHANGES.
   The county reserves the right to change this policy at any time with notice.
Nothing in this policy is intended or should be construed as an agreement and/
or a contract, express or implied.
(1980 Code, § 36.84) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
§ 36.090 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. County Executive, Auditor, Recorder, Sheriff, Treasurer,
Circuit Clerk, State’s Attorney, Coroner, Chief Judge, Superintendent of
Schools.
   ELECTRONIC MAIL (E-MAIL). Electronic mail may include non-interactive
communication of text, data, image or voice messages between a sender and
designated recipients(s) by systems utilizing telecommunications links. It may
also include correspondence transmitted and stored electronically using
software facilities called mail, facsimile or messaging systems or voice
messages transmitted and stored for later retrieval from a computer system.
   ENCRYPTION SOFTWARE. Proprietary software that changes information from its
native state to an unrecognizable coded state which can only be returned to its
native state with special software.
   FILE TRANSFER PROTOCOL (FTP). A program that allows you to transfer data
between different computers on a network or between networks.
   INTERNET. A worldwide network of networks, connecting informational networks
communicating through a common communications language or protocol.
   INTRANET. An in-house web site that serves the employees of the enterprise.
Although intranet pages may link to the internet, an INTRANET is not a site
accessed by the general public.
   LIST SERVERS. An e-mail discussion group.
   NEWSGROUPS. The computer discussion groups of USENET.
   USENET. A collection of computer discussion groups that are read all over
the world.
   WORLD WIDE WEB. An internet client-server distributed information and
retrieval system based upon hypertext transfer protocol (http) that transfers
hypertext documents that can contain text, graphics, audio, video and other
multimedia file types across a varied array of computer systems.
(1980 Code, § 36.85) (Res. 01-164, passed 4-19-2001)
CHAPTER 37: COURTS; COUNTY LIBRARY
Section
   
37.01   Certain courts abolished
   
37.02   County law library established
   
37.03   Special funds
   
37.04   Civil fees and criminal assessments
   
37.05   Civil fees
   
37.06   Criminal assessments
Cross-reference:
   Continuation of services of the State’s Attorney Appellate Service
Commission, adopted November 17, 1983, see
TSO Table IX
   Office of Juvenile Services, see §§
33.075 and
33.076
   Proceeds from additional fees for motor vehicle violations to finance county
court system, see §
70.03
§ 37.01 CERTAIN COURTS ABOLISHED.
   All justice of the peace courts, county courts and other local government
courts are abolished. All their jurisdiction, judicial functions, powers and
duties are transferred to the respective circuit courts.
(1980 Code, § 37.01)
Statutory reference:
   Abolishment of certain courts; transfer of functions, see Art. 6, Schedule,
paragraph 5 of Illinois Constitution
§ 37.02 COUNTY LAW LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The county shall establish and maintain a county law library to be
located in the County Court House at Joliet, Illinois, for the use of the
judges of all courts of record in the county, the State’s Attorney and his or
her staff, magistrates, other public officers and the attorneys and members of
the public of the county.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-39001, the
Clerk of the Circuit Court for the county, is directed to charge and collect a
County Law Library fee in the sum of$20 and thereafter in each of those cases
authorized by that statute and which are filed in the Circuit Court for the
county.
      (2)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court for the county is directed to pay
over each month to the County Treasurer all sums so collected to be retained by
him or her in his or her special Law Library Fund and disbursed in accordance
with that statute.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the County Board shall serve upon the clerk of each
trial court of record in the county written notice that the County Board has
acted to establish and maintain a county law library.
(1980 Code, § 37.02) (1962 pp. 48-49, adopted 3- -1962) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, pp.
290-291) (Res. 11, adopted 5-18-1978; Res. 85-97, adopted 8-15-1985; Res. 08-
196, adopted 5-15-2008; Ord. 17-274, adopted 10-19-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Establishment of county law libraries, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-39001
§ 37.03 SPECIAL FUNDS.
   (A)   The Will County Treasurer shall maintain the following special funds
for the administration of the various court fees.
      (1)   Circuit Court Automation Fund;
      (2)   Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
      (3)   Circuit Clerk Operations and Administration Fund;
      (4)   Sheriff-Court Security Fund;
      (5)   Child Advocacy Center Fund;
      (6)   State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
      (7)   Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
      (8)   County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
      (9)   Probation and Court Services Fund;
      (10)   Neutral Site Exchange Fund;
      (11)   CASA Fund;
      (12)   Problem Solving Courts Fund;
      (13)   Judicial Facilities Construction Fund;
      (14)   Public Act 100-987 General Fund.
   (B)   The repeal of Ordinances 07-08, 14-123, 15-23 and Resolution 08-506
shall not operate to eliminate the revenue currently maintained in the various
funds created under those ordinances. The Will County Treasurer shall maintain
those funds and carry the current balances forward, crediting those funds as
provided by this chapter, court order and by Public Act 100-0987 and debiting
in compliance with the then current budget and properly executed department
authorizations.
   (C)   The current Drug Grant Fund shall be renamed the Problem Solving
Courts Fund.
(Ord. 19-145, passed 6-20-2019)
§ 37.04 CIVIL FEES AND CRIMINAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Civil fees and criminal assessments shall meet the requirements of Section
27.1b of the Clerks of Courts Act, ILCS Ch. 705, Act 105, §
27.1b, and the Criminal and Traffic Assessment Act, ILCS Ch. 705, Act 105, §
135 et seq.
(Ord. 19-145, passed 6-20-2019)
§ 37.05 CIVIL FEES.
   (A)   Fees in civil matters shall be assessed and distributed as set forth
herein, in compliance with Section 27.1b of the Clerks of Courts Act, ILCS Ch.
705, Act 105, § 27.1b.
   (B)   The fees for filing a complaint, petition or other pleading initiating
a civil action shall be as set forth in the schedules below in accordance with
case categories established by the Illinois Supreme Court:
      (1)   Schedule 1: $314 to be divided as follows:
         (a)   $45 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
deposited as follows:
            1.   Circuit Court Automation Fund - $15;
            2.   Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund - $15;
            3.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund - $15;
         (b)   $19 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and deposited as
follows:
            1.   Mandatory Arbitration Fund - $8;
            2.   Access to Justice Fund - $2;
            3.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
         (c)   $250 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and deposited as
follows:
            1.   Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $250.
      (2)   Schedule 2: $264 to be divided as follows:
         (a)   $45 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
deposited as follows:
            1.   Circuit Court Automation Fund - $15;
            2.   Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund - $15;
            3.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund - $15.
         (b)   $19 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Mandatory Arbitration Fund - $8;
            2.   Access to Justice Fund - $2;
            3.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
         (c)   $200 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $200.
      (3)   Schedule 3: $89 to be divided as follows:
         (a)   $22 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
deposited as follows:
            1.   Circuit Court Automation Fund - $8;
            2.   Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund - $7;
            3.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund - $7.
         (b)   $11 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Access to Justice Fund - $2;
            2.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
         (c)   $56 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $56.
      (4)   Schedule 4: $0.00.
   (C)   The fees for filing an appearance in a civil action, including a
cannabis civil law action under the Cannabis Control Act shall be as set forth
in the schedules below in accordance with case categories established by the
Illinois Supreme Court:
      (1)   Schedule 1: $189 to be divided as follows:
         (a)   $45 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
distributed as follows:
            1.   Circuit Court Automation Fund - $15;
            2.   Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund - $15;
            3.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund - $15.
         (b)   $19 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows: in accordance with the Clerk's instructions.
            1.   Mandatory Arbitration Fund - $8;
            2.   Access to Justice Fund - $2;
            3.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
         (c)   $125 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $125.
      (2)   Schedule 2: $109 to be divided as follows:
         (a)   $10 to be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court and
distributed as follows:
            1.   Circuit Court Automation Fund - $4;
            2.   Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund - $3;
            3.   Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund - $3.
         (b)   $9 to be remitted to the State Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Supreme Court Special Purposes Fund - $9.
         (c)   $90 to be remitted to the County Treasurer and distributed as
follows:
            1.   Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $90.
         (d)   There is an additional fee of $30 that shall be assessed by the
Will County Circuit Clerk under Section 5-1101.3 of the Counties Code to be
paid by each party at the time of filing the first pleading, paper, or other
appearance; provided that no additional fee shall be required if more than one
party is represented in a single pleading, paper, or other appearance. The
proceeds of all fees enacted under this division (d) shall be collected by the
Circuit Clerk and turned over to the Will County Treasurer to be deposited into
the County's Judicial Department Facilities Construction Fund and used for the
sole purpose of funding in whole or in part the costs associated with building
new judicial facilities in Will County.
         (e)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, the following
miscellaneous fees are to be deposited in the Public Act 100-987 General Fund
to be used for purposes related to the operation of the court system in the
county:
            1.   Alias summons or citation: $5.
            2.   Jury services: $212.50.
            3.   Change of venue: $40.
            4.   Petition to vacate or modify:
               A.   If filed within 30 days: $50;
               B.   If filed after 30 days: $75;
               C.   Notice sent to Secretary of State: $40;
            5.   Appeals preparation:
               A.   If record is 100 pages or less: $50;
               B.   If record is between 100 and 200 pages: $100;
               C.   If record is 200 pages or more: additional fee of $0.25 per
page.
            6.   Garnishment, wage deduction, and citation proceedings:
               A.    Amount in controversy $1,000 or less: $15;
               B.    Amount in controversy greater than $1,000 and not more
than $5,000: $30;
               C.    Amount in controversy greater than $5,000: $50.
            7. Collections:
               A.   All collections (except state and county and maintenance
and child support cases): 2.5% of the amount collected and turned over.
               B.   In child support and maintenance cases: $36 annually to be
deposited in the Child Support Maintenance Fund.
               C.    Certifications to Secretary of State pursuant to Section
7-703 of the Family Financial Responsibility Law: $5.
               D.   In proceedings to foreclose a delinquent real estate tax
lien the State's Attorney shall receive a fee of 10% of the total amount
realized from the sale of real estate sold in the proceedings.
            8.   Mailing: $10 plus the cost of postage.
            9.   For each certified copy of a judgment, following the first
copy: $10.
            10.   Certification, authentication, and reproduction:
               A.   Each certification or authentication for taking
acknowledgment of a deed or other instrument in writing with the seal of
office: $6;
               B.    Reproduction of any document contained in the Clerk's
files:
                  i.    $2 for the first page;
                  ii.    $0.50 per page for the next 19 pages;
                  iii.    $0.25 per page for all additional pages.
            11.   For each record search, within a division or municipal
district: $6 for each year searched.
            12.   For each page of hard copy print output, when case records
are maintained on an automated medium: $6.
            13.   Performing a marriage in court: $10.
            14.   For filing each deed of voluntary assignment: $20; for
recording a deed of voluntary assignment: $0.50 for each 100 words.
            15.   Expungement petition: $60 and an additional fee of $4 for
each certified copy of an order to expunge arrest records.
            16.   Probate filings:
               A.   For each account (other than one final account) filed in
the estate of a decedent or ward: $25.
               B.   Filing a claim:
                  i.    Amount claimed greater than $150 and not more than
$500: $25;
                  ii.    Amount claimed greater than $500 and not more than
$10,000: $40;
                  iii.    Amount claimed greater than $10,000: $60.
               C.   For filing a claim, petition, or supplemental proceeding
based upon an action seeking equitable relief: $60.
               D.   There shall be no fee for filing in an estate the
appearance of: any person for the purposes of consent; or an executor,
administrator, administrator to collect, guardian, guardian ad litem or special
administrator.
               E.   For a jury demand: $137.50.
               F.   For each certified copy of letters of office, of court
orders or other certifications: $2 per page.
               G.   For each exemplification: $2 plus the fee for
certification.
            17.   For correction of the case number, case title, or attorney
computer identification number, if required by rule of court, on any document
filed in the Clerk's Office: $25.
   (F)   Unpaid fees.
      (1)   Unless a court ordered payment schedule is implemented or the fee
requirements of this section are waived by court order, the Clerk is authorized
to add to any unpaid fees and costs a delinquency amount equal to 15% of the
unpaid fees that remain unpaid after 90 days.
      (2)   Delinquency amounts collected pursuant to this provision shall be
deposited into the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund to
defray additional administrative costs incurred by the Clerk in collecting
unpaid fees and costs.
      (3)   No civil fees shall be charged to local school districts.
(Ord. 19-145, passed 6-20-2019)
§ 37.06 CRIMINAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Assessments shall be imposed in criminal, traffic, conservation and
non-traffic matters in accordance with the schedules set forth in the Criminal
and Traffic Assessment Act, ILCS Ch. 705, Act 135, §§ 1-5 et seq., and shall be
distributed as set forth herein.
   (B)   Schedules:
      (1)   Schedule 1: Generic felony offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $549 and remit as follows:
            1.   $354 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $255 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $225.
               E.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $20 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               I.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $195 to the State Treasurer.
      (2)   Schedule 2: felony DUI offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $1,709 and remit as follows:
            1.   $399 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $300 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $270.
               E.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $20 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               I.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $1,110 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $200 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (3)   Schedule 3: felony drug offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $2,215 and remit as follows:
            1.   $354 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $255 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $225.
               E.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $20 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               I.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $1,861 to the State Treasurer.
      (4)   Schedule 4: felony sex offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $1,314 and remit as follows:
            1.   $354 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $255 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $225.
               E.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               F.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               G.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $20 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               I.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund;
            2.   $960 to the State Treasurer.
      (5)   Schedule 5: generic misdemeanor offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $439 and remit as follows:
            1.   $282 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $185 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $155.
               F.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               I.   $10 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               J.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $155 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (6)   Schedule 6: misdemeanor DUI offenses.
         A.   The Clerk shall collect $1,381 and remit as follows:
            1.   $322 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               a.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               b.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               c.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               d.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               e.   $225 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $195.
               F.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               I.   $10 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               J.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $707 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $352 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (7)   Schedule 7: misdemeanor drug offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $905 and remit as follows:
            1.   $282 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $185 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $155.
               F.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               I.   $10 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               J.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $621 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (8)   Schedule 8: misdemeanor sex offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $1,184 and remit as follows:
            1.   $282 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $185 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    CASA Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  iii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $155.
               F.   $10 to the Child Advocacy Center Fund;
               G.   $2 to the State's Attorney Records Automation Fund;
               H.   $2 to the Public Defender Records Automation Fund;
               I.   $10 to the County Jail Medical Costs Fund;
               J.   $20 to the Probation and Court Services Fund.
            2.   $900 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (9)   Schedule 9: major traffic offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $325 and remit as follows:
            1.   $203 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $150 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    Problem Solving Courts Fund $15;
                  ii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $135.
            2.   $97 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $25 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (10)   Schedule 10: minor traffic offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $226 and remit as follows:
            1.   $168 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $115 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $100.
            2.   $46 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $12 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (11)   Schedule 10.5: truck weight and load offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $260 and remit as follows:
            1.   $168 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $115 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    Problem Court Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $100.
            2.   $92 to the State Treasurer.
      (12)   Schedule 11: conservation offenses.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $195 and remit as follows:
            1.   $168 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $115 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    Problem Solving Courts - $15;
                  ii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $100.
            2.   $25 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $2 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (13)   Schedule 12: dispositions under Supreme Court Rule 529 (No Court
Appearance Required Traffic Offenses).
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $164 and remit as follows:
            1.   $100 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $47 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $47.
            2.   $14 to the State Treasurer.
            3.   $50 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
      (14)   Schedule 13: petty offense, business offense, or non-traffic
ordinance violation.
         (a)   The Clerk shall collect $100 and remit as follows:
            1.   $75 to the County Treasurer who shall deposit the money as
follows:
               A.   $20 to the Circuit Court Automation Fund;
               B.   $20 to the Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund;
               C.   $5 to the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative
Fund;
               D.   $8 to the Circuit Court Clerk Electronic Citation Fund;
               E.   $22 to the County General Fund to be distributed as
follows:
                  i.    Problem Solving Courts Fund - $15;
                  ii.    Public Act 100-987 General Fund - $7.
            2.   $25 to the treasurer of the unit of local government of the
arresting agency.
   (c)   There shall be an additional $30 assessed by the Will County Circuit
Clerk as authorized under Section 5-1101.3 of the Counties Code in all felony,
misdemeanor, local or county ordinance, traffic, or conservation cases upon
entry of a judgment of conviction, an order of judgment under Section 10 of the
Cannabis Control Act, Section 410 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act,
Section 70 of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, section
12-4.3 or subdivision (b)(1) of Section 12-3.05 of the Criminal Code of 1961 or
the Criminal Code of 2012, Section 10-102 of the Illinois Alcoholism and Other
Drug Dependency Act, or Section 10 of the Steroid Control Act; except in local
or county ordinance traffic, and conservation cases, if fines are paid in full
without a court appearance, then the assessment shall not be imposed or
collected. The proceeds of all fees enacted under this division (c) shall be
collected by the Circuit Clerk and turned over to the Will County Treasurer to
be deposited into the County's Judicial Department Facilities Construction Fund
and used for the sole purpose of funding in whole or in part the costs
associated with building new judicial facilities in Will County.
   (d)   Unpaid assessments.
      (1)   Unless a court ordered payment schedule is implemented or the
assessment requirements of this section are waived by court order, the Clerk is
authorized to add to any unpaid assessments a delinquency amount equal to 15%
of the unpaid assessments that remain unpaid after 90 days.
      (2)   Delinquency amounts collected pursuant to this provision shall be
deposited into the Circuit Court Clerk Operation and Administrative Fund to
defray additional administrative costs incurred by the Clerk in collecting
unpaid assessments.
(Ord. 19-145, passed 6-20-2019)
CHAPTER 38: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
   
38.01   Freedom of information
   
38.02   County Recorder fees
   
38.03   Recording of trust documents
   
38.04   Index number on real estate documents filed with County Recorder
   
38.05   Fee for computer access to records of county officials and department
heads
   
38.06   Document format regulations
§ 38.01 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION.
   It is the intent of the county pursuant to P.A. 83-1013, being ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 140, known as the “Freedom of Information Act”, to make available to all
persons full and complete information regarding the affairs of their government
and the official acts and policies of those who represent them as public
officials and public employees as permitted by this Act.
(1980 Code, § 38.01) (Res. 84-100, adopted 8-16-1984)
§ 38.02 COUNTY RECORDER FEES.
   (A)   Pursuant to Public Act 86-0924 as passed by the State General Assembly
and signed by the Governor amending § 9.07, “An act to revise the law in
relation to recorders approved March 9, 1974, as amended”, being ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 3-5018, the County Recorder of this county shall, in addition to the
fees provided therein, charge an additional fee of $3 instead of $2, for the
filing of every instrument, paper or notice for record.
      (1)   Each $3 fee collected shall be placed in a special fund to be held
by the County Treasurer.
      (2)   The moneys collected and placed in the special fund shall be used
to defray the cost of converting the document storage system of the recorder to
computers or micrographics and the moneys shall be used solely to provide the
equipment, materials and necessary expense and costs incurred in the
implementing and maintaining of a document records systems.
   (B)   A fee in the Recorder of Deeds office, not to exceed $0.05 per “enter”
request on remote terminal, is hereby established as a user fee for private
industry to access public files through remote terminals.
(1980 Code, § 38.02) (Res. 89-258, adopted 9-21-1989; Res. 89-269, adopted 10-
19-1989)
§ 38.03 RECORDING OF TRUST DOCUMENTS.
   Whereas, Public Act 84-858 allows the County to impose a tax upon the
recording of certain documents representing a transfer of a beneficial interest
in certain property at the rate of $0.25 for each $500 of value or fraction
thereof stated in the declaration required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200 § 31-25, it
is resolved that Public Act 84-858 be implemented in its entirety and that a
tax be implemented upon the recording of certain documents representing
transfers of beneficial interests in certain property.
(1980 Code, § 38.03) (Res. 86-34, adopted 3-20-1986)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of county to impose tax upon recording of trust documents, see
ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1031
§ 38.04 INDEX NUMBER ON REAL ESTATE DOCUMENTS FILED WITH COUNTY RECORDER.
   (A)   (1)   If the County Recorder installs a computerized system that
permits automated entry and indexing of instruments filed in his or her office,
every instrument which purports to affect real property and which is thereafter
filed with the Recorder’s office must have affixed thereto a permanent index
number.
      (2)   The proper permanent index number to be affixed to a particular
instrument shall be the permanent index number of the parcel of real property
which the instrument purports to affect.
   (B)   Anyone who files an instrument at the Recorder’s office after the
computerized indexing system is in operation which purports to affect real
property shall affix to the particular instrument the permanent index number of
the parcel of real property the instrument purports to affect.
(1980 Code, § 38.04) (Res. 89-74, passed 5-18-1989)
§ 38.05 FEE FOR COMPUTER ACCESS TO RECORDS OF COUNTY OFFICIALS AND DEPARTMENT
HEADS.
   In order to allow access to the non-privileged files on the data base to the
private sector through remote terminals, the County Board does hereby establish
a fee for the accessing of information on the data base of those office holders
and department heads of the county who so allow access, the fee to be set at
$0.05 per “enter” request on a remote terminal.
(1980 Code, § 38.05) (Res. 89-323, adopted 12-21-1989)
Cross-reference:
   Imposition of similar fee in County Recorder’s Office, see §
38.02(B)
§ 38.06 DOCUMENT FORMAT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   If the County Recorder installs a computerized optical imaging storage
and retrieval system in his or her office, every instrument in a physical
format larger than 11 inches by 17 inches which is thereafter filed with the
Recorder’s office must have submitted along with it a clear and readable
reduction of the size 11 inches by 17 inches. This includes but is not limited
to large format versions of the following document types:
      (1)   Annexations;
      (2)   Condominium surveys;
      (3)   Correction to plats;
      (4)   Declaration amendments;
      (5)   Declarations, codes, covenants and restrictions;
      (6)   Disclaimer of easements;
      (7)   Easements;
      (8)   Plans;
      (9)   Plots;
      (10)   Plats of dedication;
      (11)   Plats of highway;
      (12)   Plats of subdivision;
      (13)   Plats of survey;
      (14)   Plats of vacation;
      (15)   Proposed annexations; and
      (16)   Variances.
   (B)   Anyone who files an instrument at the Recorder’s office after the
optical imaging storage and retrieval system is in operation, which is in a
physical format larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, must submit in addition to
all other required large format copies a clear and readable reduction to the
size 11 inches by 17 inches.
(1980 Code, § 38.06) (Res. 93-264P, passed 11-18-1993)
CHAPTER 39: COUNTY POLICIES
Section
   
39.01   Highway contract opportunities for minority and other disadvantaged
business enterprises
   
39.02   Adult detention facilities; No Smoking Policy
   
39.03   Health insurance benefits for elected retirees
   
39.04   Personal use of county-owned cell phones
   
39.05   Senior citizen homestead exemption
   
39.06   Sexual Harassment Policy
   
39.07   Charitable Organizations Policy
 
   
39.99   Penalty
§ 39.01 HIGHWAY CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES FOR MINORITY AND OTHER DISADVANTAGED
BUSINESS ENTERPRISES.
   (A)   Minority business participation. The County Board approves the concept
of disadvantaged or women-owned business participation in highway contracts and
that from 1% to 10% participation of the total dollars bid depending upon the
scope of the work and availability of disadvantaged business enterprises (DBE)
or women-owned business enterprises (WBE) subcontractors be used in future
highway projects.
   (B)   Exception. In cases where there are no subcontractorable items
included in the scope of work, DBE - WBE participation shall not be required at
the discretion of the Transportation and Communication Committee.
   (C)   Review of section. Authority is granted to the Transportation and
Communication Committee to review the contents of this section on a continual
basis and make appropriate adjustments.
(1980 Code, § 39.01) (Hwy. Res. 3, adopted 3-21-1985)
§ 39.02 ADULT DETENTION FACILITIES; NO SMOKING POLICY.
   (A)   The County Board prohibits smoking in the present and new adult
detention facilities.
   (B)   Visitors will be advised of the “No Smoking Policy” and a violation of
the policy will result in a $10 fine.
(1980 Code, § 39.02) (Res. 89-111, adopted 6-15-1989)
§ 39.03 HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS FOR ELECTED RETIREES.
   (A)   Persons retired from the county, if elected or appointed to county
office, shall be allowed to either elect retiree or active health insurance
status.
   (B)   If an official elects active coverage, they shall comply with all
current policies and procedures for the coverage, and can not change insurance
coverage during their term.
   (C)   If an elected official elects active coverage, upon separation from
the county, he or she must elect to return to retiree status within 60 days of
termination.
(1980 Code, § 39.03) (Res. 94-331, adopted 12-15-1994; Res. 07-296, adopted 7-
19-2007)
§ 39.04 PERSONAL USE OF COUNTY- OWNED CELL PHONES.
   (A)   The County Board hereby declares that any employee issued a county-
owned cell phone shall use it primarily for business and any personal use must
be limited to the agreed upon personal use tier contained in the Authorization
for Personal Use of Will County-Owned Cell Phone Agreement, attached to
Resolution 07-108, passed March 15, 2007.
   (B)   Any employee in receipt of or to receive a county-owned cell phone
must read, complete and sign the attached Authorization for Personal Use of
Will County Owned-Cell Phone Agreement.
   (C)   The employee shall be assessed a monthly charge for personal use. This
monthly charge shall be deducted from the employee’s paycheck on the first and
second payroll of the month.
(1980 Code, § 39.04) (Res. 07-108, passed 3-15-2007) Penalty, see §
39.99
§ 39.05 SENIOR CITIZEN HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.
   In compliance with 35 ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, § 15-170, the County Board
authorizes and directs the Supervisor of Assessments to set forth policy that
once a senior citizen has been granted homestead exemption under this section,
the person qualifying need not reapply for the exemption.
(Res. 10-313, passed 9-16-2010)
§ 39.06 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   (A)   It is a violation of federal and state law, and against Will County’s
policy, for any employee, male or female, to harass another worker by making
unwelcome sexual advances or favors, or other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature, a condition of employment; by using a worker’s submission to or
rejection of such conduct as the basis for or a factor in any employment
decision affecting the individual; or by creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive work environment by engaging in such conduct.
   (B)   The creation of an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment
may include such actions as persistent comments on a worker’s sexual
preferences, or the display of obscene or sexually oriented photographs or
drawings. Conduct or actions that arise out of a personal or social
relationship and that are not intended to have a discriminatory effect on
employment may not be viewed as harassment. The employer will determine whether
certain conduct constitutes sexual harassment, based on a review of the facts
and circumstances of each situation.
   (C)   Will County will not condone any sexual harassment of employees. All
employees, including supervisors, will be subject to discipline, including
discharge, for any sexual harassing behavior.
   (D)   Any employee who feels victimized by sexual harassment should
immediately report the alleged harassment to his or her supervisor. If the
first-line supervisor is the source of the alleged harassment, the employee
should report the problem to the supervisor’s superior.
   (E)   Supervisors and managers who receive a sexual harassment complaint
should, in consultation with the county’s Human Resources Department, carefully
investigate the matter, questioning all employees who may have knowledge of the
alleged incident or similar problems. Both the complaint and the investigative
steps and findings should be documented as thoroughly as possible.
   (F)   Employees who are dissatisfied with an investigating supervisor’s
resolution of a sexual harassment problem may file a complaint in accordance
with established grievance procedures.
   (G)   No employee will be subject to any form of retaliation or discipline
for pursuing a sexual harassment complaint.
   (H)   The county anticipates that any incident of sexual harassment can be
resolved through the internal process outlined above. All employees, however,
have the right to file formal charges with the Illinois Department of Human
Rights (IDHR) and/or the Illinois Human Relations Commission (IHRC). The
Illinois Department of Human rights may be contacted at 312-814-6200 or 1-800-
662-3942 or by TDD at 312-263-1579. The IHRC may be contacted as follows: 312-
814-6269 or by TDD at 217-557-1500. A charge with IDHR must be filed within 180
days of the incident of sexual harassment.
(Res. 11-365, passed 9-15-2011)
§ 39.07 CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS POLICY.
   (A)   The county desires to put in place a process for screening and
granting access to qualified charitable organizations in the county.
   (B)   The County Board hereby authorizes and adopts the Charitable
Organizations Policy, attached to Resolution No. 13-98, passed April 18, 2013.
(Res. 13-98, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 39.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   The County Board hereby declares that any employee who fails to comply
with §
39.04 shall be subject to the following penalties.
      (1)   The county-owned cell phones shall be removed from the employee’s
use and returned to the appropriate county office or department.
      (2)   The employee may be responsible for paying the entire monthly
amount due for the cell phone usage. This amount may be deducted from the
employee’s pay.
      (3)   The employee may be responsible for repairing and/or replacing any
hardware or software in the county-owned cell phone that has been damaged in
any way as a result of personal use.
      (4)   The employee may be liable for additional taxable income pursuant
to § 280F(d)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (5)   Repeated failure to comply with this policy may subject the
employee to disciplinary action.
(1980 Code, § 39.04) (Res. 07-108, passed 3-15-2007)
CHAPTER 40: FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section
   
40.01   Fiscal year for county
   
40.02   Depository banks
   
40.03   Prevention of overexpenditures
   
40.04   Purchase orders; contracts
   
40.05   Inventory of office equipment and furniture
   
40.06   Tax collection; fees
   
40.07   Authorization for tax law suits
   
40.08   Fees for document copies
   
40.09   Petty cash funds
   
40.10   Sheriff’s Department Impress Fund
   
40.11   Interest on undisturbed taxes
   
40.12   Voiding of long-standing county- issued payment checks
   
40.13   Property sales tax
   
40.14   Vital records automation fee
   
40.15   Historic Preservation Commission Fund
   
40.16   Fee for NSF checks
   
40.17   Payment of real estate taxes by credit card
   
40.18   Special service area assessment collection policy
   
40.19   Cash reserve policy
   
40.20   Year-end reserve period policy
   
40.21   Expenditure of RTA tax revenue policy
   
40.22   Capital Assets Policy Manual
   
40.23   Civil union fee
   
40.24   Payment of fees and fines by credit card
   
40.25   Fee for issuance of attorney identification cards
§ 40.01 FISCAL YEAR FOR COUNTY.
   The fiscal year shall begin on December 1 and end November 30 of each year.
(1980 Code, § 40.01) (1933 p. 30; 1947 pp. 125—126, adopted 6- -1947; 1947 p.
193, adopted 8- -1947; Res. adopted 6-24-1968, p. 383) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 216, pp.
175—176; Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, pp. 439—440; Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, pp. 505—506; Sup.
Rec. Bk. 237, p. 494)
§ 40.02 DEPOSITORY BANKS.
   No depository, designated from time to time by the County Treasurer as the
active bank, shall be a bank whose aggregate capital stock and surplus is less
than 75% of the amount of the funds or public moneys in the custody of the
Treasurer on deposit in that bank.
(1980 Code, § 40.02) (1966 pp. 96—97, adopted 3-9-1966) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p.
116)
§ 40.03 PREVENTION OF OVEREXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The County Board shall instruct the County Auditor to record the
amounts of all orders and contracts against the proper appropriations, as
encumbrances, before these orders and contracts are placed with the vendor or
contractor.
   (B)   The County Auditor shall be instructed to place no order which brings
the total of expenditures and encumbrances of all sorts against an
appropriation to an amount exceeding the total of the appropriation, but shall
return all orders to the proper committee, notifying the committee that the
order is in excess of its appropriation.
   (C)   No person or committee shall place an order or make a contract which
shall be chargeable against the county or any funds of the county, without
passing this order or contract into the hands of the County Auditor who shall
handle this order as described above.
   (D)   Any person making any contract or placing any order, without
presenting the contract or order to the County Auditor to be charged against
the appropriation and checked with the appropriation for overexpenditures,
shall by the action assume full liability for the amount of the order or
contract.
   (E)   The Finance Committee of the County Board shall be instructed to
indicate the person or committee responsible for the expenditure of each part
of the appropriation ordinance, and to inform the members of the County Board
of this designation of responsibility.
   (F)   No person or committee other than the indicated committee, shall be
permitted to make charges or to incur liability against that appropriation.
   (G)   The designated committee or individual shall be held liable for over-
expenditures of their appropriations.
(1980 Code, § 40.03) (1940 p. 400, adopted 12- -1940) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 220, pp.
301—302)
Cross-reference:
   Approval of certain expenditures by County Board, see §
30.08
§ 40.04 PURCHASE ORDERS; CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Purchase orders.
      (1)   All purchase orders for supplies issued by the various county
officials for or on behalf of the county, are to be submitted by requisition in
triplicate for the approval of the County Auditor and the respective committee
before being placed with the vendor.
      (2)   All orders shall indicate:
         (a)   Name of vendor;
         (b)   Date;
         (c)   Name of officer placing order;
         (d)   Quantities;
         (e)   Unit price;
         (f)   Description of items; and
         (g)   Total price.
      (3)   The orders are to be issued in quadruplicate, the original order
and the three copies to be submitted to the County Auditor.
      (4)   Upon approval of the order of the County Auditor and the respective
committee, one copy shall be returned to the county officer placing the order,
one copy shall be retained by the County Auditor and the remaining copy
together with the original shall be submitted to the vendor.
      (5)   After delivery of the merchandise, the vendor shall submit his or
her copy of the purchase order, together with an invoice and a delivery slip
signed by the person who received the order, to the County Clerk.
      (6)   The County Clerk shall staple the vendor’s copy of the purchase
order, the invoice and the delivery slip to the claim and submit it to the
County Auditor for approval for payment.
      (7)   Upon the County Auditor’s approval for payment, the claim will be
returned to the County Clerk, who shall in turn submit it to the proper
committee for approval for payment.
      (8)   Upon approval for payment by the proper committee, the County Clerk
shall carry out the necessary steps to secure payment.
      (9)   The County Auditor shall not countersign any checks for payment
unless the above routine has been adhered to in full.
      (10)   All claims against the county for payment of bills and services
shall be date stamped by the purchasing department on their arrival and
departure, by the auditing department on their departure and by the County
Clerk’s office on their departure.
   (B)   Contracts.
      (1)   Copies of any and all contracts entered into by the County Board
and all authorized county officers for or on behalf of the county shall be
submitted to the County Auditor, who shall record the amounts of the contracts
against the proper appropriation as encumbrances and shall check with the
proper appropriation for overexpenditures, before the contracts are placed with
the contractor.
      (2)   The County Auditor, thereafter, shall not approve for payment any
claim pertaining to any contract if the claim does not accord with the terms
and amounts as contained in the Auditor’s records and in the Auditor’s copy of
the contract.
      (3)   The equal employment opportunity clause required by the State Fair
Employment Practices Commission as a material term of all public contracts,
shall be a material term of all contracts of the county and shall be
incorporated by reference in all contracts.
(1980 Code, § 40.04) (1941 pp. 106—107, adopted 6- -1941) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 220,
pp. 401—402)
Statutory reference:
   Equal employment opportunity clause in public contracts, see ILCS Ch. 775,
Act 5, § 2-105
§ 40.05 INVENTORY OF OFFICE EQUIPMENT AND FURNITURE.
   Each office holder will be requested to make a complete inventory of the
office equipment and furniture in his or her office, including serial numbers
of machines; the inventories shall be given to the purchasing agent before the
June meeting of the County Board each year, so that the Public Property
Committee may have an up-to-date list at all times.
(1980 Code, § 40.05) (1965 pp. 270—271, adopted 5-18-1965) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236,
p. 445)
§ 40.06 TAX COLLECTION; FEES.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TAXING DISTRICT. Includes, but is not limited to, the county.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this section to provide the County Board with the
authority to recover its actual costs of extending and collecting taxes on
behalf of all taxing districts.
   (C)   The County Collector shall determine the total actual costs to the
county of extending and collecting taxes on behalf of taxing districts within
the county and charge each taxing district its proportionate share of those
costs. The proportionate share of a taxing district shall be determined by
applying the same percentage to the actual total cost of extension, as its
extension (dollar amount) bears to the total extension (dollar amount).
   (D)   The cost analysis required by this section in order to determine a
taxing district’s proportionate share of the costs to the county shall be
determined by an independent auditing firm. The auditing firm shall be
designated by the County Board.
   (E)   The resultant amount due under division (C) above shall be billed to
each taxing district after tax collections have been distributed to all taxing
districts within the county.
(1980 Code, § 40.06) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , p. 459, adopted 10-30-1974)
§ 40.07 AUTHORIZATION FOR TAX LAW SUITS.
   The County Board authorizes the County State’s Attorney’s office to
institute whatever legal actions are necessary to recover any and all unpaid
taxes and special assessments.
(1980 Code, § 40.07) (Res. 83-13A, adopted 2-17-1983)
Statutory-reference:
   Suits for delinquent taxes by county, see ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, § 21-440
§ 40.08 FEES FOR DOCUMENT COPIES.
   (A)   There is established the unit price of $0.50 per copy for copies made
by any county department. All departments doing reproduction are authorized to
charge this amount, unless otherwise established by state statute or a
resolution of the County Board.
   (B)   The County Sheriff’s Department is authorized to charge $2 per page
for a copy of any Sheriff’s report on file. These funds shall be deposited in
the Sheriff’s Fee Account and shall be turned over to the General Fund at the
end of each month.
   (C)   The Will County Treasurer shall charge a mortgage lenders/closing
companies a fee of $5 for a copy of a duplicate tax bill.
(1980 Code, §40.08) (Res. 81-71, adopted 4-23-1981; Res. 81-227, adopted 12-17-
1981; Res. 13-302, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 40.09 PETTY CASH FUNDS.
   (A)   The County Board has adopted the following guidelines for the
expenditure of petty cash funds in all departments except as provided in §
40.10.
      (1)   A maximum of $50 will be advanced to each department after receipt
of a claim.
      (2)   Submission of vouchers for reimbursement to the petty cash fund
shall be on a specially-designed form which shall contain the following
information.
         (a)   Voucher should be dated indelibly.
         (b)   Voucher should indicate the account charged.
         (c)   Voucher should contain an explanation of the expenditure.
         (d)   Voucher should show the amount of the expenditure.
         (e)   Voucher should be signed by the person receiving the money and
the person disbursing the money.
         (f)   Voucher should be accompanied by receipts or other proof of
disbursement.
      (3)   Custody of petty cash must reside in one person.
      (4)   Petty cash must be replenished in the following manner.
         (a)   Account must be in balance.
         (b)   Submit claim with copy of petty cash expenditures.
      (5)   Petty cash funds will be audited each month by the County Auditor.
   (B)   The Board will approve replenishment claims of petty cash funds only
in those offices where the guidelines provided in division (A) above are
followed.
(1980 Code, § 40.09) (Res. 81-206, adopted 10-22-1981)
§ 40.10 SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT IMPRESS FUND.
   (A)   The County Board has created an Impress Fund in the Sheriff’s
Department to provide cash advances or reimbursements to employees and officers
of the Sheriff’s Department in discharging their official duties. The Sheriff
shall be the custodian of the fund.
   (B)   Reimbursements to the Impress Fund shall be made from the appropriate
line items of the budget after approval of the County Board in the manner
prescribed by the Board’s rules and regulations.
(1980 Code, § 40.10) (Res. 82-87, adopted 7-22-1982)
§ 40.11 INTEREST ON UNDISTURBED TAXES.
   The county elects to receive the earnings on collected but undistributed
taxes due to the county for the 1985 tax year collectible in 1986. The County
Collector shall pay over the earnings pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Ch.
35, Act 715, §§ 1 et seq.
(1980 Code, § 40.11) (Res. 86-83, adopted 5-15-1986)
Editor’s note:
   ILCS Ch. 35, Act 715, §§ 1 et seq. was repealed in 1993.
§ 40.12 VOIDING OF LONG-STANDING COUNTY-ISSUED PAYMENT CHECKS.
   The County Board hereby establishes the following policy concerning voiding
long-outstanding county-issued payment checks.
   (A)   To print the words “void if not cashed within 90 days of issue date of
this check” on the face of the check. Primary purpose is to encourage the
current cashing of all county checks and thereby reduce the number of checks
long-outstanding.
   (B)   Six months after the issue date of the check, the Treasurer’s office
will attempt to contact the payee of the check to request that the check be
cashed. With names and addresses printed on new checks under the
computerization program, it should be easier to contact payees.
   (C)   One year after the original check issue date, any outstanding check
will be actually voided. The cash account of the County Fund originally
credited for the check written will be increased for the amount of the voided
check and a revenue account will be credited for the same amount. Thus,
budgetary expenditure accounts will not be affected by this procedure. If a
voided check is later cashed by the bank, an accounting adjustment will be made
to reduce the Fund cash account and to likewise reduce the revenue account for
the same amount.
   (D)   With the notification on the check and regular follow-up on checks
over six months old, it is felt that the number of checks to be voided should
be reduced considerably.
(1980 Code, § 40.12) (Res. 95-172, passed 8-17-1995)
§ 40.13 PROPERTY SALES TAX.
   The County Board imposes the fee of $60 upon the purchase of any property at
any tax sale under the Property Tax Code for deposit into the fund for payment
of interest.
(1980 Code, § 40.13) (Res. 95-227, passed 10-19-1995)
§ 40.14 VITAL RECORDS AUTOMATION FEE.
   (A)   The County Treasurer establish a special fund known as the Vital
Records Automation Fund.
   (B)   The County Clerk be authorized to charge an additional $2 fee for
certified copies of vital records, which shall be remitted to the County
Treasurer, and which shall be used only for the purposes of automation.
   (C)   The County Clerk shall transmit a certified copy of this section to
the County Treasurer.
(1980 Code, § 40.14) (Res. 95-282, passed 12-21-1995)
§ 40.15 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION FUND.
   The County Board establishes the County Historic Preservation Commission
Fund as stated in Resolution 96-108.
(1980 Code, § 40.15) (Res. 96-108, passed 5-16-1996)
§ 40.16 FEE FOR NSF CHECKS.
   The County Board hereby authorizes and directs the County Executive and all
county offices and departments to charge a $25 fee for all NSF checks to defray
the costs of the county in the processing of the checks.
(1980 Code, § 40.16) (Res. 00-147, passed 4-20-2000)
§ 40.17 PAYMENT OF REAL ESTATE TAXES BY CREDIT CARD.
   The County Board hereby authorizes the County Treasurer to accept the
payment of real estate taxes by credit card and to impose a convenience fee
upon those individuals choosing to pay their taxes by credit card pursuant to
the terms of ILCS Ch. 50, Act 345, § 25(c).
(1980 Code, § 40.17) (Res. 03-385a, passed 9-18-2003; Res. 06-286, passed 7-20-
2006; Res. 07-128, passed 4-19-2007)
§ 40.18 SPECIAL SERVICE AREA ASSESSMENT COLLECTION POLICY.
   The County Board hereby establishes a policy to cease entertaining requests
from other local governmental entities to act as their designated officer in
the extension and collection of non-ad valorem special service area
assessments, effective December 1, 2007.
(1980 Code, § 40.18) (Res. 07-477, passed 11-15-2007)
§ 40.19 CASH RESERVE POLICY.
   (A)   It is the goal of the county to have a 25% (three-months) corporate
fund cash reserves at year- end. This reserve ratio shall be calculated as the
year-end corporate cash balance divided by the subsequent year’s budgeted
corporate fund expenses.
   (B)   With the exception of additional reserves set aside for capital or
other special projects, if the corporate fund cash reserves fall below 22%, or
exceed 26%, the Finance Committee shall recommend corrective action to bring
the corporate fund cash reserve into this targeted range.
   (C)   Appropriate reserve levels will be maintained for special funds,
whenever possible and appropriate.
(1980 Code, § 40.19) (Res. 08-219, adopted 5-15-2008)
§ 40.20 YEAR-END RESERVE PERIOD POLICY.
   In order to expedite the year-end close of the county’s books, and allow for
the timely presentation of the year-end financials, the reserve period for
year-end closure of the county’s books shall be 60 days.
(1980 Code, § 40.20) (Res. 08-423, adopted 10-16-2008)
§ 40.21 EXPENDITURE OF RTA TAX REVENUE POLICY.
   Any expenditures from the additional 0.25% sales tax proceeds shall be
strictly limited to that of capital cost of any transportation and/or public
safety services. At no time now, or in the near or distant future, shall the
proceeds be used for any operating costs.
(1980 Code, § 40.21) (Res. 08-220, adopted 5-15-2008)
§ 40.22 CAPITAL ASSETS POLICY MANUAL.
   (A)   Generally. The Capital Assets Policy Manual outlines the accounting
policies for identifying, tracking and controlling the county’s capital assets.
Capital assets can be tangible such as land, infrastructure, building and
improvements, furnishings, machinery, equipment, vehicles and computer hardware
or intangible such as right-of- way easements and computer software. They have
a useful life and are expected to last for more than one year.
   (B)   Overview.
      (1)   The county complies with various accounting and financial reporting
standards including generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP);
governmental accounting, auditing and financial reporting (GAAFR); and
applicable state and federal reporting requirements. Further, the county
complies with the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement No.
34 of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board, Basic Financial Statements
and Management’s Discussion and Analysis for State and Local Governments and
Statement No. 51 Accounting and Finance Reporting for Intangible Assets.
      (2)   GASB No. 34 states that governments should provide additional
disclosures in their summary of significant accounting policies including the
policy for capitalizing assets and for estimating the useful lives of those
assets which are used to calculate the depreciation expenses. The statement
also requires disclosure of major classes of assets; delineation of assets
associated with governmental activities from those associated with business-
type activities; beginning and end-of-year balances; capital acquisition;
sales/dispositions; and current- period depreciation expense by function.
      (3)   GASB No. 51 requires that all intangible assets, such as easements,
water rights, timber rights, land use rights, mineral rights, patents,
trademarks. copyrights and computer software is classified as capital assets.
This statement also establishes guidance for the amortization of intangible
assets and an approach to recognizing intangible assets that are internally
generated.
      (4)   In the consolidated annual financial report (CAFR), the fund
financial statements reflect capital acquisitions as capital outlay expenses;
however, in the government-wide financial statements, they are reflected as
capital assets.
   (C)   Definitions and valuation.
      (1)   Valuation.
         (a)   Capital assets should be valued at their cost at the time they
are placed in service; they are treated as an asset instead of being expensed.
The asset is then depreciated/amortized over the estimated useful life of the
asset. The value of the asset includes ancillary costs that are necessary to
place the asset in its intended location and use. However, minor ancillary
costs are not required to be capitalized (not measurable or readily available
at the time a capital asset is recorded).
         (b)   When an asset is purchased, the historical cost, including all
ancillary costs, is capitalized. If the historical cost is not practicably
determinable, an estimated cost is used. When assets are donated or dedicated,
the fair market value at the time of the donation is used. If the fair market
value is not practieably determinable, due to the lack of sufficient records,
an estimated cost is used. If the donated asset is land, the capitalized value
should reflect its appraised or fair market value.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         INTANGIBLE ASSETS.
            1.   Right-of-way. Permanent right-of-way easement is an intangible
asset considered to have an indefinite useful life and is not amortized.
            2.   Computer software, purchased or licensed. Software that is
purchased or licensed from a third party is valued at the purchase licensed
cost. If the contract breaks down the cost of training, data conversion, travel
and the like, they are excluded from the capitalized value. Annual maintenance
and licensing fees are also not capitalized. Licensed software that has a large
initial year licensing fee that is followed by smaller annual fees is valued at
the amount of the initial license fee amortized over the life of the initial
contract.
            3.   Computer software, internally generated. Computer software
should be considered internally generated if it developed in-house by the
county, or by a third-party contracted in the county. Commercially available
software that is purchased or licensed by the county and modified using more
than minimal incremental effort before being put into operation should be
considered internally generated. Only the application development stage is
capitalized: the following are not capitalized: preliminary project stage, data
conversion (in general), training and the post-implementation/ operating stage.
For existing applications the software development is capitalized if it
increases the functionality of the software, increases the efficiency of the
software, and/or extends the useful life. If the modification does not result
in the any of the above outcomes, then the modification should be considered
maintenance, and the associated outlays should be expensed as incurred.
         TANGIBLE ASSETS.
            1.   Land. The capitalized value of land includes the purchase
price and any ancillary costs. Ancillary costs may include: legal and title
fees; professional fees of engineers, attorneys, appraisers and financial
advisors; surveying fees; appraisal and negotiation fees: damage payments; site
preparation costs; and costs related to demolition of unwanted structures.
            2.   Infrastructure. Long-lived capital assets that are stationary
in nature and normally can be preserved for a significantly greater number of
years than most other capital assets. Examples include roads, bridges, signals,
tunnel drainage systems, water and sewer systems, dams, lighting systems and
overlaps. The capitalized value includes the cost of designing and building the
infrastructure. Ancillary costs may include: professional fees of engineers,
attorneys, appraisers and financial advisors; survey fees; appraisal and
negotiation fees; damage payments; site preparation costs; and costs related to
demolition of unwanted structures.
            3.   Building and improvements. The capitalized value includes both
the acquisition and capital improvement costs. Capital improvement costs
include structures (e.g., office buildings, storage quarters and other
facilities) and all other property permanently attached to, or an integral part
of, the structure (e.g., loading docks, heating and air-conditioning equipment
and refrigeration equipment). The county has the option of capitalizing
buildings by components when the useful lives of the components vary. Ancillary
costs may include: professional fees of architects, engineers, attorneys,
appraisers and financial advisors; damage payments; costs of fixtures
permanently attached to a building or structure; insurance premiums and related
costs incurred during construction; and any other costs necessary to place the
building or structure into its intended location.
            4.   Furnishings, machinery, equipment, vehicles, computer
hardware, and other capital assets. The cost for this asset type reflects the
actual or estimated cost of the asset. Ancillary costs may include:
transportation charges, sales tax, installation costs and any other normal or
necessary costs required to place the asset in its intended location and
condition for use. Modular furniture and replacement flooring are not capital
assets.
   (D)   Capitalization threshold.
      (1)   The county has adopted the following capitalization thresholds:
 
For intangible internally generated computer software $50,000
For tangible assets and all other intangible assets   $5,000
 
      (2)   Assets valued at or above $1,000 and below $5,000 are considered
minor assets. Some minor assets warrant “control” due to their sensitive nature
and may include weapons, radios, personal computers, laptop computers, printers
and small power tools. These sensitive minor assets are tracked/inventoried at
the county department level. Departments will maintain listings for each minor
asset including the following data elements: tag number, location, asset
description, model, serial number, general ledger code, cost, date of purchase,
to whom the minor asset is assigned, the condition, and any other information
that assists in controlling the asset or is deemed relevant.
   (E)   Depreciation/amortization and useful life.
       (1)   The county uses the straight-line method of depreciation with no
allowance for salvage value. Other depreciation methods may be accepted
depending on the nature of the asset.
      (2)   The estimated useful lives of county assets are:
Land                                      Indefinite
Infrastructures
   Rural roads low volume              100 yrs.
   Rural roads high volume             80 yrs
   Roads - urban                       50 yrs.
   Bridges                             50 yrs.
   Signals                             25 yrs.
   Overlays                            10 yrs.
Building and improvements
   Building and improvements           50 yrs.
   Roofs                               25 yrs.
   Parking lots                        7 yrs.
Equipment
   Heavy equipment vehicles*           10 yrs.
   Furniture and fixtures              7 yrs.
   Light equipment vehicles*           5 yrs.
   Equipment and computer hardware     5 yrs.
Intangible assets
   Right-of-way easements              Indefinite
   Computer software purchased         5 yrs.
   Computer software licensed          Determined by contract
   Computer software internally generat5 yrs.
* For assets placed in service on or after 12-1-2009
 
   (F)   Record keeping and identification.
      (1)   The Finance Department is responsible for maintaining and updating
the county’s capital asset records to reflect additions, deletions, retirements
and transfers in the capital asset module on an annual basis. On a regular
basis, the Finance Department will compare the capital asset additions posted
in the capital assets module with the capital outlay expenditures. Any
discrepancies will be accounted for and necessary adjusting entries will be
posted.
      (2)   County departments are responsible for notifying the Finance
Department when assets are acquired, donated, transferred, surplused and/or
otherwise removed from service. Forms are available on the intranet containing
the required information. Any other relevant policies and procedures, such as
the Surplus Policies and Procedures must also be followed.
      (3)   When suspected or known losses of assets occur, the Department
should conduct a search for the missing property. The search should include
checking transfers to other departments, storage, scrapping, conversion to
another asset and the like. If the missing property is not found, the
department should contact the Finance Department.
      (4)   The County Highway Department is responsible for maintaining
records for infrastructure. The Highway Department ensures that all costs
related to infrastructures are added together and all supporting information is
available in the Department. The Highway Department reports any additions,
deletions or changes in the county’s infrastructures to the Finance Department
on a regular basis.
      (5)   When possible, assets should be marked with a property control
number to aide in the identification and tracking of assets and to discourage
theft. The Finance Department is responsible for maintaining and assigning
property control numbers and ensuring that adequate controls for safeguarding
unissued, mutilated and voided capital asset property tags are followed.
Property control numbers should be permanently affixed to the asset by using
the property tag provided by the Finance Department. The property tag number
should be located on the principal body of the asset, rather than a removable
part.
      (6)   It is impractical or impossible to mark some of the county’s
capital assets according to these standards. For example, where the capital
asset:
         (a)   Is stationary in nature and not susceptible to theft (such as
land, infrastructure, buildings, improvements other than buildings and
leasehold improvements);
         (b)   Has a unique permanent serial number that can be used for
identification, security and inventory control;
         (c)   Would have its warranty negatively impacted by being permanently
marked; or
         (d)   Would lose significant historical or resale value (such as art
collections or museum and historical collections).
      (7)   The Sheriff’s Department uses their own numbering system for
marking and tracking their vehicles.
   (G)   Capital leases.
      (1)   A capital lease is a lease that transfers substantially all the
benefits and risks inherent in the ownership of the property to the county.
Capital leases are valued at the net present value of the future minimum lease
payments or the fair market value. To be a capital lease, the value must be a
minimum of $5,000 and meet one or more of the following four criteria to
qualify as a capital lease:
         (a)   Ownership of the leased property is transferred to the county by
the end of the lease term;
         (b)   The lease contains a bargain purchase option;
         (c)   The term is equal to 75% or more of the estimated useful life of
the leased property; or
         (d)   If, at the inception of the lease, the present value of the
future minimum lease payments, excluding executory costs (usually insurance,
maintenance, and taxes paid in connection with the leased property, including
any profit thereof) is 90% or more of the fair market value of the leased
property.
      (2)   Capital leases are to be used only to acquire capital assets. It is
a liability for a future stream of payments. If the lease involves the
acquisition of more than one asset, each asset is capitalized if its fair
market value is $5,000 or more.
(Res. 11-130, passed 4-21-2011)
§ 40.23 CIVIL UNION FEE.
   The County Board hereby sets the fee for civil unions of the county as $28,
which includes the mandatory $5 fee to the state for the Domestic Violence
Fund.
(Res. 11-228, passed 6-16-2011)
§ 40.24 PAYMENT OF FEES AND FINES BY CREDIT CARD.
   The County Board authorizes the County Executive to accept payment of fees
and fines associated with administrative adjudication by credit card and to
impose a convenience fee upon those individuals choosing to pay fees and fines
in connection with administrative adjudication by credit card pursuant to the
terms of ILCS Ch. 50, Act 345, § 25(c).
(Res. 12-121, passed 4-19-2012)
§ 40.25 FEE FOR ISSUANCE OF ATTORNEY IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   The County Board authorizes the County Sheriff to charge a $35 fee for the
issuance of each photographic identification card issued to attorneys and to
establish a revolving fund comprised of those $35 fees so that no tax dollars
are spent on the photographic identification cards that are issued to
attorneys.
(Res. 12-120, passed 4-19-2012)
CHAPTER 41: PURCHASING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
41.001   Purpose
   
41.002   Requirement of good faith
   
41.003   Singular-plural and gender rules
   
41.004   Definitions
   
41.005   Public access to procurement information
Duties of the County Executive
   
41.015   Authority and duties
   
41.016   Applicability
Source Selection and Contract Procedure
   
41.030   Competitive sealed bidding
   
41.031   Bid procedures
   
41.032   Competitive bid and request for procedures
   
41.033   Non-competitive procurement
   
41.034   Emergency procurements
   
41.035   Cancellation or rejection of invitations for bids or requests for
proposals
Bidder Qualifications and Duties
   
41.050   Insurance requirements on supply or service contracts
Types of Contracts; Contract Administration
   
41.065   Types of contracts
   
41.066   Contract clauses and their administration
   
41.067   Contract administration
   
41.068   Right to inspect plant
   
41.069   Reporting of anti-competitive practices
   
41.070   County procurement records
   
41.071   Approval of accounting system
Contract Execution
   
41.085   Requisitions
   
41.086   Fiscal responsibility
   
41.087   Authorization to issue bids or other solicitations
   
41.088   Review of contracts
   
41.089   Approval of contracts
   
41.090   Change orders and contract modifications
   
41.091   Maximum practicable competition
   
41.092   Additional contents of bid packages
Bid Security, Performance Bonds, Insurance Requirements for Construction
Contracts
   
41.105   Bid security
   
41.106   Contract performance or payment bonds
Supply Management
   
41.120   Supply management regulations
   
41.121   Allocation of the proceeds from sale or disposal of surplus supplies
Appeals and Remedies
   
41.135   Bid protests
   
41.136   Contract claims
   
41.137   Authority of the County Executive to settle bid protests and contract
claims, subject to statutory provisions
   
41.138   Remedies for solicitation or award in violation of law
Cooperative Purchasing
   
41.150   Cooperative purchasing authorized
   
41.151   Sale, acquisition or use of supplies
   
41.152   Cooperative use of supplies and services
   
41.153   Joint use of facilities
Ethics in Public Contracting
   
41.165   Statement of policy
   
41.166   General standards of ethical conduct
   
41.167   Criminal penalties
   
41.168   Employee conflict of interest
   
41.169   Gratuities and kickbacks
   
41.170   Prohibition against contingent fees
   
41.171   Contemporaneous employment prohibited
   
41.172   Waivers from contemporaneous employment
   
41.173   Use of confidential information
   
41.174   Sanctions
   
41.175   Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical
standards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 41.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Interpretation. This chapter shall be construed and applied to promote
its underlying purposes and policies.
   (B)   Purposes and policies. The underlying purpose and policies of this
chapter:
      (1)   To invite competition, to guard against favoritism, negligence,
extravagance, fraud and corruption, and to secure the best work or supplies at
the lowest practicable price;
      (2)   To fairly and equitably treat all persons involved in public
purchasing with the county;
      (3)   To sustain a high level of public confidence in the county
procurement procedures;
      (4)   To simplify, clarify and modernize the law governing procurement by
the county;
      (5)   To permit the continued development of procurement policies and
practices;
      (6)   To maximize to the fullest extent practicable, the purchasing value
of public funds in procurement;
      (7)   To foster broad-based competition within the free enterprise
system;
      (8)   To provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system
of quality and integrity;
      (9)   To provide guidelines for purchases of equipment, materials,
supplies and services for the operational requirements of the county, so the
competitive and unbiased selection of vendors is ensured;
      (10)   To support the preservation of natural resources and reduction of
energy use and pollution through development of a sustainable manufacturing
production systems;
      (11)   To strengthen the markets for materials collected in local
recycling collection systems;
      (12)   To maximize the reduction of discarded materials;
      (13)   To encourage economic development through attraction and retention
of recycled and source reduction product manufacturers and distributors; and
      (14)   To support markets for recycled and other environmentally
preferable products and encourage county agencies and contractors to buy
products whenever practicable.
(1980 Code, § 41.001) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.002 REQUIREMENT OF GOOD FAITH.
   This chapter requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance
or administration of county contracts to act in good faith.
(1980 Code, § 41.002) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.003 SINGULAR-PLURAL AND GENDER RULES.
   (A)   Singular-plural. Words in the singular number include the plural, and
those in the plural include the singular.
   (B)   Gender. Words of a particular gender include any gender and the
neuter, and when the sense so indicates, words of the neuter gender may refer
to any gender.
(1980 Code, § 41.003) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCHITECT-ENGINEER AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES. Those professional services
within the scope of practice of architecture, professional engineering,
structural engineering or land surveying, as defined by the laws of the state.
   BID DEPOSIT. A 10% bid bond or cashiers check made payable to the County
Treasurer shall accompany each bid, attached to the front cover, as a guarantee
that if the bid is accepted, a contract will be entered into. Money orders or
company checks will not be accepted. Bid deposits will be returned to the
unsuccessful bidder after the County Board awards the contract.
   BLIND TRUST. An independently managed trust in which the employee-
beneficiary has no management rights, and in which the employee-beneficiary is
not given notice of alterations or other dispositions of, the property
subjected to the trust.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship,
joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity.
   CHANGE ORDER. A change in a contract term, other than as specifically
provided for in the contract, which authorizes or necessitates any increase or
decrease in the cost of the contract or the time to completion.
   COMPETITIVE BIDDING. Procurement process where the procedure or method to
accomplish a goal or result is unknown.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information which is available to an employee
only because of the employee’s status as an employee of the county and is not a
matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or
demolishing any public structure or building or other public improvements of
any kind to any public real property.
   CONTRACT. All types of county agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of supplies, services or construction.
   CONTRACT MODIFICATION (BILATERAL CHANGE). Any written alteration in
specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price,
quantity or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of
the parties to the contract.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person having a contract with the county or using agency
thereof.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. Procurement conducted by or on behalf of more than
one public procurement unit.
   COST ANALYSIS. The evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at
costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid
and costs to be reimbursed.
   COST DATA. Factual information concerning the cost of labor, material,
overhead and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred or which
have actually been incurred by the contractor in performing the contract.
   COUNTY (PUBLIC) AGENCY. A county officer, department, official, commission,
board, employee or agency whose purchasing authority is subject to the County
Board.
   COUNTY BOARD. The county officials elected by the voters of the county to be
the legislative body of the county.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. The county official elected by the voters of the county to
be the chief executive officer to administer the County Executive form of
government. The term COUNTY EXECUTIVE shall also include his or her designee.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. An appointed county officer whose position is specifically
provided for in state statute, for example, Supervisor of Assessments,
Chairperson of the Board of Review, County Engineer.
   DIRECT OR INDIRECT PARTICIPATION. Involvement through decision, approval,
disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase, request,
influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering
of advice, investigation, auditing or any other advisory capacity.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual drawing a salary or wages from the county, whether
elected or not.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY PREFERABLE PRODUCTS AND SERVICES. Commodities or services
that are less detrimental to the environment or human health than competing
commodities or services serving the same purpose. Includes commodities or
services that minimize waste, use recycled materials, conserve energy or water
or reduce the consumption or disposal of toxic materials.
   EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE. The committee established by the County Board to review
and consider all contracts for professional services.
   FINANCE COMMITTEE. The committee established by the County Board to review
and recommend appropriations and expenditure of funds for all using agencies or
any successor committee having like authority.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST.
      (1)   Ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from
which, or as a result of which, an individual within the past year has
received, or is presently or in the future entitled to receive, more than
$1,200 per year, or its equivalent;
      (2)   Ownership of 5% of any property of a business; or
      (3)   Holding a position in a business such as officer, director,
trustee, partner, employee or holding any position of management.
   GRATUITY. A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service
or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless
consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Husband, wife, daughter, son, mother, father, mother-in-
law, sister-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids for the purchase or contract of
any item or nonprofessional service, which estimated price equals or exceeds
$20,000.
   JOINT PURCHASE ACT. The Governmental Joint Purchasing Act, ILCS Ch. 30, Act
525, §§ 0.01 et seq., or any successor statute.
   PERFORMANCE BOND. May be required from the successful bidder and shall be
valid throughout the term of the contract. The PERFORMANCE BOND will be
returned at the completion of the contract. The purpose of a PERFORMANCE BOND
is insurance that the successful contractor complete the job or service as
outlined in the bid specifications for the price quoted and for the length of
the contract. If the contractor should default on the contract for any reason,
the county would at that time exercise the right to use that PERFORMANCE BOND
to complete the contract.
   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, business, union, firm,
corporation, trust, partnership, association, joint venture, committee, club or
other entity.
   PRICE ANALYSIS. The evaluation of price data, without analysis of the
separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in
arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed.
   PRICING DATA. Factual information concerning prices for items substantially
similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer to offered or
proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices.
The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices.
   PROCUREMENT. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring
of any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that
pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or construction, including
description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation
and award of contract and all phases of contract administration.
   PROCUREMENT OFFICER. The duly authorized agent of the County Board or County
Executive for the purposes of procuring goods or services.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. The services of a person possessing a high degree of
professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual plays an
important part and the primary reason for that purchase is the service provided
and the skills are primarily mental as opposed to manual. PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
means, but is not limited to, services rendered in the practice of law,
accounting, engineering, medicine, architecture, dentistry, clinical psychology
and technology. For example: development of software specifically designed to
meet the needs of a county office or department. The purchase of shrink-wrap
software is not.
   PUBLIC PROCUREMENT UNIT. The state, any county, city, town and any other
subdivision of the state or public agency of any subdivision, public authority,
education, health or other state or local entity which expends public funds for
the procurement of supplies, services and construction.
   PURCHASE ORDER. The written commitment for the purchase of goods and/or
services with a vendor.
   REASONABLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR. A person who has the capability in all
respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity,
perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities,
equipment and credit which will assure good faith performance.
   RECYCLED PRODUCTS. Goods containing materials, which have been diverted from
the solid waste stream including post-consumer materials and materials or by-
products generated in industrial processes or which have been wholly or
partially remanufactured.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting proposals for professional services, where
the procedure or method to accomplish a goal or result is to be determined and
the cost negotiated.
   REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting qualifications, for professional
services.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all
material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER FOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS. A bidder who meets all of the
following applicable criteria, and submits evidence of compliance:
      (1)   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in the state;
      (2)   Evidence of compliance with:
         (a)   Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social Security
number (for individuals); and
         (b)   Provisions of 42 U.S.C. Ch. 21, § 2000(e) and Federal Executive
Order No. 11246 as amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal
Opportunity Employer provisions).
      (3)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages:
general liability, worker’s compensation, completed operations, automobile,
hazardous occupation, product liability and professional liability;
      (4)   Compliance with all provisions of the State Prevailing Wage Act,
including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those
trades as covered in the act; and
      (5)   Participation in apprenticeship and training programs approved and
registered with the United States Department of Labor’s Bureau of
Apprenticeship and Training.
   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product and other than reports which
are merely incidental to the required performance. This definition shall not
apply to employment agreements, collective bargaining agreements or the
definition of professional services as provided in this section.
   SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics
or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a
description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a supply,
service or construction item for delivery.
   STANDING COMMITTEE. Any committee established by the County Board with
specific duties and responsibilities, as set forth in the County Board Rules.
   STRINGING. Knowingly structuring a contract or job order to avoid the
contract or job order being subject to a competitive bidding requirements.
   SUPPLIES. All property, including but not limited to equipment, materials
and printing, excluding land or a permanent interest in land.
   SURPLUS. All supplies that are beyond their useful life and have no value or
use to the county as determined and approved by the assigned County Board
committee.
(1980 Code, § 41.004) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.005 PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION.
   Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in
the State Freedom on Information Act.
(1980 Code, § 41.005) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
DUTIES OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE
§ 41.015 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Authority. The County Executive shall be responsible for the
procurement of supplies, services, professional services and construction, in
accordance with this chapter, as well as the management and disposal of
supplies.
   (B)   Duties. In accordance with this chapter, and subject to the
supervision of the County Board and the assigned County Board committee, the
County Executive shall:
      (1)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services and
construction needed by the county;
      (2)   Develop and implement a written policy for the sale, trade,
transfer or disposal of surplus items which have become obsolete and unusable
to the county, upon terms most advantageous to the county. The policy shall be
administered by the office of the County Executive and audited by the County
Auditor;
      (3)   Establish and maintain programs for specifications development,
contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with the
county agencies using the supplies, services and construction;
      (4)   Exercise general supervision over inventories of supplies belonging
to the county;
      (5)   Consistent with this chapter, and with the approval of the assigned
County Board committee, the County Executive shall adopt purchasing regulations
and operational procedures relating to the execution of his or her duties;
      (6)   Provide maximum service to all offices in the areas of contracts,
negotiation, placement of orders, expediting delivery and follow-up on orders
in a manner that the maximum value will be obtained per dollar expended;
      (7)   At the request of and in cooperation with the requesting county
agency, prepare and issue Invitations for Bids (IFB), Requests for Proposals
(RFP) and Requests for Qualifications (RFQ), purchase orders and addenda or
corrections thereto;
      (8)   Conduct pre-bid and pre-award conferences as necessary, cooperation
with requesting county agency;
      (9)   Evaluate vendor’s bids for proposals and present recommendations
for award with requesting county agency or with written or recommendation for
award;
      (10)   Maintain a complete record of all purchasing transactions, subject
to this chapter;
      (11)   Report to the assigned County Board committee the contracts which
are expiring 90 days prior thereto and to inform the assigned County Board
committee of all contracts that are of three year’s duration or more;
      (12)   Utilize all known contact and sources to expedite deliveries of
needed supplies, services and equipment;
      (13)   Develop and maintain current bidders list of vendors;
      (14)   Maintain vendor and product performance records;
      (15)   Maintain, where possible, current prices through study of
published price lists, information from salesmen, published market data or
through negotiations or competitive bids;
      (16)   Coordinate and control inventory systems kept in county
storerooms;
      (17)   Inspect or delegate the inspection to requesting county agency of
all deliveries of supplies, equipment or contractual services;
      (18)   Function as the county’s representative on all matters pertaining
to purchasing, in cooperation with the requesting county agency; and
      (19)   Periodically review systems and procedures to determine improved
methods which result in efficiencies in performance.
(1980 Code, § 41.010) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.016 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Applicability. This chapter is applicable to the County Board, County
Executive and all departments under the County Executive, except as specified
below.
      (1)   The following county officials have internal control over their
office, and therefore, are not subject to the county competitive bidding
statute or county purchasing ordinance:
         (a)   Auditor: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-1004;
         (b)   County Clerk: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-2003.2;
         (c)   Recorder: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-5005.2;
         (d)   State’s Attorney: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9006; and
         (e)   Treasurer: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-10005.1.
      (2)   The Attorney General has determined that the following offices have
internal control provisions over their office, and therefore, are not subject
to the county competitive bidding statute or county purchasing ordinance:
Supervisor of Assessments.
      (3)   The following county offices have internal control over their
offices except for purchases of equipment:
         (a)   Coroner: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-3003; and
         (b)   Sheriff: ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-6018.
      (4)   The following offices are not subject to the county competitive
bidding statute or county purchasing ordinance based upon the language of the
above Attorney General opinion.
         (a)   Courts;
         (b)   Public defender;
         (c)   Regional Superintendent Schools: 1987 Ill. Attorney General
Opinion 233, 87-005; and
         (d)   Clerk of the Circuit Court: 1984 Ill. Attorney General Opinion
9, 84-003.
      (5)   The County Engineer shall be required to procure services,
materials and equipment for road and bridge construction, maintenance,
engineering, land acquisition and other technical supplies, services and
engineering equipment necessary to meet the operational obligations of the
County Engineer, as set forth in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   Procurement records. All records required by §
41.070 shall be maintained by any county agency to which procurement authority
has been delegated and a copy of all records, as appropriate, shall be provided
to the County Executive.
   (C)   Correspondence with vendors. All correspondence with vendors relating
to the purchasing functions shall originate from the County Executive or his or
her designee. Correspondence concerning matters which precede actual
purchasing, such as specifications development, conceptual ideas and general
industry and product application information, may be between the vendor, county
agency and the County Board committees, provided copies of the correspondence
are sent to the County Executive or his or her designee.
(1980 Code, § 41.011) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT PROCEDURE
§ 41.030 COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING.
   (A)   Conditions for use. Excepting professional services, all contracts of
the county shall be awarded by competitively sealed bidding, except as
otherwise provided in §§
41.031,
41.032,
41.033,
41.035,
41.151 and
41.152, or as provided by state statute.
   (B)   Invitation for bids. All invitations for bids shall be issued and
shall include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.
   (C)   Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall
be given a reasonable time, but not less than 12 calendar days prior to the
date set forth therein for the opening of bids. The notice shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the county at least 12 calendar
days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. The public
notice shall state the place, date and time of bid opening. All notices that
are published in a newspaper shall also be published concurrently on the county
web page giving notice that any and all questions may be e-mailed to the County
Executive’s office together with a notice that any and all questions shall be
answered by posting the answer on the appropriate county web page.
   (D)   Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or
more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid, and other relevant information as the County Executive
deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded;
the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection in accordance with §
41.005.
   (E)   Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally
accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this
chapter. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the
invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such
as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a
particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be
considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as
discounts, transportation costs and total or life cycle costs. The invitation
for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be
used in bid evaluation that is not set forth in the invitation for bids.
Alternative bids may be considered and accepted provided they are specifically
provided for in the invitation for bids and meet the evaluation criteria set
forth therein. The evaluation criteria chosen for inclusion in a bid or
proposal cannot exceed the minimum requirements necessary to meet the needs of
the county. Evaluation criteria cannot be used to eliminate potential bidders
or proposers.
   (F)   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards.
      (1)   Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or
after bid opening or cancellation of awards or contracts based on bid mistakes,
may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may
be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the
office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid
opening. After bid opening, cancellation of bids shall be permitted only to the
extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake
of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid
price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in the bid prices or
other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the county in fair
competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder
alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
         (a)   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document
but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
         (b)   The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made.
      (2)   All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to
cancel awards of contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a
written recommendation of the assigned County Board committee to the entity
having the authority to approve.
   (G)   Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness to the
lowest responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set
forth in the invitation for bids. In the event the lowest responsible bid for a
construction project exceeds available funds as certified by the County
Auditor, and the bid does not exceed funds by more than 10%, the County
Executive or his or her designee is authorized when time or economic
considerations preclude resolicitation of work on a reduced scope, to negotiate
with the lowest responsible bidder a reduction in only the price term of the
bid, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
Notwithstanding the above, the following language will be included in all
solicitations: “the County Board retains the right to reject any and all bids,
and to waive non-material informality or irregularity in any bid received in
whole or part, and to determine not to proceed to contract on any particular
bid”.
(1980 Code, § 41.020) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.031 BID PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Preparation of invitation for bid; determination of method of
procurement. The determination of the method of procurement is made by the cost
or nature of that procurement as indicated below and determined by the
designated procurement officer.
      (1)   Purchases less than $100 (purchase order).
      (2)   Purchases from $100 to $9,999.99.
         (a)   For the County Executive the purchase award is to be authorized
by the County Executive or his or her duly authorized agent.
         (b)   For the County Board the purchase award is to be authorized by
the County Board or its duly authorized agent.
         (c)   Bids shall not be required, but at the discretion of the County
Executive or the duly authorized agent, thereof, informal quotes may be
obtained.
         (d)   Bids, bid deposits or performance bonds are not required.
      (3)   Purchases from $10,000 to $19,999.99.
         (a)   Formal bids shall not be required, but three informal quotes
shall be sought.
         (b)   The results of the quotes shall be reported in written form as
an attachment to the Auditor. The County Executive or County Board, or duly
authorized agent thereof, shall select the lowest responsible quote and procure
the item or services.
         (c)   In the event the lowest quote is not chosen then the reason
shall be reported by the procurement officer in writing, as an attachment to
the Auditor.
         (d)   Bids, bid deposits or performance bonds are not required.
      (4)   Purchases in excess of $20,000.
         (a)   The purchase or contract of any budgeted item or nonprofessional
service, with an estimated price equal to or exceeding $20,000, shall be
submitted to the County Executive for advertising and bidding and then
presented by the County Executive to the appropriate County Board committee as
determined by the County Board rules for presentation to and for final approval
by the County Board.
         (b)   Expenditures shall be as provided in the approved budget; or if
not specifically provided in the approved budget, shall require prior approval
of the assigned County Board committee only to the extent that additional funds
or appropriation is necessary.
         (c)   Public advertisements for sealed bids shall be required.
         (d)   The bids are to be opened at a time and place designated prior
to the letting of bids.
         (e)   Bid deposit and performance bonds will be required. The
requirement of a bid deposit and/or performance bonds may be waived or modified
prior to bid letting, including time and material costs, (on an individual
case-by-case basis upon the recommendation of the County Executive) with the
final determination of the waiver of the bid deposit requirement to be made by
the assigned County Board committee. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, a one-time
purchase of supplies shall not require a performance bond.
         (f)   Awards are to be made to the lowest responsible bidder complying
with the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, request for proposals
or request for quotes.
         (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the County
Board may let without advertising for bids, in the case of purchases and
contracts, when individual orders do not exceed $25,000 for the use, purchase,
delivery, movement or installation of data processing equipment, software or
services and telecommunications and inter-connect equipment, software and
services.
   (B)   General terms and requirements. (Required for, but not limited to, all
purchases exceeding $20,000.) The general terms and requirements will include,
but are not limited to:
      (1)   Delivery time;
      (2)   Bid opening date and place;
      (3)   Tax exemption statements;
      (4)   Method of award; and
      (5)   Bond requirements.
   (C)   Recycled materials. Bidders able to supply products containing
recycled materials that meet performance requirements are encouraged to offer
them in bids and proposals.
   (D)   Responsibility of bidders; determination of nonresponsibility. If a
bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found not
responsible, the awarding entity must make a written determination of
nonresponsiblity, setting forth the basis of the finding. A copy of the
determination shall be sent promptly to the nonresponsible bidder or offeror.
The final determination shall be made part of the contract file.
(1980 Code, § 41.021) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.032 COMPETITIVE BID AND REQUEST FOR PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Competitive sealed proposals. Where the procedure or method to
accomplish a goal or result is unknown, as determined by the Director of
Purchasing with the concurrence of the assigned County Board committee,
competitive sealed proposals may be used.
   (B)   Requests for proposals and/or bids. Proposals shall be solicited
through a request for proposals.
   (C)   Public notice. Public notice of the request for the proposals shall be
given in the same manner as provided in §
41.030(C).
   (D)   Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit
the disclosure of the identity of any bidder or the contents of any proposal to
competing bidders during the process of negotiation. A bid tabulation of the
proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each bidder, the number of
addendums issued, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item
bid. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection by Freedom
of Information request only after contract award. The contractor shall be
notified so they can determine if there is any sensitive and/or proprietary
information in their proposal that they do not want viewed.
   (E)   Evaluation factors. Where appropriate, the request for proposals shall
state the relative importance of evaluation factors.
   (F)   Award. Awards shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder taking
into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request or addenda
thereto. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made.
(1980 Code, § 41.022) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.033 NON-COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   General. Contracts may be awarded without competitive bidding when the
appropriate County Board committee as determined by the County Board Rules
determines in writing, after the requesting county agency has conducted and
presented a good faith review of available sources, that the contract by its
very nature is not suitable to competitive bids or proposals. Examples of
contracts which may not be suitable to competitive bids or proposals are
contracts where:
      (1)   There is only one source for the required supply, service or
construction item;
      (2)   A sole supplier’s item is needed for trial use or testing;
      (3)   Purchases of used equipment; and
      (4)   Purchases at auctions.
   (B)   Negotiation. The County Executive or his or her designee or
responsible elected official shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to
price, delivery and terms.
(1980 Code, § 41.023) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.034 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the County Executive,
county officers and department heads, may make emergency procurement of
supplies, services or construction items when there exists a threat to public
health, welfare or safety, or to prevent or minimize serious disruption of
government services; provided that each emergency procurement shall be made
with the competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the
particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. A confirming
resolution, along with the written determination, shall be submitted to the
County Board for all emergency procurements of $20,000 or more in accordance
with §
41.089.
(1980 Code, § 41.024) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.035 CANCELLATION OR REJECTION OF INVITATIONS FOR BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR
PROPOSALS.
   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be
canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part
as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the
best interests of the county. The reasons therefore shall be made part of the
contract file. Each solicitation issued by the county shall state that the
solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in
whole or in part for good cause when in the best interests of the county.
Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice
shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation, and,
where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any
resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reasons for
rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors.
(1980 Code, § 41.025) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
BIDDER QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES
§ 41.050 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS ON SUPPLY OR SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   For supply contracts or service contracts, the County Executive or
responsible elected official, shall determine whether insurance coverage by the
contractor shall be required, and, if so, the types and amounts of coverage
that shall be required. The contractor shall have the county named as an
additional insured as its interest may appear and furnish the County Executive
with satisfactory evidence of insurance.
(1980 Code, § 41.040) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
TYPES OF CONTRACTS; CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION
§ 41.065 TYPES OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   General authority. Subject to the limitations of this section, any
type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement of and which will
promote the best interests of the county may be used, provided that the use of
a cost-plus-a-percentage-of cost contract is prohibited, unless otherwise
required by law.
   (B)   Multi-term contracts; specified period. Unless otherwise provided by
law, a contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any specified
period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the county, not to exceed
three years, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or
extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for
the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. However, the total contract
term for any contract except leases, including the time periods by which the
contract is extended due to renewal, shall not exceed a maximum of three years.
Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be
subject to the availability and appropriation of funds thereof, and copies of
all contracts shall be submitted with annual budget requests.
      (1)   Determination prior to use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-
term contract, it shall be determined in writing:
         (a)   The estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and
are reasonably firm and continuing; and
         (b)   The contract will serve the best interests of the county by
encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in county
procurement.
      (2)   Cancellation due to unavailability of funds. When funds are not
appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance
in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled.
   (C)   Multiple source contracting.
      (1)   General. A multiple source award is an award of an indefinite
quantity for one or more similar supplies or services to more than one bidder.
      (2)   Limitations on use.
         (a)   A multiple source award may be made when award to two or more
bidders for similar products is necessary for adequate economic delivery,
service or product compatibility.
         (b)   Any multiple source awards shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of §§
41.030,
41.031,
41.032 and
41.035, as applicable. Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single
award will meet the county’s needs without sacrifice of economy or service.
Awards shall not be made for the purpose of dividing the business, making
available product or supplier selection to allow for user preference unrelated
to utility or economy, or avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any awards shall
be limited to the least number of suppliers necessary to meet the valid
requirements of the county without sacrificing economy and service.
      (3)   Contract and solicitation provisions. All eligible users of the
contract shall be named in the solicitation, and it shall be mandatory that the
actual requirements of the users included in the contract be obtained in
accordance with the contract, provided that: the county shall reserve the right
to take bids separately if a particular quantity requirement arises which
exceeds its normal requirement or an amount specified in the contract.
      (4)   Intent to use. If a multiple source award is anticipated prior to
issuing a solicitation, the county shall reserve the right to make an award and
the criteria for award shall be stated in the solicitation.
      (5)   Determination required. The County Executive or his or her designee
shall make a written determination setting forth the reasons for a multiple
source award, which shall be made a part of the procurement file.
(1980 Code, § 41.050) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.066 CONTRACT CLAUSES AND THEIR ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Contract clauses. All county contracts for supplies, services and
construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities
and rights of the parties to the contract. The county may issue clauses
appropriate for supply, service or construction contracts, addressing among
others the following subjects:
      (1)   The unilateral right of the county to order in writing changes in
the work within the scope of the contract;
      (2)   The unilateral right of the county to order in writing temporary
stopping of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of
the contract;
      (3)   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in
contract and actual quantities;
      (4)   Defective pricing;
      (5)   Liquidated damages;
      (6)   Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;
      (7)   Termination of the contract for default;
      (8)   Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience
of the county;
      (9)   Suspension of work on a construction project for the convenience of
the county; and/or
      (10)   Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract or
ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions clause need not
be included in the contract:
         (a)   When the contract is negotiated;
         (b)   When the contractor provides the site or design; or
         (c)   When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk
of differing site conditions.
   (B)   Price adjustments.
      (1)   Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses
required by division (A) of this section shall be computed in one or more of
the following ways:
         (a)   By agreement of a fixed price adjustment before commencement of
the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;
         (b)   By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed
upon;
         (c)   By the costs attributable to the events or situations under the
clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or
subsequently agreed upon;
         (d)   In another manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree;
or
         (e)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a unilateral
determination by the county of the costs attributable to the events or
situations under the clauses with adjustment of profit or fee as computed by
the county, as accounted for in accordance with applicable cost principles and
subject to the provisions of §§
41.165 through
41.175.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, all adjustments in price must be in
compliance with the provisions of state statute.
   (C)   Standard clauses and their modification. The County Executive, after
consultation with the State’s Attorney, may establish standard contract clauses
for use in county contracts.
(1980 Code, § 41.051) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.067 CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION.
   A contract administration system designed to ensure that a contractor is
performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract was
awarded, and the terms and conditions of the contract, shall be maintained.
(1980 Code, § 41.052) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.068 RIGHT TO INSPECT PLANT.
   (A)   Right to inspect. The county may, at reasonable times, inspect the
part of the plant, place of business or worksite of a contractor or
subcontractor at any tier which is pertinent to the performance of any contract
awarded or to be awarded by the county.
   (B)   Contract audit. The county shall be entitled to audit the books and
records of a contractor or a subcontractor at any tier under any negotiated
contract or subcontract other than a firm fixed price contract to the extent
that the books, documents, papers and records are pertinent to the performance
of the contract or subcontract. The books and records shall be maintained by
the contractor or subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of
final payment.
(1980 Code, § 41.053) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.069 REPORTING OF ANTI- COMPETITIVE PRACTICES.
   When for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are
suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall
be transmitted to the State’s Attorney.
(1980 Code, § 41.054) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.070 COUNTY PROCUREMENT RECORDS.
   (A)   Contract file. All determinations and other written records pertaining
to the solicitation, award or performance of a contract shall be maintained for
the county in a contract file to be determined by the County Executive, the
Auditor and the County Clerk. The Highway Department contracts shall be
maintained at the Highway Department.
   (B)   Retention of procurement records. All procurement records shall be
retained and disposed of by the county in accordance with records retention
guidelines and schedules approved by the State Local Records Commission.
(1980 Code, § 41.055) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.071 APPROVAL OF ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.
   Except with respect to firm price contracts, no contract type shall be used
unless it has been determined in writing by the County Executive that:
   (A)   The proposed contractor’s accounting system will permit timely
development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specific
contract type contemplated; and
   (B)   The proposed contractor’s accounting system is adequate to allocate
costs in accordance with generally accepted cost accounting principles.
(1980 Code, § 41.056) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
CONTRACT EXECUTION
§ 41.085 REQUISITIONS.
   Prior to submission to the County Executive, all requisitions shall be
signed by the county agency making the request or by any individual authorized
by the County Officer.
(1980 Code, § 41.070) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.086 FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Prior to the payment of any purchase order, contract, change order or
contract modification, the Auditor shall verify that sufficient budgeted funds
are available.
(1980 Code, § 41.071) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.087 AUTHORIZATION TO ISSUE BIDS OR OTHER SOLICITATIONS.
   The County Executive may issue bids or other solicitations for any supply,
service or construction item for which funds have been specifically budgeted.
(1980 Code, § 41.072) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.088 REVIEW OF CONTRACTS.
   The County Executive may request the State’s Attorney to review all
contracts prior to award of the contract.
(1980 Code, § 41.073) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.089 APPROVAL OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Contracts of $20,000 or more. Contracts for $20,000 or more shall be
submitted by the responsible county official to the County Board for approval.
After award by the County Board, contracts shall be signed by the County
Executive.
   (B)   Contracts of less than $20,000. Subject to the provisions of §
41.031 the county officer or department head, upon approval by the County
Executive, shall sign all contracts of less than $20,000 for all purchases when
the funds are available within their budget.
   (C)   Contracts by other county officials. When authority to purchase
certain supplies, services or construction items has been delegated pursuant to
§
41.016, then the delegated official shall sign the contract instead of the
County Executive.
   (D)   Upon execution, the Auditor will be provided with one copy of the
executed contract for his or her retention.
(1980 Code, § 41.074) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.090 CHANGE ORDERS AND CONTRACT MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Change orders, contract modifications or price adjustments, as defined
in §
41.004 or by state statute, are subject to approval of the assigned County
Board committee in the following circumstances:
      (1)   When the total of change orders, contract modifications or price
adjustments of any contract of $20,000 or more exceeds 10% of the original
contract amount, or a change in the time of completion is 30 days or more; or
      (2)   When the total of change orders, contract modifications or price
adjustments of any contract exceeds $20,000.
   (B)   Change orders, contract modifications or price adjustments of
contracts under §
41.091 may be approved by the appropriate County Board committee as determined
by the County Board Rules when the county official or employee determines in
writing that:
      (1)   The circumstances said to necessitate the change in performance
were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed;
      (2)   The change is germane to the original contract, as signed; or
      (3)   The change order is in the best interest of the county and is
authorized by law.
   (C)   The written change orders shall be preserved in the contract file.
   (D)   Contracts under the jurisdiction of the County Engineer are not
subject to this provision.
(1980 Code, § 41.075) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.091 MAXIMUM PRACTICABLE COMPETITION.
   All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the
purpose intended and encourage competition in satisfying the county’s needs,
and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this section
applies to all specifications including, but not limited to, those prepared for
the county by architects, engineers, designers and draftsmen.
(1980 Code, § 41.076) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.092 ADDITIONAL CONTENTS OF BID PACKAGES.
   In addition to the bid specifications detailing information as to the
specific services, materials, equipment or supplies sought, the bid package
must include the following:
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 33E-11, the prime contractor bid
certification form attesting that the prime contractor is not barred from
entering the contract;
   (B)   A copy of Article 33E of State Criminal Code of 1961, being ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, Art. 33E, together with a form to be signed by the bidder that the
bidder has not violated any of the provisions of the Article;
   (C)   The phone number of the State’s Attorney’s office to call concerning
any possible violation of Article 33 of the State Criminal Code for 1961; and
   (D)   Where applicable, prevailing wage act requirements will be specified.
(1980 Code, § 41.077) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
BID SECURITY, PERFORMANCE BONDS, INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION
CONTRACTS
§ 41.105 BID SECURITY.
   (A)   Requirement for bid security. Bid security shall be required for all
competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is
estimated by the County Executive to exceed $25,000. Bid security shall be a
bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, or
the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the
county. Nothing herein shall prevent the requirement of the bonds on
construction contracts under $25,000.
   (B)   Amount of bid security. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at
least 10% of the amount of the bid.
(1980 Code, § 41.090) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.106 CONTRACT PERFORMANCE OR PAYMENT BONDS.
   (A)   When required; amounts. When a construction contract is awarded in
excess of $25,000, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the
county and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the
contract:
      (1)   A performance bond satisfactory to the county, executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state, or otherwise secured in a
manner satisfactory to the county, in an amount equal to 100% of the price
specified in the contract; and
      (2)   A payment bond satisfactory to the county, executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner
satisfactory to the county, for the protection of all persons supplying labor
or materials to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the
work provided in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100% of
the price specified in the contract.
   (B)   Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to limit the authority of the county to require a performance bond
or other security in addition to those bonds, or in circumstances other than
specified in division (A) above of this section.
(1980 Code, § 41.091) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
SUPPLY MANAGEMENT
§ 41.120 SUPPLY MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.
   Pursuant to §
41.015, the County Executive shall be responsible for developing policy for:
   (A)   The management of supplies during their entire life cycle;
   (B)   The sale, lease or disposal of surplus supplies by public auction,
competitive sealed bidding or other appropriate method designated by
regulation; and
   (C)   Transfer of excess property.
(1980 Code, § 41.100) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.121 ALLOCATION OF THE PROCEEDS FROM SALE OR DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS SUPPLIES.
   Proceeds from the sale or disposal of surplus supplies or equipment shall be
disposed into the County Corporate Fund, unless state or federal law requires
or mandates otherwise.
(1980 Code, § 41.101) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
APPEALS AND REMEDIES
§ 41.135 BID PROTESTS.
   (A)   Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a
contract may protest to the County Executive. Any protest must be submitted in
writing within ten calendar days from the issuance of the solicitation,
addendum, notice of award or other decision by the County Executive, County
Board or awarding official.
   (B)   Stay of procurement during protest. In the event of a timely protest
under division (A) of this section, the County Executive or the assigned County
Board committee, after consulting with the State’s Attorney, shall determine
whether it is in the best interests of the county to proceed with the
solicitation or award of the contract.
   (C)   Entitlement to costs. When a protest is sustained and the protesting
bidder or offeror should have been awarded the contract under the solicitation
but is not, then the protesting bidder or offeror shall be entitled only to the
reasonable costs incurred in connection with the solicitation, including bid
preparation costs other than attorney’s fees.
(1980 Code, § 41.110) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.136 CONTRACT CLAIMS.
   All claims by a contractor against the county relating to a contract, except
bid protests, shall be submitted in writing to the County Executive. The
contractor may request a conference with the County Executive on the claim.
Claims include without limitation, disputes arising under a contract, and those
based upon modification or rescission.
(1980 Code, § 41.111) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.137 AUTHORITY OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE TO SETTLE BID PROTESTS AND CONTRACT
CLAIMS, SUBJECT TO STATUTORY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The awarding entity is authorized to settle any procedural
protest regarding the solicitation or award of a county contract prior to an
appeal to the County Board or any committee thereof. The County Executive,
after consulting with the State’s Attorney, is authorized to make
recommendations on the settlement of any monetary claim to the assigned County
Board committee for their consideration.
   (B)   Notice to the contractor of the County Executive’s or awarding
entity’s decision. If a protest or claim is not resolved by mutual agreement,
the County Executive or awarding entity shall promptly issue a decision in
writing, and it shall be immediately mailed or otherwise furnished to the
contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached, and
shall inform the contractor of its appeal rights under division (C) of this
section.
   (C)   Failure to render timely decision. If a written decision is not
rendered regarding any protest or claim within ten calendar days after written
request for a final decision, or within a longer period as may be agreed upon
between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed with an appeal to the
County Board as if an adverse decision had been received.
(1980 Code, § 41.112) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.138 REMEDIES FOR SOLICITATION OR AWARD IN VIOLATION OF LAW.
   (A)   Prior to bid opening or closing date for receipt of proposals. If
prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the
County Executive, after consultation with the State’s Attorney, determines that
the solicitation is in violation of federal, state or local law, then the
solicitation shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law.
   (B)   Prior to award. If after bid opening or closing date for receipt of
proposals, the County Executive, after consultation with the State’s Attorney,
determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of a contract is in
violation of federal, state or local law, then the solicitation or proposed
award shall be canceled.
   (C)   After award. If, after award, the County Executive, after consultation
with the State’s Attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of a
contract was in violation of applicable law, then the matter shall be
considered at the next County Board meeting.
(1980 Code, § 41.113) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
COOPERATIVE PURCHASING
§ 41.150 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING AUTHORIZED.
   Subject to applicable state statutes, the county may either participate in,
sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the
procurement of supplies, services or construction with one or more public
procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the
participants. The cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to,
joint or multi-party contracts between public procurement units and open-ended
state public procurement unit contracts which are made available to other
public procurement units. The elected officials must follow rules of the state
statute if not following this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 41.120) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.151 SALE, ACQUISITION OR USE OF SUPPLIES.
   The county may sell, acquire from or use any supplies belonging to another
public procurement unit independent of the requirements of §§
41.030 through
41.035,
41.050,
41.065 through
41.071,
41.085 through
41.092,
41.105 and
41.106.
(1980 Code, § 41.121) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.152 COOPERATIVE USE OF SUPPLIES AND SERVICES.
   The county may enter into an agreement independent of the requirements of §§
41.030 through
41.035,
41.050,
41.065 through
41.071,
41.085 through
41.092,
41.105 and
41.106 with any other public procurement unit for the cooperative use of
supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties.
(1980 Code, § 41.122) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.153 JOINT USE OF FACILITIES.
   The county may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of
warehouse facilities, capital equipment and other facilities with another
public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties.
(1980 Code, § 41.123) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING
§ 41.165 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   Public employment is a public trust. It is the policy of the county to
promote and balance the objective of protecting government integrity and the
objective of facilitating the recruitment and retention of personnel needed by
the county. The policy is implemented by prescribing essential standards of
ethical conduct without creating unnecessary obstacles to entering public
service. Public employees must discharge their duties impartially so as to
assure fair competitive access to governmental procurement by responsible
contractors. Moreover, they should conduct themselves in a manner as to foster
public confidence in the integrity of the county procurement organization. To
achieve the purpose of this subchapter, it is essential that those doing
business with the county also observe the ethical standard prescribed herein.
(1980 Code, § 41.130) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.166 GENERAL STANDARDS OF ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   General ethical standard for employees. Any attempt to realize
personal gain through public employment by conduct inconsistent with the proper
discharge of the employee’s duties is a breach of the public trust.
   (B)   General ethical standards for non- employees. Any effort to influence
any public employee to breach the standards of ethical conduct set forth in
this subchapter is a breach of ethical standards.
(1980 Code, § 41.131) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.167 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth
in this subchapter constitute violation of state statutes, they shall be
punishable as provided therein. The penalties shall be in addition to the civil
sanctions set forth in this subchapter. Criminal, civil and administrative
sanctions against employees or non-employees which are in existence on the
effective date of this chapter shall not be impaired.
(1980 Code, § 41.132) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.168 EMPLOYEE CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Conflict of interest. It shall be unethical for any county employee to
participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the county
employee knows that:
      (1)   The county employee or any member of the county employee’s
immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement
contract; or
      (2)   Any other person, business or organization with whom the county
employee or any member of a county employee’s immediate family is negotiating
or has an agreement concerning prospective employment is involved in the
procurement contract.
   (B)   Financial interest in a blind trust. A county employee or any member
of a county employee’s immediate family who holds a financial interest in a
disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a conflict of interest with
regard to matters pertaining to that financial interest.
   (C)   Discovery of actual or potential conflict of interest,
disqualification and waiver. Upon discovery of an actual or potential conflict
of interest, an employee shall promptly file a written statement of
disqualification and shall withdraw from further participation in the
transaction involved. The employee may, at the same time, apply for an advisory
opinion as to what further participation, if any, the employee may have in the
transaction pursuant to §
41.172.
(1980 Code, § 41.133) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.169 GRATUITIES AND KICKBACKS.
   (A)   Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give or
agree to give any county employee or for any county employee to solicit,
demand, accept or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity or an offer
of employment in connection with any direct or indirect participation in a
county bid, proposal or purchase.
   (B)   Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity or offer of
employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to
the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any individual associated
therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order.
(1980 Code, § 41.134) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.170 PROHIBITION AGAINST CONTINGENT FEES.
   It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to
solicit or secure a county contract upon an agreement or understanding for a
commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee.
(1980 Code, § 41.135) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.171 CONTEMPORANEOUS EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unethical for any county employee who is participating directly
or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while a county
employee, the employee of a person contracting with the county.
(1980 Code, § 41.136) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.172 WAIVERS FROM CONTEMPORANEOUS EMPLOYMENT.
   The assigned County Board committee may grant a waiver from the employee
conflict of interest provision (§
41.168) or the contemporaneous employment provision (§
41.171) upon making a written determination that:
   (A)   The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the county
employee has been publicly disclosed;
   (B)   The county employee will be able to perform its procurement functions
without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and
   (C)   The award will be in the best interest of the county.
(1980 Code, § 41.137) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.173 USE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee to knowingly use
confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the
actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person.
(1980 Code, § 41.138) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.174 SANCTIONS.
   (A)   Employees. Sanctions on a county employee for violations of the
ethical standards of this subchapter shall be imposed in accordance with the
County Ethics Ordinance.
   (B)   Non-employees. The assigned County Board committee may impose one or
more of the following sanctions on a non-employee for violations of the ethical
standards:
      (1)   Written warning or reprimands; or
      (2)   Termination of contracts.
(1980 Code, § 41.139) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
§ 41.175 RECOVERY OF VALUE TRANSFERRED OR RECEIVED IN BREACH OF ETHICAL
STANDARDS.
   (A)   General provisions. The value of anything transferred or received in
breach of the ethical standards of this chapter by a county employee or non-
employee may be recovered from both the county employee and the non-employee.
   (B)   Recovery of kickbacks by the county. Upon showing that a subcontractor
made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in
connection with the award of a subcontract or an order thereunder, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the
subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the county and will be recoverable
hereunder from the recipient. In addition, the amount may also be recovered
from the subcontractor making the kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party
shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties.
(1980 Code, § 41.140) (Ord. 08-461, passed 11-20-2008)
CHAPTER 42: COUNTY LOBBYIST’S REGISTRATION
Section
   
42.01   Short title
   
42.02   Definitions
   
42.03   Persons required to register
   
42.04   Persons not required to register
   
42.05   Lobbyist registration and disclosure
   
42.06   Reports
   
42.07   Duties of the Clerk
   
42.08   Contingent fees prohibited
   
42.09   Petition to member or public official - right not to be infringed
   
42.10   Venue
   
42.11   Severability
   
42.12   Effective date
 
   
42.99   Penalty
§ 42.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the County Lobbyist Registration Chapter.
(1980 Code, § 42.01) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION. The execution or rejection of any rule, regulation,
legislative rule, standard, fee, rate, contractual arrangement, purchasing
agreement or other delegated legislative or quasi-legislative action to be
taken or withheld by any county official or county employee.
   BOARD. The Will County Board and any and all of its standing or special
committees or subcommittees.
   CLERK. The duly elected or appointed Clerk of Will County, Illinois.
   COMPENSATION. Any money, thing of value, financial benefits, or other
pecuniary benefits received or to be received in return for lobbying.
   COUNTY. The County of Will, Illinois.
   COUNTY AGENCY. Any board, commission, department or authority under the
jurisdiction of the County Executive or Board or any other county official.
   COUNTY EMPLOYEE. An individual employed by the county whether part-time or
full-time.
   COUNTY MATTER. Any executive action, legislative action or administrative
action.
   COUNTY OFFICIAL. The Assessor, Auditor, Board Member, Clerk of the Circuit
Court, Clerk, Coroner, County Executive, Recorder of Deeds, Sheriff, State's
Attorney, Regional Superintendent of Schools and Treasurer of Will County, and
any county agency or member thereof.
   EXECUTIVE ACTION. The proposal, drafting, development, consideration,
amendment, adoption, approval, promulgation, issuance, modification, rejection
or postponement by a county entity of a rule, regulation, order, decision,
determination, contractual arrangement, purchasing agreement or other quasi-
legislative or quasi-judicial action or proceeding.
   EXPENDITURE. A payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, honoraria,
travel or entertainment expense, meal or beverage expense or gift of money or
anything of value. This includes a contract, promise, or agreement, whether or
not legally enforceable, to make an expenditure for the ultimate purpose of
influencing executive, legislative or administrative action, for services
rendered or to be rendered.
   FILE, FILED, or FILING.
      (1)   Delivery to an office of the Clerk by the close of business of the
prescribed filing date; or
      (2)   Deposit with the United States Postal Services, postage prepaid, in
sufficient time so that the mailed document(s) arrive at an office of the Clerk
by the close of business of the prescribed filing date.
   INFLUENCING. Any communication, action, or other means used to promote,
support, affect, modify, oppose or delay any executive, legislative or
administrative action or to promote goodwill with county officials or
employees.
   LEGISLATIVE ACTION. The development, drafting, introduction, consideration,
modification, adoption, rejection, review, enactment, or passage or defeat of
any bill, amendment, resolution, report, nomination, administrative rule or
other matter by either any county official or county employee. LEGISLATIVE
ACTION also means the action of the County Executive in approving or vetoing
any ordinance, resolution or motion or portion thereof, and the action of any
county officials or county employee in the development of the proposal for
introduction before the Board.
   LOBBYING. Any communication with a county official or county employee for
the ultimate purpose of influencing executive, legislative, or administrative
action.
   LOBBYIST. Any person who lobbies.
   PERSON. Any individual, entity, corporation, partnership, firm, committee,
association, membership association, union, trust, or estate, as well as any
parent or subsidiary of any of the foregoing whether or not operated for
profit, or group of persons.
(1980 Code, § 42.02) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.03 PERSONS REQUIRED TO REGISTER.
   (A)   Except as provided in §§
42.04 and
42.07, the following persons shall register with Will County Clerk as provided
herein:
      (1)   Any person who, for compensation or otherwise, either individually
or as an employee or contractual employee of another person, undertakes to
influence executive, legislative or administrative action.
      (2)   Any person who employs another person for the purposes of
influencing executive, legislative or administrative action.
   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter to engage in lobbying or to employ
any person for the purpose of lobbying who is not registered with the Will
County Clerk, except upon condition that the person register and the person
does in fact register within ten working days of an agreement to conduct any
lobbying activity.
(1980 Code, § 42.03) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.04 PERSONS NOT REQUIRED TO REGISTER.
   (A)   Persons who, for the purpose of influencing executive, legislative or
administrative action and who do not make expenditures that are reportable
pursuant to §
42.06, appear without compensation or promise thereof only as witnesses before
county committees for the purpose of explaining or arguing for or against the
passage of or action upon any legislation then pending before such committees,
or who seek without compensation or promise thereof the approval or veto of any
legislation by the County Board.
   (B)   Persons who own, publish, or are employed by a newspaper or other
regularly published periodical, or who own or are employed by a radio station,
television stations, or other bona fide news medium which in the ordinary
course of business disseminates news, editorial or other comment, or paid
advertisements which directly urge the passage or defeat of legislation. This
exemption shall not be applicable to such an individual insofar as he receives
additional compensation or expenses from some source other than the bona fide
news medium for the purpose of influencing executive, legislative or
administrative action. This exemption does not apply to newspapers and
periodicals owned by or published by trade associations and profit corporations
engaged primarily in endeavors other than dissemination of news.
   (C)   Persons performing professional services in drafting ordinances or in
advising and rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of
proposed or pending legislation where such professional services are not
otherwise, directly or indirectly, connected with executive, legislative or
administrative action.
   (D)   Persons who are employees of departments, divisions, or agencies of
county government, and who appear before committees for the purpose of
explaining how the passage of or action upon any legislation then pending
before such committees will affect said departments, divisions or agencies of
county government.
   (E)   Employees of county legislators, legislators and legislative agencies.
   (F)   Persons who possess technical skills and knowledge relevant to certain
areas of executive, legislative or administrative actions, whose skills and
knowledge would be helpful to officials when considering such actions, whose
activities are limited to making occasional appearances for our communicating
on behalf of a registrant and who do not make expenditures that are reportable
pursuant to §
42.07 even though receiving expense reimbursement for such occasional
appearances.
   (G)   Any full time employee of a bona-fide church or religious organization
who represents that organization solely for the purpose of protecting the right
of the members thereof to practice the religious doctrines of such church or
religious organization.
   (H)   Persons who receive no compensation other than reimbursement for
expenses of up to $500 per year while engaged in lobbying government, unless
those persons make expenditures that are reportable under §
42.06.
   (I)   Any attorney in the course of representing a client in any
administrative or judicial proceedings, or any witness providing testimony in
any administrative or judicial proceeding, in which ex parte communications are
not allowed and who does not make expenditures that are reportable pursuant to
§
42.06.
   (J)   Persons who, in the scope of their employment as vendor, offer or
solicit an official for the purchase of any goods or services where (1) said
solicitation is limited to either an oral inquiry or written advertisements and
informative literature; or (2) said goods and services are subject to
competitive bidding requirements of the Illinois Purchasing Act; or (3) said
goods and services are for sale at a cost not to exceed $5,000; and (4) such
persons do not make expenditures that are reportable under §
42.06.
(1980 Code, § 42.04) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.05 LOBBYIST REGISTRATION AND DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Every person required to register under §
42.03 shall each and every year, or before any such service is performed which
requires the person to register, file in the Office of the County Clerk a
written statement containing the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the registrant.
      (2)   The name and address of the person or persons employing or
retaining registrant to perform such services or on whose behalf the registrant
appears.
      (3)   A brief description of the executive, legislative, or
administrative action in reference to which such service is to be rendered.
      (4)   A picture of the registrant.
   (B)   Persons required to register under this chapter shall remit a single,
annual and nonrefundable $50 registration fee. All fees shall be payable to the
Will County Clerk for administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 42.05) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.06 REPORTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every person required to
register as prescribed in §
42.03 shall file with the Clerk a report under oath before a notary public,
pursuant to the specifications set forth of all expenditures for lobbying made
or incurred by the lobbyist on his behalf or the behalf of his employer. In the
case where an individual is solely employed by another person to perform job
related functions say part of which includes lobbying, the employer shall be
responsible for reporting all lobbying expenditures incurred on the employer's
behalf as shall be identified by the lobbyist to the employer preceding such
report. Persons who contract with another person to perform lobbying activities
shall be responsible for reporting all lobbying expenditures incurred on the
employer's behalf. Any additional lobbying expenses incurred by the employer
which are separate and apart from those incurred by the contractual employee
shall be repotted by the employer.
   (B)   (1)   The report shall itemize each individual expenditure or
transaction over $100 and shall include the name of the official on whose
behalf the expenditure was made, the name of the client on whose behalf the
expenditure was made, the total amount of the expenditure, the date on which
the expenditure occurred and the subject matter of the lobbying activity, if
any.
      (2)   Expenditures attributable to lobbying officials shall be listed and
reported according to the following categories:
         (a)   Travel and lodging on behalf of others.
         (b)   Meals, beverages and other entertainment.
         (c)   Gifts.
         (d)   Honoraria.
      (3)   Individual expenditures required to be reported as described herein
which are equal to or less than $100 in value need not be itemized but are
required to be categorized and reported by officials in an aggregate total in a
manner prescribed by the County Clerk.
      (4)   Expenditures incurred for hosting receptions, benefits and other
large gatherings held for purposes of goodwill or otherwise to influence
executive, legislative or administrative action to which there are 25 or more
county officials invited shall be reported listing only the total amount of the
expenditure, the date of the event, and the estimated number of officials in
attendance.
      (5)   Each individual expenditure required to be reported shall include
all expenses made for or on behalf of county officials and members of the
immediate family of those persons.
      (6)   The category travel and lodging includes, but is not limited to,
all travel and living accommodations made for or on behalf of county officials
in the capital during sessions of the County Board.
      (7)   Salaries, fees, and other compensation paid to the registrant for
the purposes of lobbying need not be reported.
      (8)   Any contributions required to be reported under Article 9 of the
Election Code need not be reported.
      (9)   Gifts and honoraria returned to the registrant within 30 days of
the date of receipt need not be reported.
   (C)   (1)   Reports under this section shall be filed by July 31, for
expenditures from the previous January 1 through the later of June 20 and by
January 31, for expenditures from the entire previous calendar year.
      (2)   Registrants who made no reportable expenditures during a reporting
period shall file a report stating that no expenditures were incurred. Such
reports shall be filed in accordance with the deadlines as prescribed in this
division.
      (3)   A registrant who terminates employment or duties which required him
to register under this chapter shall give the County Clerk, within 30 days
after the date of such termination, written notice of such termination and
shall include therewith a report of the expenditures described herein, covering
the period of time since the filing of his last report to the date of
termination of employment. Such notice and report shall be final and relieve
such registrant of further reporting under this chapter, unless and until he
later takes employment or assumes duties requiring him to again register under
this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   Failure to file any such report within the time designated or
the reporting of incomplete information shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
      (2)   A registrant shall preserve for a period of two years all receipts
and records used in preparing reports under this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 42.06) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.07 DUTIES OF THE CLERK.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to provide appropriate forms for the
registration and reporting of information required by this chapter and to keep
such registrations and reports on file in his or her office for three years
from the date of filing. The Clerk shall also maintain a listing of registered
lobbyists. Such records and listings shall be considered public information and
open to public inspection during normal business hours.
   (B)   The Clerk shall administer this chapter. The Clerk shall review all
forms that are filed for completeness. The Clerk shall report all violations
and suspected violations of this chapter to the State's Attorney of Will
County.
(1980 Code, § 42.07) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.08 CONTINGENT FEES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall retain or employ another to promote or oppose legislation
for compensation contingent in whole or in part upon the passage or defeat of
any legislation, or the approval or veto of any legislation by the County
Board, and no person shall accept any such employment or render any such
service for compensation contingent upon the passage or defeat of any
legislation or the approval or veto of any legislation by the County Board.
(Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998) Penalty, see §
42.99
§ 42.09 PETITION TO MEMBER OR PUBLIC OFFICIAL - RIGHT NOT TO BE INFRINGED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to infringe in any way the right
of a citizen to lawfully petition a Commissioner or any other county official
as guaranteed by the constitutions of the United States and the State of
Illinois.
(1980 Code, § 42.09) ( Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.10 VENUE.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the Circuit Court of
the Twelfth Judicial District, Will County, Illinois, by the State’s Attorney
of Will County.
(1980 Code, § 42.11) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.11 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 42.12) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.12 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect immediately after passage and the disclosure
and reporting requirements outlined in §§
42.05 and
42.06 shall apply to all persons who, at any time after January 1, 1998, came
or come within the scope of §
42.03, as limited by §
42.04. Initial reports required to be filed under §
42.06 of this chapter shall be due within 60 days of passage.
(1980 Code, § 42.13) (Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
§ 42.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found by a court to be guilty of filing a late registration
or report after January 31 (in the case of reports due after by January 20) or
after July 31 (in the case of reports due by July 20) shall be fined not more
than $500 per day late.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided for in this section, any person
convicted of any violation of any provision of this chapter is prohibited for a
period of three years from the date of the conviction from engaging, directly
or indirectly, in any lobbying activities.
(Res. 98-353, passed 11-19-1998)
CHAPTER 43: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Section
   
43.01   Authority
   
43.02   Purpose
   
43.03   Adoption of the system of administrative adjudication
   
43.04   Administrative adjudication not exclusive remedy
   
43.05   Definitions
   
43.06   Coding hearing unit
   
43.07   Procedure for instituting proceedings
   
43.08   Procedure for Property Maintenance and Building Code Violations
   
43.09   Administrative search warrant
   
43.10   Subpoenas; default
   
43.11   Representation at hearings
   
43.12   Conduct of hearing
   
43.13   Rules of evidence
   
43.14   Findings, decision, and order
   
43.15   Administrative hearing fee
   
43.16   Administrative fee for mail-in ticket
   
43.17   Enforcement of judgment
§ 43.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority by ILCS 55, Ch. 5, Art. 5-
43005, et seq.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to create an administrative adjudication
process by defining the process, establishing procedures, creating the hearing
unit and establishing requirements for the Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.03 ADOPTION OF THE SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION.
   The county hereby adopts division 5-43 of the Illinois Counties Code, as
amended, ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-43005 et seq., in its current form and as it
may be amended from time to time, for the administrative adjudication of
violations of County ordinances and offenses under the Illinois Vehicle Code
(or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code).
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.04 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   The adoption by the county of a system of administrative adjudications does
not preclude the county from using other methods to enforce its ordinances,
including, but not limited to, pursuing any and all actions and relief allowed
at law and in equity in the Circuit Court of the Twelfth Judicial Circuit, Will
County, Illinois. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to allow for
administrative adjudication of an ordinance violation in the case where a state
statute or administrative rule provides for a specific method or procedure to
be followed, other than administrative adjudication.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.05 DEFINITIONS.
   In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, terms are defined
as:
   CODE. The Will County Code of Ordinances.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A county employee authorized to issue citations
for code violations and to conduct inspections of public or private real
property to determine whether a code violation(s) exists.
   HEARING OFFICER. A person other than a Code Enforcement Officer or law
enforcement officer, who is appointed by the County Executive, with the advice
and consent of the County Board, to preside over administrative healings. Every
hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state for
at least three years.
      (1)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings,
hearing officers shall have successfully completed a formal training program,
approved by the County Executive that includes the following:
         (a)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings that they will conduct;
         (b)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that
they will adjudicate;
         (c)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
         (d)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders.
      (2)   The powers and duties of a hearing officer shall include:
         (a)   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the code violation.
         (b)   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give
relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
         (c)   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         (d)   Issuing a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a code violation exists, which shall be in writing and
shall include a written finding of fact, decision, and order including the
fine, penalty, or action with which the defendant must comply; and
         (e)   Imposing penalties consistent with applicable code provisions
and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation,
except, however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to
(i) impose a penalty of incarceration or (ii) impose a fine in excess of
$50,000, or at the option of the county, such other amount not to exceed the
maximum amount established by the mandatory Arbitration System as prescribed by
the Rules of the Illinois Supreme court from time to time for the Twelfth
Judicial Circuit, Will County, Illinois. The maximum monetary fine under this
item (e), shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure
compliance with the county's ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to
enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the county.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of an improved or unimproved
parcel of real estate.
   RECORDING SECRETARY. A County employee assigned to the administration and
management of the adjudication records, hearing scheduling, and other duties as
assigned.
   RESPONDENT. A property owner, waste hauler, or other person charged with
liability for an alleged code violation and the person to whom the notice of
violation is directed.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.06 CODE HEARING UNIT.
   There is hereby established a code hearing unit. The code hearing unit shall
consist of a Hearing Officer, and Recording Secretary. The function of the code
hearing unit shall be to expedite the prosecution and correction of violations
of county ordinances ("code violation"). Charges of code violations may be
heard and adjudicated by the Hearing Officer as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.07 PROCEDURE FOR INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   When a Code Enforcement Officer observes a code violation, the Officer
shall note, or in the case of an animal control violation, the Code Enforcement
Officer may respond to the filing of a formal complaint by noting the violation
on the violation notice and report form, indicating the following: the name and
address of the respondent, if known; the name, address, and vehicle
registration number of the waste hauler who deposited the waste, if applicable;
the type and nature of the violation; the date and time the violation was
observed; the names of witnesses to the violation; and the address of the
location or property where the violation is observed.
   (B)   The violation notice and report form shall contain a file number and a
hearing date noted by the Code Enforcement Officer in the spaces provided for
that purpose on the form. The violation notice and report form shall state the
penalties for failure to appear at the hearing on the date indicated including
that failure to appear may result in a determination of liability for the cited
violation and the imposition of fines and assessment of costs as provided by
the applicable county ordinance. The violation notice and report form shall
also state that upon a determination of liability and the exhaustion of or
failure to exhaust procedures for judicial review, any unpaid fines or costs
imposed will constitute a debt due and owed to the county.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall certify the correctness of the
information required by division (A) of this section by signing his name to the
violation notice and report form, and indicate the date on which this was done.
Failure to certify does not invalidate the violation notice, but will not
establish a prima facie case at trial.
   (D)   A copy of the violation notice and report form shall be filed with the
code hearing unit and served on the respondent in a manner reasonably
calculated to give them actual notice, including, as appropriate, personal
service of process upon a party or its employees or agents; service by mail at
a party's address; or not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled
posting in a prominent place upon the property where the violation is found
when the party is the owner or manager of the property.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.08 PROCEDURE FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS.
   Prior to a Code Enforcement Officer forwarding any violation notice to
administrative adjudication, the Code Enforcement Officer shall follow the
notice and right to cure procedure as outlined in the currently adopted
International Property Maintenance Code however in no case shall the Code
Enforcement Officer give less than 30 days notice of the violation prior to
issuing a ticket requiring appearance at an Administrative Adjudication
hearing.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.09 ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANT.
   Whether forwarding a matter to the Circuit Court or Administrative
Adjudication, the Code Enforcement Officer or any other agent of the County
shall obtain a search warrant or administrative search warrant as required by
law search of a person's property if consent is not obtained.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.10 SUBPOENAS; DEFAULT.
   (A)   At any time prior to the hearing date, at the request of the Code
Enforcement Officer, the State's Attorney, the respondent, or the attorney for
the respondent, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may issue
subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
   (B)   If the respondent or the respondent's attorney fails to appear on the
date set for the hearing, the Hearing Officer may find the respondent in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relating to the
existence of a code violation.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.11 REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS.
   The case for the county may be presented by the Code Enforcement Officer. In
no event, however, may the case for the county be presented by an employee of
the code hearing unit. The case for the respondent may be presented by the
respondent or the respondent's attorney. If the respondent is a corporation, it
may appear through any officer, director, manager, or supervisor of the
corporation.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.12 CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.
   Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing during which
they may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross-examine
opposing witnesses. Parties may request the hearing officer to issue subpoenas
to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses. Parties may
request the hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, except that for
hearings scheduled in all non-emergency situations, if requested by the
defendant, the defendant shall have at least 15 days after service of process
to prepare for a hearing. For purposes of this division, "non-emergency
situation" means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to
the public interest, safety, or welfare. If service is provided by mail, the
15-day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the
mail.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.13 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   Rules of evidence shall not govern. The formal and technical rules of
evidence do not apply in an adjudicatory hearing permitted under this chapter.
Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly
relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.14 FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER.
   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and
shall be designated as the Hearing Officer's findings, decision, and order. The
findings, decision, and order shall include the Hearings Officer's findings of
fact, a determination of whether a code violation exists based on the findings
of fact, and an order imposing a fine or other penalty, directing the
respondent to correct the violation, or dismissing the case if the violation is
not proved. If the Hearing Officer determines that the respondent is liable for
the cited violation, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order imposing
sanctions that are provided in the code for the violations proved, including
the imposition of fines and the recovery of the costs of the proceedings.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.15 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING FEE.
   For each violation in which a respondent pleads guilty at administrative
hearing or that the Hearing Officer makes a determination of guilt, the Hearing
Officer shall assess a $50 administrative adjudication fee against the
respondent for each violation in addition to the penalties, fines and other
costs imposed.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.16 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR MAIL-IN TICKET.
   For each violation in which a respondent is not required to appear before
the Hearing Officer and pleads guilty and pays the required fine by mail there
shall be a $15 administrative fee assessed against the respondent for each
violation in addition to the penalties, fines and other costs imposed.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 43.17 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law are a debt due and owing the county and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a county to
enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court
costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are
fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a
debt due and owing eh county and may be collected in accordance with applicable
law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing officer pursuant to this
division, the county shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the
defendant shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer
to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The
notice shall set the date for the hearing, which shall not be less than seven
days after the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the
seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited
in the mail.
   (D)   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code
of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed
on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount
of any debt due and owing the county under this section. The lien may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new-hearing date, upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance
of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that the
petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the county did not provide proper service of
process, if any judgment is set aside pursuant to this division (E), the
hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien
that has been recorded for any debt due and owing the county as a result of the
vacated default judgment.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
      
51.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
      
52.   WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE EQUIPMENT
      
53.   WATER WELL PERMIT AND WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS
      
54.   WASTE HAULER REPORTING
      
55.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
56.   PERMIT AND ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Adoption of County Solid Waste Management Plan by reference
   
50.02   Adoption of County Volume Reduction/Recycling Grant Program by
reference
   
50.03   Adoption of Landfill/Ashfill Site Selection Process by reference
Assessing and Collecting Fees From the Owners or Operators of Landfills
   
50.20   Definitions
   
50.21   Solid Waste Management Fund created
   
50.22   Assessment and collection of fee
   
50.23   Exemptions
   
50.24   Solid waste disposal report
   
50.25   Payment of fees
   
50.26   Cessation of operation
   
50.27   Exemptions from increases
Assessing and Collecting Fees From the Owners or Operators of Clean
Construction or Demolition Debris Fill Operations
   
50.40   Definitions
   
50.41   Retention of records
   
50.42   Procedures for maintaining records
   
50.43   Procedures for payment of fees
   
50.44   Effective date
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Construction and inspection of improvements, see §
154.067
   General public nuisances, see §
93.004
   Responsibilities of owners and occupants, see § 151.02
   Waste hauler reporting, see
Ch. 54
   Waste material, see §
93.022
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 ADOPTION OF COUNTY SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The County Solid Waste Management Plan attached to Resolution 91-20 is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   The second five-year Plan Update and amendments to the County Solid
Waste Management Plan in the form of the Solid Waste Management Plan Update of
September 2001, are adopted.
(1980 Code, § 50.01) (Res. 91-20, adopted 1-17-1991; Res. 96-33, passed 3-21-
1996; Res. 01-230, passed 6-21-2001; Res. 01-475, passed 11-15-2001; Res. 06-
01, passed 1-19-2006)
§ 50.02 ADOPTION OF COUNTY VOLUME REDUCTION/RECYCLING GRANT PROGRAM BY
REFERENCE.
   (A)   The County Board hereby adopts and incorporates the attached to
Resolution 89-330 for the County volume Reduction/Recycling Grant Program by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   These program guidelines detail the application process, generally
define eligible activities, provide the criteria for the review of applications
and establish a deadline for submission of applications.
(1980 Code, § 50.02) (Res. 89-330, adopted 12-21-1989)
§ 50.03 ADOPTION OF LANDFILL/ASHFILL SITE SELECTION PROCESS BY REFERENCE.
   The County Board hereby endorses the siting process and criteria attached to
Resolution 89-306 by reference as if fully set forth herein, with the
understanding that the process will result in the selection of the best site in
the county for a landfill/ ashfill.
(1980 Code, § 50.03) (Res. 89-306, adopted 11-16-1989)
ASSESSING AND COLLECTING FEES FROM THE OWNERS OR OPERATORS OF LANDFILLS
§ 50.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Environmental Protection Agency as established by the
Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.).
   BOARD. The Pollution Control Board as established by the Environmental
Protection Act. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.).
   COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. A waste, or combination of wastes, which, because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics,
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose
a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise
managed, and which has been identified, by characteristics or listings, as
hazardous pursuant to § 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of
1976, P.A. 94-580 (42 U.S.C. § 6921), or pursuant to Board regulations.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A facility permitted by the Agency for the disposal of
waste on land meeting the requirements of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, P.A. 94-580 (41 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.) and regulations
thereunder, and without creating nuisances or hazards to public health or
safety, by confining the refuse to the smallest practical volume and covering
it with a layer of earth at the conclusion of each day’s operation, or by such
other methods and intervals as the Board may provide by regulation.
   SOLID WASTE. Includes demolition materials, food and industrial processing
waste, garden trash, land cleaning wastes, mixed refuse, noncombustible refuse,
rubbish and trash, as those terms are defined in §§ 3.01 through 3.06 of the
Solid Waste Disposal District Act (ILCS Ch. 70, Act 3105, §§ 1 et seq.).
(1980 Code, § 50.20) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-
1991)
§ 50.21 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FUND CREATED.
   There is hereby created within this county a Solid Waste Management Fund
constituted from fees collected pursuant to §§
50.21 through
50.23.
(1980 Code, § 50.21) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-
1991)
§ 50.22 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF FEE.
   (A)   The county shall assess and collect a fee in the amount established by
resolution from time to time from the owner or operator of each sanitary
landfill in the county permitted or required to be permitted by the agency to
dispose of solid waste if the sanitary landfill is owned, controlled and
operated by a person other than the generator of the waste. If a site is
contiguous to one or more landfills owned or operated by the same person, the
volumes received by each landfill shall be combined for purposes of determining
the fee. The county shall deposit all fees collected into the Solid Waste
Management Fund.
      (1)   If more than 150,000 cubic yards of non-hazardous solid waste is
received at a site in a calendar year, the owner or operator shall pay a fee of
$0.34 per cubic yard on waste received on or before December 31, 1991 and $0.60
per cubic yard on waste received on or after January 1, 1992, unless the owner
or operator weighs the quantity of the solid waste received with a device for
which certification has been obtained under the Weights and Measures Act in
which case the owner or operator shall pay a fee of $0.71 per ton of solid
waste received on or before December 31, 1991 and $1.27 per ton on solid waste
received on or after January 1, 1992.
      (2)   If more than 100,000 cubic yards, but not more than 150,000 cubic
yards of non-hazardous waste is received at a site in a calendar year, the
owner or operator shall pay a fee of $18,750 on waste received on or before
December 31, 1991, and $33,350 on waste received on or after January 1, 1992.
      (3)   If more than 50,000 cubic yards but not more than 100,000 cubic
yards of non-hazardous solid waste is received at a site in a calendar year,
the owner or operator shall pay a fee of $8,500 on waste received on or before
December 31, 1991 and $15,500 on waste received on or after January 1, 1992.
      (4)   If more than 10,000 cubic yards, but not more than 50,000 cubic
yards of non-hazardous solid waste is received at a site in a calendar year,
the owner or operator shall pay a fee of $2,600 on waste received on or before
December 31, 1991, and $4,650 on waste received on or after January 1, 1992.
      (5)   If not more than 10,000 cubic yards of non-hazardous solid waste is
received at a site in a calendar year, the owner or operator shall pay a fee of
$375 on waste received on or before December 31, 1991, and $650 on waste
received on or after January 1, 1992.
   (B)   In accordance with the findings and purposes of the State Solid Waste
Management Act, the fee shall not apply to:
      (1)   Waste which is hazardous;
      (2)   Waste which is a pollution control waste;
      (3)   Waste from recycling, reclamation or reuse processes which have
been approved by the Agency as being designed to remove any contaminant from
wastes so as to render the wastes reusable, provided that the process renders
at least 50% of the waste reusable;
      (4)   Non-hazardous solid waste that is received at a sanitary landfill
and composted or recycled through a process permitted by the Agency; or
      (5)   Any landfill which is permitted by the Agency to receive only
demolition or construction debris or landscape waste.
(1980 Code, § 50.22) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 89-183, adopted 7-20-
1989; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-1991)
§ 50.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The county shall grant exemptions from the fee requirements of this
subchapter for receipt or transport of solid waste meeting all of the following
criteria.
      (1)   Receipt of the solid waste is pursuant to a written contract
between the owner or operator of the sanitary landfill and some other person,
or transport of the solid waste is pursuant to a written contract between the
transporter and some other person.
      (2)   The contract for receipt or transport of solid waste was lawfully
executed on or before May 1, 1988 and by its express terms continues beyond May
1, 1988.
      (3)   The contract for receipt or transport of solid waste establishes a
fixed fee or compensation, does not allow the operator or transporter to pass
the fee through to another party, and does not allow voluntary cancellation or
renegotiation of the compensation or fee during the term of the contract.
      (4)   The contract was lawfully executed before May 1, 1988 and has not
been amended.
   (B)   Exemptions granted under division (A) above shall cause the solid
waste received by an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill pursuant to a
contract exempted under this section to be disregarded in calculating the
volume or weight of solid waste received during a calendar year under this
subchapter.
   (C)   Applications for exemptions under division (A) above may be granted
retroactively. Applications for retroactive or prospective exemptions must be
submitted with proof of satisfaction of all criteria for granting the
exemption, and must be received by the Administrator before June 30, 1988.
   (D)   Exemptions under division (A) above shall expire upon the expiration,
renewal or amendment of the exempted contract, whichever comes first.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill
and transporter of the solid waste to keep accurate records and to prove to the
satisfaction of the County Administrator the volume or weight of solid waste
received under an exemption during a calendar year.
(1980 Code, § 50.23) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-
1991)
§ 50.24 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL REPORT.
   (A)   Every owner or operator of a sanitary landfill permitted, or required
to be permitted by the Agency and located within the county, shall file a
quarterly report specifying the quantities of waste received and the fee
payments due to the county. The quarterly solid waste disposal report shall be
due within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be in
the form provided by the county. The reports shall be tendered to the County
Treasurer.
   (B)   The County Treasurer shall forward a copy of the report to the County
Administrator and the Chairperson of the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 50.24) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-
1991)
§ 50.25 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Every owner or operator of a sanitary landfill shall make payment of
the fees as set forth in this subchapter to the County Treasurer at the time
the report required in §
50.24 is filed.
   (B)   Payments made in accordance with this section shall be deposited by
the County Treasurer in a special fund designated by the County Treasurer as
the Solid Waste Management Fund. This fund shall be audited by the County
Auditor. The County Board shall make expenditures from this fund for payment of
any costs related to solid waste management.
(1980 Code, § 50.25) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-
1991)
§ 50.26 CESSATION OF OPERATION.
   The owner or operator of each sanitary landfill subject to this subchapter
shall notify the county if he or she is intending to terminate the receipt of
solid waste during the calendar year. Unless the termination of operation is by
emergency order of an authorized regulatory agency or court of competent
jurisdiction, notice must be given to the county 90 days in advance of
termination. The notice shall include estimated date of termination.
(1980 Code, § 50.26) (Res. 88-28, adopted 3-17-1988; Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-
1991)
§ 50.27 EXEMPTIONS FROM INCREASES.
   (A)   The county shall grant an exemption from the increase in the fee
requirements of this subchapter (the difference between the fee that begins on
January 1, 1992 and the fee that was paid on or before December 31, 1991) for
receipt or transport of solid waste meeting all of the following criteria.
      (1)   Receipt of the solid waste is pursuant to a written contract
between the owner or operator of the sanitary landfill and some other person,
or transport of the solid waste is pursuant to a written contract between the
transporter and some other person.
      (2)   The contract for receipt of solid waste was lawfully executed on or
before December 1, 1991, and by its express terms continues beyond December 31,
1991.
      (3)   The contract for receipt or transport of solid waste establishes a
fixed fee or compensation, does not allow the operator or transporter to pass
the fee through to another party and does not allow voluntary cancellation or
renegotiation of the compensation or fee during the term of the contract.
      (4)   The contract was lawfully executed before December 1, 1991, and has
not been amended.
   (B)   Exemptions granted under division (A) of this section shall cause the
solid waste received by an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill pursuant to
a contract exempted under this section to have the fees calculated as though
the solid waste were received on or before December 31, 1991.
   (C)   Application for exemptions under division (A) of this section may be
granted retroactively. Application for retroactive or prospective exemptions
must be submitted with proof of satisfaction of all criteria for granting the
exemption and must be received by the Solid Waste Director, County Land Use
Department, before February 28, 1992.
   (D)   Exemption under division (A) of this section shall expire upon the
expiration, renewal or amendment of the exempted contract, whichever comes
first.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill
and transporter of the solid waste to keep accurate records and to prove to the
satisfaction of the county the volume or weight of solid waste received under
any exemption during a calendar year.
(1980 Code, § 50.27) (Res. 91-292, passed 11-21-1991)
ASSESSING AND COLLECTING FEES FROM THE OWNERS OR OPERATORS OF CLEAN
CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS FILL OPERATIONS
§ 50.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless
specified otherwise, all terms have the meanings set forth in the Act.
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5.
   AGENCY. The State Environmental Protection Agency established by the Act in
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.105.
   CCDD. Clean construction or demolition debris.
   CCDD FILL OPERATION. A current or former quarry, mine, or other excavation
where clean construction or demolition debris is used as fill material.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(e)(3))
   CLEAN CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Clean construction or demolition
debris as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160(b).
   COUNTY. The County of Will, Illinois.
   OPERATOR. A person responsible for the operation and maintenance of a CCDD
fill operation. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §
   OWNER. A person who has any direct or indirect interest in a CCDD fill
operation or in land on which a person operates and maintains a CCDD fill
operation. A direct or indirect interest does not include the ownership of
publicly traded stock. The OWNER is the operator if there is no other person
who is operating and maintaining a CCDD fill operation.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(e)(2))
   UNCONTAMINATED SOIL. Uncontaminated soil as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5,
§ 3.160(c) and rules adopted under the Act.
(Ord. 11-45, passed 1-20-2011)
§ 50.41 RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Generally. Copies of all records required to be kept under this
subchapter shall be retained by the site operator for three years and must be
made available at the site during the normal business hours of the operator for
inspection and photocopying by the county.
   (B)   Certification.
      (1)   All records, summaries or reports submitted to the county as
required by this subchapter must be signed by a person responsible for
preparing and reviewing those documents as part of his or her duties in the
regular course of business.
      (2)   Any person signing a document submitted under this chapter shall
make the following certification:
         I certify that this document and all attachments were prepared under
my direction or supervision. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the fill operation, or those persons directly responsible for gathering
the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties under § 44 of the Environmental Protection Act for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations.
(Ord. 11-45, passed 1-20-2011)
§ 50.42 PROCEDURES FOR MAINTAINING RECORDS.
   (A)   Records.
      (1)   The operator of a CCDD fill operation shall keep a daily record of
the CCDD and the uncontaminated soil accepted for use as fill material at the
CCDD fill operation.
      (2)   For purposes of reporting and submitting fees, the operator shall
prepare the following records from the daily record:
         (a)   Monthly fill record; and
         (b)   Quarterly fill summary.
      (3)   Operators of CCDD fill operations shall submit each monthly fill
record, each quarterly fill summary and each fee payment:
         (a)   On the basis of weight, in tons, when the operator has weighed
the CCDD and the uncontaminated soil received with a device for which
certification has been obtained under the Weights and Measures Act (ILCS Ch.
225, Act 470); or
         (b)   On the basis of volume, as measured in cubic yards, when the
measurement of the CCDD and the uncontaminated soil received is based on
volume.
      (4)   Each monthly fill record and quarterly fill summary submitted to
the county must be on forms and in a format prescribed and provided by the
county.
      (5)   The monthly fill record and quarterly fill summary must be kept in
accordance with this section.
   (B)   Daily fill record.
      (1)   The daily fill records must be maintained at the site of the CCDD
fill operation and must include the agency designated site number and the site
name.
      (2)   For each load of CCDD or uncontaminated soil accepted for use as
fill material at the CCDD fill operation, the following information must be
recorded in the daily fill record, in addition to any other information
required by the Act and rules adopted under the Act:
         (a)   The date and day of the week the load was accepted; and
         (b)   The quantity, in tons weighed or cubic yards measured, of CCDD
or uncontaminated soil accepted for use as fill material at the CCDD fill
operation.
   (C)   Monthly fill record.
      (1)   Monthly fill records must be maintained at the site of the CCDD
fill operation and must include the following information:
         (a)   The agency designated site number, the site name and the
calendar month for which the record applies; and
         (b)   The total quantity of CCDD and uncontaminated soil accepted for
use as fill material, in tons weighed or cubic yards measured, for each day of
the calendar month.
      (2)   On or before April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15, the
owner or operator of the CCDD fill operation shall submit to the county the
monthly fill records for the preceding three calendar months. The monthly
records must be submitted to the address in §
50.43(D).
      (3)   Upon issuance of a valid CCDD fill operation permit pursuant to 35
III. Adm. Code 1100, and until termination of the permit, the owner or operator
of the CCDD fill operation shall submit monthly fill records to the county in
accordance with this section, regardless of the amount of CCDD and
uncontaminated soil accepted for use as fill material by the CCDD fill
operation.
   (D)   Quarterly fill summary.
      (1)   The quarterly fill summary must be maintained at the site of the
CCDD fill operation and must include the following information:
         (a)   The agency designated site number, the site name and the
calendar quarter for which the summary applies;
         (b)   The total quantity of CCDD and uncontaminated soil accepted for
use as fill material in tons weighed or cubic yards measured:
            1.   For each month of the calendar quarter;
            2.   For the entire calendar quarter; and
            3.   For the calendar year-to date.
         (c)   The fee rate applicable under ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 22.51b(f).
      (2)   The quarterly fill summary must be received by the county on or
before April 15, July 15, October 15 and January 15 of each year and must cover
the preceding three calendar months. The quarterly fill summary must be
submitted to the address in §
50.43(D).
      (3)   Upon issuance of a valid CCDD fill operation permit pursuant to 35
III. Adm. Code 1100, and until termination of the permit, the owner or operator
of the CCDD fill operation shall submit a quarterly fill summary to the county
in accordance with this section, regardless of the amount of CCDD and
uncontaminated soil accepted for use as fill material by the CCDD fill
operation.
   (E)   Revisions to monthly fill record and quarterly fill summary. When
errors in the amount of the fee due under ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 22.51b(f) or
errors in the amount of CCDD and uncontaminated soil accepted for use as fill
material are discovered in any of the records required to be kept under this
subchapter, a revised monthly fill record and quarterly fill summary reflecting
the corrections must be completed by the site operator and submitted to the
county. The revised monthly fill record and quarterly fill summary, and any
payment due the county, must be received by the county no later than the
seventh day following the discovery of the error. If the revision results in an
overpayment, the site operator shall show the adjustment on the next quarterly
fill summary.
(Ord. 11-45, passed 1-20-2011)
§ 50.43 PROCEDURES FOR PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Quarterly submission of payment.
      (1)   Payment of the fee due under ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 22.51b(f) must
be made on quarterly basis with the submission of the quarterly fill summary.
The payment must be received by the county on or before April 15, July 15,
October 15 and January 15 of each year and must cover the preceding three
calendar months.
      (2)   The fee payment due must be calculated by multiplying the quantity
of CCDD and uncontaminated soil accepted for use as fill material, in tons
weighed or cubic yards measured, as reported on the quarterly fill summary,
times the applicable rate in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 22.51b(f).
   (B)   Fee usage. Fees from this subchapter will be deposited into the County
Solid Waste Management Fund to be used for inspection, investigation or
enforcement functions performed under the county’s delegation agreement with
the agency.
   (C)   Amount of fee to be paid.
      (1)   Fees established under this subchapter shall be $0.20 per cubic
yard of clean construction or demolition debris or uncontaminated soil accepted
by the clean construction or demolition debris fill operation, unless the owner
or operator weights the quantity of the clean construction or demolition debris
or uncontaminated soil with a device for which certification has been obtained
under the Weights and Measures Act, in which case the fee shall be $0.14 per
ton of clean construction or demolition debris or uncontaminated soil.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section:
         CLEAN CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS FILL OPERATION. Has the same
meaning as clean construction or demolition debris fill operation under ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51.
         UNCONTAMINATED SOIL. Has the same meaning as uncontaminated soil under
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160.
   (D)   Manner of payment. Payment must be made by check or money order
payable to the County Land Use Department. Payment and forms must be mailed to
the county at the following address:
   Resource Recovery and Energy Division
   Will County Land Use Department
   58 E. Clinton Street, Suite 500
   Joliet, IL 60432
(Ord. 11-45, passed 1-20-2011; Am. Ord. 21- 353, passed 10-21-2021)
§ 50.44 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect on March 1, 2011.
(Ord. 11-45, passed 1-20-2011)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Every person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not more than $500. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
(1980 Code, § 50.99) (Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240 (1972) p. 51, adopted 1-19-1972)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Residential and/or industrial subdivisions
   
51.04   Sewage permits
   
51.05   Sewage treatment or disposal systems
   
51.06   Inspections
   
51.07   Transporting and disposing of waste from sewage treatment or disposal
systems
   
51.08   Individual mechanical sewage treatment systems
   
51.09   Limestone and ground water requirements
   
51.10   Contractor’s license and examination
   
51.11    Enforcement
   
51.12    Emergencies
   
51.13    Hearings and variances
 
   
51.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Fee Schedule
   
Appendix B: Soil Evaluation Procedure
   
Appendix C: Tables
§ 51.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to amend the minimum requirements,
design, location, installation, construction, maintenance, and operation of all
sewage treatment or disposal systems and appurtenances, requiring the approval
of the Health Authority before final subdivision approval is issued, and
repealing those parts of the Will County Sewage Treatment and Disposal
Ordinance approved August 5, 1963, amended June 14, 1976, and amended April 25,
1979, July 16,1987, September 25,1992, October 17,1996, amended April 18, 2002,
August 1, 2005, and amended November 6, 2007 and February 28, 2011, October 16,
2014 and August 18, 2016 which are in conflict herewith and fixing penalties.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is also to establish a fee schedule for
sewage treatment and disposal related fees and to provide for the incorporation
by reference of the standards of the Illinois Department of Public Health as
set forth in its rules and regulations entitled Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act and Code, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 225 and any subsequent revisions and
ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §5-15010 and ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1052 and any
subsequent revisions. All fees are non-refundable.
(1980 Code, §51.01) (Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-
2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014; Ord. 16-235, passed 8-18-2016)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEDROOM. Any room within the building that has a privacy door and closet
that can be used for sleeping purposes or could be converted into a room used
for sleeping purposes, such as a den or sewing room.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface water run-off and sewage.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Health Officer and/or the Executive Officer of the
County Health Department or their duly authorized representatives.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste substance or a
combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade or business or from the development, processing or recovery of any
natural resources.
   OTHER WASTES. Garbage, refuse, wood residues, sand, lime, cinders, ashes,
offal, night soil, silt, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids, chemicals and all other
substances not sewage or industrial waste which may cause or tend to cause
pollution.
   PERMIT.  A written permit issued by the Health Authority or its authorized
representative permitting the construction, repair, or alteration of a sewage
treatment or disposal system under this chapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, broker, corporation, association
or organization.
   PORTABLE TOILET. A self-contained portable unit equipped with a waste
receiving holding container that may be moved or transported from site to site.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters shall not be admitted.
   SEPTAGE. The solid and liquid waste removed from a sewage treatment or
disposal system (excluding wastes from oil and grease interceptors and
associated holding tanks, grease traps and sewage treatment plant sludge).
   SEWAGE. The water-carried human or animal wastes from residences, buildings,
industrial establishments or other places, together with any ground water
infiltration and surface water that may be present. The admixture with sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes shall also be considered sewage.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT or DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any sewage handling or treatment
facility receiving domestic sewage and having a ground surface discharge or any
sewage handling or treatment facility receiving domestic sewage and having no
ground surface discharge.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR. Any person
constructing, installing, repairing, modifying or maintaining sewage treatment
or disposal systems.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE. An
annual license issued by the Health Authority to all sewage treatment or
disposal installation contractors engaged in the installation of sewage
treatment or disposal systems within the county. This license shall expire on
December 31 of the year it is issued.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL SYSTEM PUMPING CONTRACTOR. Any person who
cleans or pumps waste from a sewage treatment or disposal system or portable
toilet unit or hauls or disposes of waste removed therefrom.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE. An
annual license issued by the Health Authority to all sewage treatment or
disposal installation contractors engaged in the construction, installation,
repair, and modification of sewage treatment or disposal systems within the
county. This license shall expire on December 31 of the year it is issued.
   SOIL CLASSIFIER. One of the following:
      (1)   A certified professional soil classifier (CPSC) who is certified by
the Illinois Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA); or a certified soil
classifier with the American Registry of Certified Professionals in Agronomy,
Crops and Soils (ARCPACS); or
      (2)   A person who is a full member or associate member of the State Soil
Classifiers Association (ISCA), provided that direct supervision is provided to
this person by an ISCA certified professional soil classifier or ARCPACS
certified soil classifier who accompanies the person on at least 25% of the
soil investigations and reviews and signs all of that person’s soil
investigation reports.
   STORMWATER. Any water resulting from precipitation mixed with the
accumulation of dirt, soil and other precipitation falls or flows.
(1980 Code, §51.02) (1963 pp. 360—361, adopted 8--1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, pp.
257—258; Sup. Rec. Bk.     , pp. 261—267, adopted 6-14-1976) (Res. 87-74,
passed 7-16- 1987; Res. 79-59, adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 05-340, adopted 7-21-
2005; Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-
279, passed 10-16-2014; Ord. 16-235, passed 8-18-2016)
§ 51.03 RESIDENTIAL AND/OR INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Subdivisions where private sewage treatment and disposal systems are
to be used, must be approved by the Health Authority. Subdivisions utilizing
public sewage treatment and disposal facilities located in unincorporated areas
of the county must be approved by the Health Authority. There shall be a plat
review fee for all proposed subdivisions. A plat review fee for all
subdivisions must be submitted prior to review by the Environmental Health
Staff. The fee shall be as designated in
Appendix A . All fees are non-refundable.
   (B)   Any subdivision being developed which is in part within 1,320 feet of
an existing available approved sewer shall not be developed by utilizing septic
tanks and ground absorption trench systems or individual mechanical sewage
treatment systems unless the lots in that subdivision are two and one-half
acres or more in area of which at least three-fourths of each lot consist of
solid land surface outside of a floodplain or wetland. An approved sewer, for
the purpose of this section, is a sewer connected to and served by a sewage
treatment plant operated by the county, township, a municipality, sanitary
district or privately owned utility company.
   (C)   In subdivisions not falling within the requirements of division (B)
above, all individual sewage disposal systems shall be designed based upon the
soil class as identified by an on-site soil evaluation/classification. This
evaluation shall be conducted by the Health Authority or soil classifier or
Illinois licensed professional engineer on each of the lots in the proposed
subdivision. The latest official county soil maps shall be used to determine
the names and numbers of each soil class. Soil classes shall be as described in
the County Soil Report 80.
   (D)   Soil evaluation. The soil evaluation procedures are set forth in
Appendix B. There shall be a fee for each soil evaluation conducted by the
Health Authority. The fee shall be paid in advance and shall be made payable to
the County Health Department. This fee is non-refundable. The fee shall be as
designated in
Appendix A .
      (1)   
Appendix C, Table 1  shall be used to group county soils into categories based
on their similar, soil permeability and textural class.
      (2)   
Appendix C, Table 2  shall be used in establishing the minimum lot size and
minimum lot width where a private well or public water supply is used.
Appendix C, Table 2  shall be used in establishing the minimum size of the
ground absorption trench system based upon the soil categories listed in
Appendix C, Table 1 . The minimum lot size shall exclude any easement or other
conditions that would limit the area available to be used for ground absorption
trench systems. The minimum lot widths as set forth in
Appendix C, Table 2  will be waived on all lots fronting on a cul-de-sac and
lots fronting on a curved portion of a street. However, the minimum lot width
as set forth in
Appendix C, Table 2  must be available in that area designated for the
installation of the ground absorption trench systems.
   (E)   If the proposed final topography of any lot within the subdivision
will change the elevation by more than one foot in the area to be used for the
installation of the ground absorption trench system, a second on site soil
evaluation, to be performed by a soil classifier or Illinois licensed
professional engineer, will be required after the final grading is accomplished
and prior to final approval of the subdivision. Based upon the results of this
second on site soil evaluation, the lot sizes shall be required as outlined in
Appendix C, Table 2 .
   (F)   The latest official soil maps for the county as prepared by the Soil
Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture shall be
utilized in evaluating all proposed subdivisions.
      (1)   The following soils have been determined as having specific
limitations regarding the satisfactory operation of ground absorption trench
systems. These soils are frequently or continually waterlogged and are subject
to periodic inundation by stormwater runoff. They have a reasonably high water
table which tends to impair the continuous satisfactory operation of ground
absorption trench systems.
      (2)   The installation of ground absorption trench systems in the
following soils shall not be permitted unless an engineering plan providing
specific solutions which will permanently overcome the ground water conditions
is received and approved by the Health Authority.
67  Harpster Silty Clay Loam
69  Milford Silty Clay Loam
103 Houghton Muck
125 Selma Loam
152 Drummer Silty Clay Loam
153 Pella Silty Clay Loam
197 Troxel Silt Loam
201 Gilford Fine Silt Loam
206 Thorp Silt Loam
232 Ashkum Silty Clay Loam
235 Bryce Silty Clay
238 Rantoul Silty Clay
317 Millsdale Silty Clay Loam
329 Will Silty Clay Loam
330 Peotone Silty Clay Loam
356 El Paso Silty Clay Loam
513 Granby Fine Sandy Loam
 
   (G)   Proposed subdivision review data. The following pertinent data must be
submitted to the Health Authority by a professional engineer, architect or
surveyor. This data must be acceptable to the Health Authority before final
approval is given on the subdivision:
      (1)   A legal description of the site;
      (2)   Plat showing the subdivision of the site into individual lots,
dimensions of lots, portions of lots subject to setback and easement
requirements;
      (3)   Topographical map showing original and final contours at two-foot
intervals shall be superimposed on the plat of subdivision;
      (4)   Data on present and past use of the site, existing vegetation,
crops, trees existing well and septic system locations and the like;
      (5)   All available and known information on the existing drainage system
in the proposed subdivisions, both surface and underground. Where tiles exist,
their size, location and outlets shall be indicated on the topographical map;
      (6)   A soil overlay based on the latest official soil maps for the
county as prepared by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture;
      (7)   Soil boring tests to a maximum depth of 32 feet to determine soil
cover over limestone rock may be required on each subdivision, unless the
information is available through the State Geological Survey Division; and
      (8)   A detailed description and specific location of the water supply
and sewage disposal system on each lot in the proposed subdivision.
   (H)   All undeveloped lots located in subdivisions which were legally
recorded prior to July 16, 1987, amendments to this section, will not be
affected by the minimum lot sizes as set forth in the July 16, 1987 amendments.
In the event the existing lot is reduced in size, all restrictions herein set
forth in the July 16, 1987 amendments shall be applicable.
   (I)   All parcels of land located other than in legally recorded
subdivisions which were in existence prior to the passage of the July 16, 1987
amendments will not be affected by the minimum lot sizes as set forth in the
July 16, 1987 amendments. In the event an existing parcel of land is reduced in
size, all restrictions set forth in the July 16, 1987 amendments shall be
applicable.
   (J)   All existing subdivision lots and parcels of land as outlined in
divisions (I) and (J) above will be accepted by the Health Authority for the
installation of sewage treatment or disposal systems consisting of septic tanks
and ground absorption trenches, only if all other requirements of this chapter
can be fully complied with.
(1980 Code, § 51.03) (1963 pp. 361-363, adopted 8- -1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235,
pp. 258-259) (Res. 87-74, passed 7-16-1987; Res. 75-79, adopted 4-25-1979; Res.
92-207, passed 9-17-1992; Res. 05-340, adopted 7-21-2005; Res. 07-0412, adopted
10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014)
Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 SEWAGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Before an application for a new sewage permit can be received by the
Health Authority, an on-site soil evaluation/classification must be obtained by
methods as prescribed in
Appendix B of this chapter or as required by Section 905.55 of the Illinois
Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code. A
legal description and a plat of survey must be submitted to the Health
Authority prior to the on-site soil evaluation.
   (B)   An approved and completed application must be submitted to the Health
Authority in triplicate for a sewage permit. This Department requires a minimum
three day permit review period and may require additional reasonable review
time as needed to ensure the system complies with all current state and local
regulations. The application shall be on forms provided by the Health Authority
and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The location and legal description of the property involved;
      (2)   The owner’s name, mailing address and telephone number;
      (3)   The size and area of lot or building site;
      (4)   In all residential buildings, the number of bedrooms, water
closets, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, clothes washing machines, garbage
grinders or disposals and all other plumbing fixtures requiring water;
      (5)   In all buildings other than residential, the number of water
closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, showers and any other fixtures or process
which requires water;
      (6)   A description including sizes of each component of the proposed
sewage treatment or disposal systems;
      (7)   The private sewage disposal system contractor’s name, IDPH License
#, address, and telephone number;
      (8)   The date and signature of applicant/owner;
      (9)   The results of the onsite soil evaluation/classification, date of
tests and name of the Health Authority representative who supervised the tests
or soil classifier or state licensed professional engineer; and
      (10)   A scale plat plan showing the actual location of all pertinent
data such as well or wells on the property and in the general area, all
buildings and permanent structures on the property, property lines, the
proposed location of the sewage system and a complete layout of the sewage
system, all driveways or other paved areas and other situations which could
affect the operation or maintenance of the sewage treatment or disposal system.
   (C)   A sewage permit must be issued by the Health Authority before the
commencement of construction or repair of a sewage treatment or disposal system
takes place. The permit is not transferable to another owner nor is it useable
by the same owner at some other location. All sewage permits will be voided one
year after the date of issue. A fee shall be charged for the re-issuance of any
permit which has been voided for reason of being older than one year. All fees
are designated in
Appendix A .
   (D)   Should the elevation of the original ground in the area to be used for
the installation of the ground absorption trench system be changed by filling
or excavating to a degree that would render the on-site soil evaluation/
classification useless, it shall be required that a soil classifier or Illinois
licensed professional engineer preform an additional soil evaluation. The type
and size of the sewage disposal system, if allowed, will be based on the
results of this evaluation.
   (E)   Each application for permit for the installation of a new septic
system shall be accompanied by a fee designated in
Appendix A . This fee is non-refundable in the event that an individual decides
not to construct the proposed septic system. An application for the
installation of an individual mechanical sewage treatment system shall be
accompanied by a permit fee designated in
Appendix A . This fee is non-refundable in the event that an individual decides
not to construct the proposed sewage treatment or disposal system. A fee shall
be charged for permits to repair, extend or alter an existing sewage treatment
or disposal system. All fees are designated in
Appendix A .
(1980 Code, § 51.04) (1963 pp. 363—364, adopted 8- -1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235,
p. 259; Sup. Rec. Bk.     , pp. 261—267, adopted 6-14-1976) (Res. 79-59,
adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 05-340, adopted 7-21-2005; Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-
2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014) Penalty,
see §
51.99
§ 51.05 SEWAGE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All sewage treatment or disposal systems to be installed in the county
must comply with the requirements of this chapter and must comply with State
Department of Public Health, Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and
all other applicable laws or ordinances.
   (B)   A sewage permit must be issued by the Health Authority before the
commencement of construction or repair of a sewage treatment or disposal
system.
   (C)   In addition, for sewage disposal systems that would require a permit
from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), an approval from the
Environmental Protection Agency must be obtained before a permit can be issued
by the Health Authority regarding the installation or repair of a sewage
treatment or disposal system designed to discharge a liquid effluent to to the
Waters of the United States.
   (D)   All sewage treatment or disposal units which have liquid surfaces open
to the free atmosphere must be located at least 200 feet from the property
line. Utility easements, railroad easements, statutorily dedicated roadways,
rivers and other bodies of water may be used to comply with the 200-foot
requirement.
   (E)   All sewage treatment and disposal systems shall be operated and
maintained in a neat and orderly manner so that no objectionable health
hazards, odor conditions or unsanitary conditions exist and shall be operated
and maintained with all other applicable laws or ordinances.
   (F)   A building permit shall not be issued in the county on construction
which will require a sewage treatment or disposal system, until the Health
Authority has issued a written sewage permit authorizing the installation of
the system. A building being served by a sewage treatment or disposal system
shall not be occupied until the Health Authority has provided its final
approval on the installation of the sewage treatment or disposal system.
   (G)   A satisfactory on-site soil evaluation/classification must be obtained
on each lot before a sewage permit can be issued for the installation of
individual sewage disposal systems consisting of ground absorption trenches.
The minimum requirements for each lot shall be determined by the criteria
listed in
Appendix C, Table 2  or by a soil classifier or Illinois licensed professional
engineer.
   (H)   The following minimum requirements shall apply to the installation or
repair of all individual sewage disposal systems constructed to serve a single-
family dwelling.
      (1)   (a)   All septic tanks must have the approval of the State
Department of Public Health. Any tank constructed in place must meet the
requirements of § 905.40 of the State Department of Public Health Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code. Septic tanks installed to serve a
three- bedroom home or less must have a liquid capacity of 1,000 gallons. For
each bedroom in excess of three bedrooms, an additional 250 gallons must be
added to the liquid capacity of the tank. If a garbage disposal or grinder is
provided, the total liquid capacity of the tank must be increased by 50%.
         (b)   Whenever more than one tank is to be installed, they must be
installed in series with the first tank having between one-half and two-thirds
the total capacity provided.
      (2)   Distribution boxes must be installed in accordance with § 905.50 of
the State Department of Public Health, Private Sewage Disposal Act and Code.
   (I)   For each bedroom in excess of three bedrooms, an additional 100 linear
feet of a 36-inch wide trench or equivalent shall be added to the system. If a
garbage disposal or grinder is provided, an additional 100 linear feet of a 36-
inch wide trench or equivalent shall be added to the system.
   (J)   If the contour of the ground requires a hillside or step-down type of
absorption system, then a serial type installation shall be made.
   (K)   The following rules shall apply to all ground absorption trench
installations.
      (1)   Seepage area shall be 900 square feet, minimum.
      (2)   A minimum four-inch inside diameter tile must be installed for
every linear foot of a conventional perforated pipe trench system.
      (3)   Conventional tile shall be perforated or open joint tile. Where
open joint tile is used, the tile sections shall be spaced not less than one-
fourth inch nor more than one-half inch apart. Perforated piping (with the
exception of eight-inch or ten-inch gravel- less ground absorption trench
installations) shall have one-half to one-fourth-inch diameter openings on
three- to five-inch centers with a minimum two rows. Gravel-less ground
absorption trench installations must meet the requirements of § 905.60, of the
State Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and
Code.
      (4)   A maximum length for any one trench will be 100 feet or sized
according to the installation guidelines approved by Illinois Department of
Public Health.
      (5)   Conventional trenches shall not be constructed closer than ten feet
on center unless prior approval has been granted for lesser distances by the
Health Authority.
      (6)   The bottom of the subsurface seepage field, each trench and its
distribution line shall be level. Level for this part shall mean plus or minus
one-half inch in any direction over the entire area of the subsurface seepage
system.
      (7)   The trench shall be of an approved width according to Health
Authority regulations and industry standards.
      (8)   There shall be installed in each conventional gravel trench at
least eight inches of gravel or similar material below the tile and two inches
above the tile. This gravel or similar material shall have sufficient voids and
have a minimum diameter of one and one-half inches.
      (9)   Subsurface trench systems must be thoroughly covered before the
backfilling with a six- inch layer of uncompacted straw or untreated building
paper or other pervious and/or biodegradable material to support the backfill
unless not required by manufacturer’s installation guidelines.
      (10)   There shall be a minimum cover of backfill over the trenches of
six inches and a maximum cover of 18 inches. The bottom of the trenches shall
not be more than 33 inches below finished grade.
      (11)   All absorption trench systems shall be backfilled, weather
permitting, within 48 hours after approval has been issued by the Health
Authority.
      (12)   Other types of subsurface seepage systems approved by State
Department Public Health § 905.60 are incorporated by reference. Any
alternative methods for the construction of ground absorption trench systems
must be approved by the State Department of Public Health and the Health
Authority.
   (L)   Location of the components of a sewage disposal system shall conform
with the minimum distances given in
Appendix C, Table 3 .
   (M)   The following sewer types and construction shall be used.
      (1)   All sewers from the house to the septic tank shall be four-inch
diameter construction of cast iron with mechanical joints or Schedule 40 PVC
with water tight joints whenever any portion of this sewer is within ten feet
of a water well. This sewer can be coot ductile iron pipe, vitrified clay sewer
pipe or Schedule 40 PVC plastic pipe or its equivalent, provided there is no
water well located within 50 feet of any portion of this sewer. The joints
shall be root-proof and watertight.
      (2)   Sewer pipes from the tank to the distribution boxes and from the
distribution boxes to each individual soil absorption trench shall be vitrified
clay pipe or Schedule 40 PVC plastic pipe or its equivalent. The joints shall
be root-proof and watertight.
      (3)   All solid pipes carrying domestic sewage by gravity flow shall have
a nominal diameter of at least four inches and minimum slope of 12 inches per
100 feet. Solid header lines used for equal distribution shall be level.
      (4)   Other materials may be approved by the Health Authority as they are
developed, provided that sufficient operational and technical data is submitted
so that the Health Authority is assured that the materials are suitable to
provide an acceptable installation.
   (N)   The installation of ground absorption trenches in ground that has been
recently filled in excess of one foot is prohibited.
   (O)   The excavation and refilling of lots in the area designated for the
installation of a ground absorption trench system is not acceptable.
   (P)   Sewers used under driveways or other areas subject to heavy loads
shall be Schedule 40 equivalent or greater. This portion of the pipe may be
packed in gravel for reinforcement.
   (Q)   The construction of driveways, parking areas, paved areas, garages,
sheds, patios, above-ground swimming pools or other building or structures of a
permanent nature over any portion, or within ten feet, of the ground absorption
trench system or septic tank is prohibited. In-ground swimming pools shall not
be located closer than 25 feet to any portion of the septic system.
   (R)   Individual sewage treatment or disposal systems are designed for the
sole purpose of treatment and disposing of sewage waste only. Under no
circumstances shall liquids from the following facilities be discharged into
any portion of the sewage system: downspouts, water softeners, footing or
foundation drains or other surface run-off.
   (S)   Footing or foundation drainage must be discharged to the surface of
the ground by gravity, provided the contour of the ground is satisfactory for
gravity flow. If the contour of the ground will not permit this type of
drainage to flow by gravity to the surface of the ground, then it will be
necessary to install a sump hole and electric sump pump to serve this drainage.
This sump hole and sump pump cannot be the same sump hole and sump pump used
for the conveyance of laundry waste, floor waste, shower waste or any other
sewage waste into the sewage system. This prohibits the use of so-called
butterfly valves for this purpose, and where two sump holes and pumps are
necessary, they must be located a minimum of ten feet apart unless one of the
sump holes contains a properly constructed ejector pit.
   (T)   Where sewage disposal systems consisting of ground absorption trenches
are proposed for buildings consisting of more than one-family dwelling, the
following minimum requirements apply.
      (1)   An on-site soil evaluation/classification must be conducted by
methods prescribed in
Appendix B  or by a soil classifier or Illinois licensed professional engineer.
      (2)   The lot or lots involved must be of sufficient area to support a
series of individual sewage systems or a combined sewage disposal system
consisting of a minimum system for each dwelling unit.
      (3)   In all cases the decision regarding construction in this category
shall be made by the Health Authority.
   (U)   The construction of privies, chemical toilets and outside toilets of
any type to be used for the disposal of sewage is prohibited. The Health
Authority may authorize the construction of a sanitary pit privy, vault privy,
septic privy, chemical toilet, recirculating toilet, incinerator toilet and
compost toilet in conformance with § 905.130 of the State Department of Public
Health Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code to serve forest
preserves, park districts, summer camps, seasonal use facilities or cottages,
and construction projects if they deem it advisable. In these cases, the summer
camps or cottages must not be used as year-round dwellings and the construction
projects will be for temporary periods only.
   (V)   All existing unsanitary privies are prohibited and must be replaced
with some approved means of sewage disposal approved by the County Health
Department.
   (W)   Holding tanks at least 1,000 gallons or greater capacity are approved
for private sewage disposal only under the following circumstances:
      (1)   As a temporary measure while awaiting the extension of a sanitary
sewer. This temporary condition shall not exceed one year in length;
      (2)   As a sanitary dumping station to receive the discharge from holding
facilities on recreational vehicles;
      (3)   The holding tank shall be designed and constructed as a septic tank
except that the outlet shall be permanently sealed;
      (4)   Holding tanks installed shall be converted to a conventional sewage
disposal system if a sanitary sewer has not been extended to serve the property
within one year of the original installation and
      (5)   Holding tanks used to receive waste products such as automotive
grease, oils or solvents and chemicals, which are otherwise not allowed to be
discharged into a private sewage disposal system. These waste products shall be
handled according to rules for disposal of oil, gas and grease promulgated
under EPA or according to 35 Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle G or shall be taken to an
oil and gas reclamation center. Holding tanks to be used as described in this
section shall be Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. certified and constructed of
materials approved for gas and oil interceptors as specified in 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890.520, and shall be properly anchored to prevent flotation.
   (X)   Septic tanks, aerobic treatment plants, lift stations, cesspools, pit
privies, disinfection chambers, sample ports, and holding tanks that are no
longer in use shall be completely pumped. The floor and walls shall be cracked
or crumbled so the tank or tanks will not hold water, and the tank(s) shall be
filled with sand or soil. If the tank(s) is removed from the ground, the
excavation shall be filled with soil. Tank abandonment activities must be
inspected by the Health Authority, and the applicable fee (see Appendix A)
shall be submitted for each tank abandonment inspection.
   (Y)   When considering proposals for experimental systems, the Health
Authority shall not be restricted by this chapter provided that:
      (1)   The experimental system proposed is approved by the State
Department of Public Health;
      (2)   The experimental system proposed is attempting to correct an
existing environmental and/or health problem; or
      (3)   The experimental system proposed is for new construction where it
has been determined that a disposal system meeting the requirements of this
chapter could be installed in the event of failure of the experiment.
   (Z)   (1)   Where sewage disposal systems consisting of ground absorption
trenches are proposed for nonresidential establishments, the Health Authority
will base the size of the system on the estimated quantity of sewage flow. The
minimum sewage disposal system of a nonresidential establishment shall consist
of a 1,000 gallon septic tank and 900 square feet of horizontal trench area
consisting of 300 lineal feet of 36-inch wide ground absorption trench system
or equivalent.
      (2)   
Appendix C, Table 4  shall be used to determine the minimum ground absorption
trench system for nonresidential establishments regardless of the creation date
of the lot or parcel.
(1980 Code, §51.05) (1963 pp. 365—370, adopted 8- -1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235,
pp. 259—261; Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 261—267, adopted 6-14-1976) (Res. 87-74,
passed 7-16- 1987; Res. 79-59, adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 07- 412, adopted 10-18-
2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014; Ord. 16-
235, passed 8-18-2016) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Before any portion of a sewage treatment or disposal system installed
or repaired by a licensed septic installer or homeowner is covered and/or
placed in operation, an inspection and approval must first be obtained from the
Health Authority. Incremental inspections of a new septic system installed by a
homeowner are required by the Health Authority with the initial inspection
consisting of the tank and first line installation only. In addition the Health
Authority may inquire incremental or partial inspections of septic systems
installed or repaired by a homeowner or a licensed septic installer.
   (B)   The Health Authority shall be allowed to inspect or investigate the
installation of a sewage treatment or disposal system whenever it is deemed
necessary. If in the opinion of the Health Authority the construction should
cease due to violation of this chapter, the Health Authority is authorized to
order the construction to cease. The resuming of construction shall not take
place until written approval is received from the Health Authority.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the owner and/or installer to notify the
Health Authority when the system is ready for a final inspection. The owner or
installer shall provide advanced notification for inspections, preferably 24
hours.
(1980 Code, § 51.06) (1963 p. 370, adopted 8- -1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p.
262) (Res. 79-59, adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 11-
74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 TRANSPORTING AND DISPOSING OF WASTE FROM SEWAGE TREATMENT OR DISPOSAL
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The collection, storage, transportation and disposal of all domestic
septage including portable toilet waste shall be handled in accordance with
Illinois Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and
Code and 40 C.F.R. § 503, Standards for the Use or Disposal of Sewage Sludge.
   (B)   The name under which the business is conducted and the town of company
origin and telephone number of the business shall be painted on each side of
every pumper truck operated by the contractor. The company name shall be easily
legible and the letters shall be at least eight inches high in contrasting
colors.
   (C)   Equipment shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Health
Authority at any reasonable time, and upon request, shall be available for
inspection at a designated location.
   (D)   Each vehicle used for collection and transportation of waste shall be
equipped with a leak proof and tightly sealed tank for septage hauling. The
interior and exterior sections of all portable containers, pumps, hoses, tools
or other implements which have been contaminated shall be rinsed clean after
each use and the rinsing shall be disposed of such that no health hazard or
nuisance results. Trucks and tanks shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The vehicle shall be equipped with either a vacuum pump or other
type of pump which is self-priming and will not allow any seepage from the
diaphragm or other packing glands.
      (2)   The discharge nozzle shall be located so that there is no flow or
drip onto any portion of the truck.
      (3)   The drainage nozzle shall be capped and leak proof when not in use.
   (E)   Septage disposal. Each licensed contractor engaged in septage disposal
shall file with the Health Authority, each year, a statement of the sites and
methods of disposal of septage. These methods must comply with 40 C.F.R. § 503,
Standards for the Use or Disposal of Sewage Sludge.
(1980 Code, § 51.07) (1963 pp. 370—372, adopted 8- -1963) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 235,
p. 262) (Res. 87-74, passed 7-16-1987; Res. 79-59, adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 07-
412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-
16-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 INDIVIDUAL MECHANICAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
   (A)   New and repaired individual mechanical sewage treatment systems shall
be approved/permitted by the Health Authority provided they meet the following
specifications:
      (1)   Approval for coverage under NPDES Permit, if required.
      (2)   A site inspection of the property is conducted by this Department
prior to permitting.
      (3)   A trash tank or compartment is installed prior to the aeration
tank;
      (4)   An aeration chamber which has sufficient capacity to treat a
minimum of 500 gallons per day of domestic sewage for a four bedroom home and
an additional 150 gallons per day for each additional bedroom;
      (5)   A final settling compartment with sludge return facilities of
sufficient size to settle the effluent from the aeration chamber;
      (6)   A subsurface sand filter having an area of at least 100 square feet
per bedroom with a minimum of 300 square feet and having an effective sand
depth of 24 inches. The filter sand shall have an effective size of one-half to
two millimeters and a uniformity coefficient of not greater than three and one-
half. It shall be clean and free of clay and silt. Approved alternative
technology may be considered for use on the place of an approved sand filter at
the discretion of the Health Authority.
      (7)   A chlorine contact chamber which will provide a holding time of at
least 30 minutes based on two and one half times the average flow and
chlorinator which will provide a chlorine residual in the final effluent in
accordance with appropriate regulation or discharge permits. The chlorine
contact chamber shall be easily accessible and shall extend at least two inches
above the ground surface. Alternative disinfection systems approved by IDPH may
also be permitted.
   (B)   A clearly labeled warning light or buzzer must be provided that warns
the owner of the failure of any electrical or mechanical component of the
system and must be in accordance with IDPH requirements.
   (C)   The owner is required to obtain and maintain a service contract to be
in effect at all times with copies being supplied to the Health Authority to
assure that proper service and maintenance of the mechanical system shall be on
a continuing basis. Renewal of the service contract is mandatory or the
replacement with another service contract. All renewal notices or certificates
and termination notices must be supplied to the Health Authority. The service
contract for maintenance must be in accordance with IDPH and other applicable
regulations and must include at least the following items:
      (1)   Routine inspection of the unit at least every six months or as
required by other applicable regulations; and
      (2)   Provisions for emergency services within 24 hours of notification
that the mechanical unit is not properly functioning.
   (D)   No person shall discharge effluent from an existing individual
mechanical sewage treatment system or discharging aerobic system not required
to be covered under NPDES Permit without a valid County Health Department
(WCHD) permit to discharge. The owner is required to obtain an annual WCHD
permit to discharge any individual mechanical sewage treatment system with a
final effluent. The WCHD permit application must be accompanied by an annual
fee as delineated in Appendix A, payable to the County Health Department and
must be received prior to January 15 of each year. Unpaid fees will be turned
over to collections or turned over to the State’s Attorney for violation of
this chapter. Those surface discharging private sewage disposal systems that
require coverage under a general or individual NPDES permit must also be in
compliance with Section 905.115 - NPDES Permit Compliance of the Illinois
Department of Public Health Private Sewage Disposal Code.
   (E)   Buried sand filters and aerobic treatment plants listed by NSF for
Class I effluent shall be discharged to one of the following.
      (1)   A receiving stream, lake or pond which provided greater than a five
to one dilution of the effluent. A discharge within ten feet of the above shall
be considered to be a discharge to the receiving body of water. Discharges to a
lake or pond shall be limited to two discharges per surface acre of water. More
than two discharges may occur per individual surface acre of water, however,
the total number of discharges to total surface acres of water shall not exceed
a ratio of two to one. An example of this is as follows: In a 20-acre lake,
several discharges may enter the lake in a one-half acre cove, however, the
total discharges entering the lake would be limited to 40. Where discharges are
not equally distributed around a lake or pond, the Health Authority shall be
consulted to assure that nuisance conditions are not created.
      (2)   To the ground surface where the discharge points of sewage disposal
systems with surface discharges are maintained at 235 feet apart and the
effluent does not pond or create a public nuisance.
   (F)   If the final discharge location of the effluent from a buried sand
filter or aerobic treatment plant listed as a Class I by NSF, or any system
that discharges will discharge according to division (E)(2) above and leave the
property, then an effluent receiving trench or bed shall be installed prior to
discharge. Effluent receiving trenches or beds shall be designed in accordance
with §51.05(K)(1) through (12) except for the following criteria.
      (1)   The effluent receiving trench shall be designed at three gallons
per square foot of trench bottom area based on the daily design flow of the
system. An example of this is as follows: A three-bedroom home equals 600
gallons per day, 600 gallons per day divided by three gallons per square foot
per day equals 200 square feet of effluent receiving trench. (600 gpd. divided
by three gallons/sq. ft./day = 200 square feet).
      (2)   Effluent receiving trenches or beds shall not be greater than 36
inches below the ground surface and shall have a maximum earth cover of six
inches.
      (3)   They shall be designed so the entire trench or bed is completely
filled with effluent prior to the discharge and the invert of the overflow line
is at least one inch below the invert of the outlet of the aerobic treatment
plant or sand filter unless the effluent is pumped.
   (G)   The owner(s) of a new, repaired, renovated or replaced WCHD permitted
surface discharging private sewage disposal system that is required to obtain
an NPDES permit shall comply with all requirements and effluent limitations of
the NPDES permit issued for the surface discharging private sewage disposal
system.
      (1)   WCHD permitted surface discharging private sewage disposal systems
that are not required to obtain an NPDES permit shall not exceed the following
effluent standards:
         (a)   The system shall comply with NSF International/ANSI Standard 40,
§ 8.5.2.1.1 for carbonaceous five-day biochemical oxygen demand (CBODs) and §
8.5.2.1.2 for total suspended solids (TSS).
         (b)   No effluent shall contain settleable solids.
         (c)   Color, odor and turbidity shall be reduced to below discernable
levels.
         (d)   No effluent shall contain floating debris, visible oil, grease,
scum or sludge solids.
         (e)   Fecal coliform bacteria concentration shall not exceed 400
organisms per 100 ml (milliliter).
      (2)   Samples shall be analyzed in accordance with the Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   (H)   Aerobic treatment plants and accessory tanks, lift stations, sample
ports, and disinfection units that are no longer in use shall be completely
pumped. The floor and walls shall be cracked or crumbled so the tank or tanks
will not hold water, and the tank(s) shall be filled with sand or soil. If the
tank(s) is removed from the ground, the excavation shall be filled with soil.
Tank abandonment activities must be inspected by the Health Authority, and the
applicable fee (see Appendix A) shall be submitted for each tank abandonment
inspection.
(1980 Code, §51.08) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 261—267, adopted 6-14-1976) (Res.
87-74, passed 7-16-1987; Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-
17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014; Ord. 16-235, passed 8-18-2016)
Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 LIMESTONE AND GROUND WATER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Absorption trench systems shall not be installed where there is less
than 30 feet of cover above the limestone formations unless the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   There must be a minimum of five feet of soil between the bottom of
the absorption trench system and the limestone formation and that soil will
provide a minimum of 20 years travel time prior to the effluent reaching the
limestone formation. This must be demonstrated by sufficient engineering data
and it is the responsibility of the owner or subdivider to furnish this
information. All calculations of travel time shall be made assuming the maximum
possible hydraulic gradient.
      (2)   The above requirement also applies to subdividing lots which have
less than 30 feet of earth cover above limestone in which case it is the
responsibility of the subdivider to provide sufficient information to either
show the existence of 30 feet of cover above limestone or that the ground
conditions will provide the protection of the water-bearing formations as
specified above.
   (B)   No absorption trench systems shall be installed in areas where the
permanent ground water table is less than four feet below the bottom of the
trench system. This depth of water table may be required to be confirmed by
soil boring tests where indicated.
(1980 Code, §51.10) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 261—267, adopted 6-14-1976) (Res.
07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16- 2014; Ord. 16-235,
passed 8-18-2016) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE AND EXAMINATION.
   (A)   No person shall engage or offer to engage in or carry on the business
of installing private sewage disposal systems or any components of private
sewage disposal systems, including but not limited to, septic tanks, ground
absorption trench systems and/or individual mechanical sewage treatment systems
within the county unless they have obtained a valid county sewage treatment or
disposal system installation contractor’s license.
   (B)   An annual installation contractor’s license fee designated in
Appendix A  shall be required for all sewage treatment or disposal systems
installation contractors wishing to operate within the county. This fee is non-
refundable.
   (C)   The Health Authority shall issue a license to persons applying who
comply with the following items:
      (1)   Obtained a valid installation contractor’s license issued by the
state;
      (2)   Successfully passed the County Health Department installation
contractor’s examination; and
      (3)   Paid the required annual license fee to the County Health
Department.
   (D)   Any person who owns an occupies a single-family dwelling and who is
installing the private sewage disposal system which services the single-family
residence on their own property, for their own use, must successfully pass an
examination. An examination fee designated in
Appendix A  must be submitted prior to the issuance of the examination. This
fee is non-refundable.
   (E)   No person shall engage or offer to engage in or carry on the business
of cleaning or pumping, hauling or disposing of waste from a sewage treatment
or disposal system or portable toilet units within the county unless they have
obtained a valid county sewage treatment or disposal system pumping
contractor’s license.
   (F)   An annual pumping contractor’s license fee designated in
Appendix A  shall be required for all sewage treatment or disposal systems or
portable toilet unit pumping contractors wishing to operate within the county.
This fee is non-refundable.
   (G)   The Health Authority shall issue a license to persons applying who
comply with the following items:
      (1)   Obtained a valid pumping contractor’s license or applicable
portable toilet certification issued by the state;
      (2)   Successfully passed the County Health Department pumping
contractor’s examination; and
      (3)   Paid the required annual license fee to the County Health
Department.
   (H)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year they are issued.
   (I)   Individuals and businesses in the portable sanitation business must be
in compliance with regulations set forth in the State Department of Public
Health rules and regulations entitled Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and
Code, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 225 and any subsequent revisions.
   (J)   Each person who desires to apply for admittance to the examination for
a sewage treatment or disposal system installation contractor’s license or a
private sewage treatment or disposal system pumping contractor’s license, shall
file an application for examination on forms provided by the Health Authority.
   (K)   Examination dates and locations shall be established by the Health
Authority. A completed application, a photograph of the applicant and a fee
designated in
Appendix A  must be filed with the Health Authority at least 30 days prior to
the examination date. This fee is non-refundable.
   (L)   The examination requirements and results are as follows.
      (1)   Installation license examination. The examination for a sewage
treatment and disposal system installation contractor license shall test the
applicant’s knowledge of the design, installation, operation, maintenance,
repairing and servicing of sewage treatment and disposal systems.
      (2)   Pumping licensing examination. The examination for a sewage
treatment and disposal system pumping contractor license shall test the
applicant’s knowledge of the pumping, hauling and disposal of wastes removed
from sewage treatment or disposal systems or portable toilet units.
      (3)   Both licenses. Individuals desiring both the installation
contractor license and pumping contractor license must pass the examination for
each license.
      (4)   Passing grade. The examination shall consist of questions with a
combined grade value of 100 points. In order to successfully pass the
examination, a grade of not less than 75 must be obtained.
      (5)   Failure to pass. Any person who fails to pass the examination shall
be admitted to a subsequent scheduled examination after filing a new
application and fee with the Health Authority in accordance with this section.
      (6)   Expired license. A private sewage disposal system pumping
contractor or private sewage system installation contractor whose license has
expired for a period of less than three years may apply to the WCHD for
reinstatement of the license and by paying the annual license fee to the County
Health Department. A license which has expired for more than three years may be
restored by reapplying to take the examination and by successfully passing the
written examination and by paying the annual license fee to the County Health
Department.
(1980 Code, §51.11) (Res. 87-75, passed 7-16- 1987; Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-
2007; Ord. 11- 74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10- 16-2014; Ord. 16-
235, passed 8-18-2016)
§ 51.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited human excrement or raw and or improperly treated sewage upon the
surface of public or private property located within the county or to farm
tiles, streams, rivers, ponds, lakes or other collectors of water. Improperly
treated sewage is sewage that does not meet the effluent requirements of the
applicable NPDES permit or the requirement of §
51.08 (G) or sewage which comes directly from a septic tank or building sewer.
Domestic sewage or effluent from any sewage treatment or disposal system or
component shall not be discharged into any well or into any underground mine,
cave or tunnel.
   (B)   Should any defect exist or occur in any sewage treatment or disposal
system which would cause the sewage system to fail to meet the requirements of
this chapter and cause a nuisance or public health hazardous condition, the
defect shall be corrected immediately by the owner or agent of the owner,
occupant or agent of the occupant.
   (C)   If in the opinion of the Health Authority, the conditions involved are
serious enough, they may order the buildings to be vacated and to remain
vacated until the defect has been eliminated and the public health nuisance and
hazardous condition abated to his or her satisfaction.
   (D)   Whenever an approved combined or sanitary sewer which can be legally
connected to becomes available within 300 feet for a single-family residence
and not greater than 1,000 feet for a commercial establishment served by a
sewage treatment or disposal system, which in the opinion of the County Health
Department is causing a public health nuisance and/or a possible public health
hazardous condition, a direct connection shall be made to the approved sewer by
the owner of the property involved. This connection to the approved sewer must
bypass all portions of the existing sewage treatment or disposal system and all
portions of this system shall be completely pumped and properly abandoned in
accordance with §§
51.05 (X) and
51.08 (H).
(1980 Code, § 51.09) (Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-
2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014; Ord. 16-235, passed 8-18-2016) Penalty,
see §
51.99
§ 51.12 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Authority finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without any
administrative procedure and without notice, hearing or bond, bring action for
a temporary restraining order or temporary injunction to request and require
that the action be taken as the court may deem necessary to meet the emergency.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter the order shall be
effective immediately. The action shall be brought by the State’s Attorney of
the county. When the emergency conditions are abated, in the opinion of the
Health Authority, the Health Authority may request that the temporary
injunction be canceled.
(1980 Code, § 51.12) (Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-2007; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-
16-2014)
§ 51.13 HEARINGS AND VARIANCES.
   (A)   Hearings before the Health Authority. Any person affected by any order
or notice issued by the Health Department in connection with any section of
this chapter, may file in the office of the Health Department a written request
for a hearing before the Health Authority. The Health Authority shall hold a
hearing at a time and place designated within 30 days from the date on which
the written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing shall be notified
of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days prior to the date
on which the hearing is to be held. If as a result of the hearing, the Health
Authority finds that strict compliance with the order, or notice, would cause
undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public health would be
adequately protected and substantial justice done by varying or withdrawing the
order or notice, the Health Authority may modify or withdraw the order or
notice and as a condition for the action may, where deemed necessary, make
requirements which are additional to those prescribed in this chapter for the
purpose of properly protecting the public health. The Health Authority shall
render a decision within ten days after the date of the hearing which shall be
reduced to writing and placed in the file in the office of the Health
Department as a matter of public record. Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the Health Authority may seek relief there from through a hearing before the
Health Director.
   (B)   Fee. There shall be a fee for each variance request. The fee is
designated in
Appendix A and must be submitted with the written variance request and shall be
made payable to the County Health Fund. This fee is non-refundable.
   (C)   Hearings before the Health Director. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Health Authority rendered as the result of a hearing held in
accordance with this section may file in the office of the Health Department a
written request for a hearing at a time and place designated by the Health
Director within 30 days of the date on which the written request was filed. The
petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the
hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be
held. If, as a result of facts elicited as a result of the hearing, the Health
Director finds that strict compliance with the decision of the Health Authority
would cause undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public health would
be adequately protected and substantial justice done by granting a variance,
the Health Director may grant a variance and as a condition for the variance,
may, where it deems necessary, make requirements or special conditions which
are additional to those prescribed by this chapter, all for the purpose of
properly protecting the public health. The Health Director shall render a
decision within ten days after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced
to writing and placed on file in the office of the Health Department and a copy
thereof shall be served on the petitioner personally or by delivery to the
petitioner by certified mail. If a variance, special condition, or use of
experimental/alternative system is granted, the owner may be required to record
the variance or a special condition with the County Recorder’s office.
(1980 Code, § 51.13) (Res. 87-74, passed 7-16-1987; Res. 07-412, adopted 10-18-
2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person, firm, corporation, association or organization who
violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to fines or penalties
in an amount not exceeding $1,000 for each violation plus $100 for each day
that the violation continues. A violation continues to exist each day following
due notice having been served.
   (B)   The imposition of penalties prescribed above shall not preclude the
State's Attorney of Will County from instituting appropriate action for
injunction to restrain or enjoin such violation or to enjoin the operation of
any such establishment as required to prevent or abate a violation.
(1980 Code, § 51.99) (Sup. Rec. Bk.     , pp. 261—267, adopted 6-14-1976) (Res.
87-74, passed 7-16-1987; Res. 79-59, adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 07-412, adopted
10-18-2007; Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014)
APPENDIX A: FEE SCHEDULE
   (A)   Soil evaluation fee. The fee shall be $175 for each soil evaluation.
   (B)   Site inspection fee. The fee shall be $125 for each site inspection.
   (C)   New sewage installation permit fee. Each application for permit for
the installation of a new septic system shall be accompanied by a permit fee of
$425 payable to the County Health Department.
   (D)   Individual mechanical system installation permit fee. An application
for the installation of an individual mechanical sewage treatment system shall
be accompanied by a permit fee of $700 payable to the County Health Department.
   (E)   Repair permit fee. A fee of $225 shall be charged for permits to
repair, extend or alter an existing sewage treatment or disposal system.
   (F)   Sewage installation permit re-issuance fee. A fee $100 shall be
charged for the re-issuance of any permit that has been voided for reason of
being older than one year.
   (G)   Annual permit to discharge fee. The permit application must be
accompanied by an annual fee of $170 payable to the County Health Department
and must be received prior to January 15.
   (H)   Annual licensed installation contractor fee. An annual installation
contractor’s license fee of $175 shall be required for all sewage treatment or
disposal systems installation contractors wishing to operate within the county.
   (I)   Licensed contractor test fee. A completed application, a photograph of
the applicant and a fee of $50 must be filed with the Health Authority at least
30 days prior to the examination date.
   (J)   Annual licensed pumping contractor fee. An annual pumping contractor’s
license fee of $175 shall be required for all sewage treatment or disposal
systems or portable toilet pumping contractors wishing to operate within the
county.
   (K)   Homeowner’s test. Any person installing or repairing a septic tank,
ground absorption trench system and/or individual mechanical sewage treatment
system on his or her own property, for his or her own use, must successfully
pass an examination. An examination fee of $60 shall be required for all
homeowner tests.
   (L)   Plat review fee. A plat review fee of $50 per lot for all proposed
subdivisions must be submitted prior to review by environmental health staff.
   (M)   Variance hearing fee. Request for variance must be submitted in
writing with a fee of $75.
   (N)   Verification of existing system fee. Request for the verification of
an existing private sewage disposal system on private property must be
accompanied by a fee of $65.
   (O)   Sign-off fee. Request for environmental health staff to review an
existing septic system location in reference to proposed property change,
building modification, addition of a new structure or remodel must be
accompanied by a fee of $20. If a verification of the existing system is
conducted by the WCHD, the sign-off fee is waived.
   (P)   Well and septic survey. Request for environmental health staff to
attempt to locate well and septic system, to assess the condition of the well
and septic, sample the well from the point of consumption for total coliform
and nitrates and determine if there are any violations or conditions that could
adversely affect the well and septic must be accompanied by a fee of $175. This
fee covers one additional water sample if a presence of E. Coli is detected in
the initial water sample.
   (Q)   Tank abandonment inspection fee. An application for the abandonment of
any septic tank, aerobic treatment plant, lift station, cesspool, pit privy,
disinfection chamber, sample port, or holding tank shall be accompanied by a
fee of $55 payable to the Will County Health Department.
   (R)   Sewage effluent test fee. A fee of $80 will be charged for a sewage
effluent sample which includes fecal coliform, suspended solids, residual
chlorine, pH, and biological oxygen demand (BOD) testing.
   (S)   Sewage effluent without fecal coliform test fee. A fee of $60 will be
charged for a sewage effluent sample which includes suspended solids, residual
chlorine, pH, and biological oxygen demand (BOD) testing.
   (T)   Sewage effluent fecal coliform test fee. A fee of $20 will be charged
for a sewage effluent sample which includes fecal coliform testing only.
   (U)   All fees are non-refundable.
   (V)   Unpaid fees will be turned over to collections or turned over to
state's attorney for violation of this chapter.
(1980 Code, §51.14) (Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-
2014; Ord. 16-235, passed 8-18-2016; Ord. 19-281, passed 10-17-2019)
APPENDIX B: SOIL EVALUATION PROCEDURE
   (A)   A soil evaluation must be conducted before issuance of a permit to
install a private sewage disposal system. The evaluation must be conducted by a
representative of the County Health Department or by others identified in §
905.55 of the State Department of Public Health, Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act and Code. The following must be adhered to when setting up a soil
evaluation.
      (1)   Legal description, a plat of survey or facsimile, tax number, name,
address and phone number must be submitted. The soil evaluation process will
not start until this information is made available.
      (2)   Specific directions from the Health Department to the site must be
provided.
      (3)   Three holes, three feet wide by three feet long by five feet deep
must be in the proposed location of the individual sewage treatment system.
These holes shall be no less than 50 feet apart and tapered at one end for easy
entrance and exit by the Health Department. At least one hole must be dug to at
least eight feet deep when bedrock may be in the area based on the latest
official soil maps for the county as prepared by the Soil Conservation Service
of the United States Department of Agriculture.
      (4)   The property must be visibly staked at the corners with four feet
or more of the stake above the ground and topped with a bright flag.
      (5)   The area of the intended septic field must be staked at each corner
with ribbons encircling the proposed field.
      (6)   A sign by the road with letters “SE” must be clearly displayed.
      (7)   If vegetative growth over 12 inches high is present on the lot, a
path must be cut to and around the holes.
      (8)   After the soil evaluation is completed, you will be notified in
writing of the results if the notification is requested.
   (B)   Once the soil evaluation or soil classification is done, a sewage
permit can be issued as long as the final elevations of the proposed location
of the subsurface ground absorption septic system are not changed. The
installation of a subsurface ground absorption septic system in ground that has
recently been filled in excess of one foot is prohibited and the soil
evaluation or soil classification will be voided. The excavation and/or
refilling of soil in the area designated for the installation of a subsurface
ground absorption system is also prohibited.
(1980 Code, § 51.15) (Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014)
APPENDIX C: TABLES
   TABLE 1: SOIL CATEGORIES
Table 1: Soil Categories
Table 1: Soil Categories
Soil Category A
49   Watseka Loamy Fine Sand
88   Sparta Loamy Sand
93   Rodman Gravelly Loam
98   Ade Loamy Fine Sand
318  Lorenzo Silt Loam
494  Kankakee Fine Sandy Loam
513* Granby Fine Sandy Loam
741  Oakville Fine Sand
Soil Category B
103* Houghton Muck
201* Gilford Fine Sandy Loam
380  Fieldon Loam
387  Ockley Loam
570  Martinsville Loam
688  Braidwood Loam
Soil Category C
67*  Harpster Silty Clay Loam
102  LaHogue Loam
125* Selma Loam
134  Camden Silt Loam
149  Brenton Silt Loam
150  Onarga Fine Sandy Loam
151  Ridgeville Fine Sandy Loam
152* Drummer Silty Clay Loam
153* Pella Silty Clay Loam
184  Roby Fine Sandy Loam
197* Troxel Silt Loam
>290 Warsaw Silt Loam
325  Dresden Silt Loam
327  Fox Silt Loam
329* Will Silty Clay Loam
343  Kane Silt Loam
356* Elpaso Silty Clay Loam
369  Waupecan Silt Loam
440  Jasper Loam
523  Dunham Silty Clay Loam
526  Grundelein Silt Loam
541  Graymont Silt Loam
614  Chenoa Silt Clay Loam
740  Derroch Silt Loam
792  Bowes Silt Loam
802  Orthents, Loamy Type
Soil Category D
69*  Milford Silty Clay Loam
132  Starks Silt Loam
146  Elliott Silt Loam
189  Martinton Silt Loam
219  Millbrook Silt Loam
223  Varna Silty Clay Loam
232* Ashkum Silty Clay Loam
293  Andres Silt Loam
294  Symerton Silt Loam
295  Mokena Silt Loam
330* Peotone Silty Clay Loam
594  Reddick Clay Loam
719  Symerton Fine Sandy Loam
Soil Category E
23   Blount Silt Loam
91   Swygert Silty Clay Loam
206* Thorp Silt Loam
228  Nappanee Silt Loam
235* Bryce Clay Loam
238* Rantoul Silty Clay
241  Chatsworth Silty Clay
298  Beecher Silt Loam
320  Frankfort Silt Loam
530  Ozaukee Silt Loam
531  Markham Silt Loam
560  St. Clair Clay Loam
Soil Category F
240  Plattville Silty Clay Loam
311  Ritchey Silt Loam
314  Joliet Silt Loam
315  Channahon Silt Loam
316  Romeo Silt Loam
317* Millsdale Silty Clay Loam
403  Elizabeth Silt Loam
900 through 9000: Please seek advice from soil classifier or certified soil
scientist.
* Denotes unsuitable soil. Refer to §
51.03(G).
 
   TABLE 2: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
Table 2: Minimum Requirements
         Minimum Lot                Minimum Lot                Minimum
Soil     Size w/       Minimum Lot  Width w/      Width w/PWS  Ground
Category Private Wells Size (square Private Well  (feet)       Absorption
         (square feet) feet)        (feet)                     Trench System
                                                               (lin. feet)
Table 2: Minimum Requirements
         Minimum Lot                Minimum Lot                Minimum
Soil     Size w/       Minimum Lot  Width w/      Width w/PWS  Ground
Category Private Wells Size (square Private Well  (feet)       Absorption
         (square feet) feet)        (feet)                     Trench System
                                                               (lin. feet)
A        20,000        16,000       100           90           300
B        20,000        16,000       100           90           400
C        30,000        24,000       120           90           600
D        40,000        32,000       150           150          800
E        60,000        60,000       150           150          1,000
F        Unsuitable: Bedrock less than 32 inches from surface
 
   TABLE 3: LOCATION OF COMPONENTS OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM MINIMUM DISTANCE
ALLOWABLE
Table 3: Location of Components of Sewage Disposal System (*1, *2)
Minimum Distance Allowable
                                  Lake
          Well or     Water       Stream,  Dwelling/
Component Suction     Supply Line Inground Permanent  Property    Artificial
Part of   Line from   Pressure    Pool or  Structure  Line (feet) Drain (feet)
System    Pump to     (*3) (feet) Body of  (feet)
          Well (feet)             Water
                                  (feet)
Table 3: Location of Components of Sewage Disposal System (*1, *2)
Minimum Distance Allowable
              Well or               Lake
              Suction   Water       Stream,  Dwelling/
Component     Line from Supply Line Inground Permanent  Property    Artificial
Part of       Pump to   Pressure    Pool or  Structure  Line (feet) Drain
System        Well      (*3) (feet) Body of  (feet)                 (feet)
              (feet)                Water
                                    (feet)
Building      50        10          25       —        —         10
sewer (*4)
Septic tank
or aeration   50        10 (*5)     25       10         5           10
plant
Distribution  75        10          25       10         5           10
box
Subsurface    75        25          25       10         5           10
seepage field
Sand filter   75        25          15       10         5           10
Privy         75        25          25       20         5           10
Waste
stabilization 75        25          25       20         5           10
pond
Surface
discharge     50        10          —      —        5           —
effluent line
Treated
effluent      50        10          —      20         25          25
discharge
point (*6)
Effluent
receiving     75        25          15       10         5           10
trench
Class V
injection     200       25          25       10         5           10
wells
(*1)   These distances have been determined for use in clay, silt and loam
soils only. The minimum distances required for use in sand or other types of
soil shall be determined for the proposed private sewage disposal system and
approved by the Health Authority. Approval will be given if the Health
Authority determines that the soil will provide treatment of the sewage.
(*2)   For separation distances to closed loop wells, see 77 Ill. Adm. Code
920.180.
(*3)   Includes lawn irrigation piping. See Section 905.20(d) for additional
details on water lines and sewer separation.
(*4)   The building sewer or surface discharge effluent line may be located
within 10 feet of a well or suction line from the pump to the well when cast
iron pipe with mechanical joints or Schedule 40 PVC pipe with water-tight
joints is used for the building sewer or surface discharge effluent line.
(*5)   There shall be 25 feet separation from municipal water supply lines.
(*6)   Any surface discharge system installed, repaired or renovated after
January 1, 2014.
 
   TABLE 4: NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Table 4: Nonresidential Establishments (*1)
Soil Category Sewage Flow (gpd) (*2) Minimum Ground Absorption Trench System
                                     (lineal feet)
Table 4: Nonresidential Establishments (*1)
Soil Category Sewage Flow (gpd) (*2) Minimum Ground Absorption Trench System
                                     (lineal feet)
   A       1—600                300
B             1—200                300
              201—600              400
C             1—200                300
              201—400              400
              401—600              600
D             1—200                400
              201—400              600
              401—600              800
E             1—200                600
              201—400              800
              401—600              1,000
F             Unsuitable - Bedrock is less than 32 inches from the surface
(*1)   Non-residential establishments using more than 600 gpd shall install an
additional lineal feet of 36-inch wide trench for each 100 gallons of sewage
flow.
(*2)   Sewage flow shall be calculated using Table 5.
 
   TABLE 5: QUANTITY OF SEWAGE FLOWS
Table 5: Quantity of Sewage Flows
Type of Establishment Gallon Per Person Per Day (Unless otherwise noted)
Table 5: Quantity of Sewage Flows
                                                                   Gallon Per
                                                                   Person Per
Type of Establishment                                              Day (Unless
                                                                   otherwise
                                                                   noted)
Permanent dwellings
   Boarding houses                                              50
   Boarding schools                                             150
   Institutions other than hospitals (per bed)                  125
   Mobile homes, individual (per bedroom)                       200
   Mobile home parks (per space)                                400
   Multi-family dwellings (per bedroom)                         150/200
   Rooming houses                                               40
   Single-family dwellings (per bedroom)                        200
Travel and recreational facilities
   Airport, railway stations, bus stations                      5
   Campgrounds
      Comfort stations w/toilets and showers (per space)     35
      Comfort stations w/toilets and no showers (per space)  25
      Day camps, no meals                                    25
      Travel trailer parks w/water and sewer (per space)     150
   Cottages and/or small dwellings with seasonal occupancy (per 150
bedroom)
   Country clubs (per member)                                   25
   Highway rest areas                                           5
   Hotels and motels (per bed)                                  50
   Picnic parks                                                 5
   Places for public assembly                                   5
   Swimming pools and bathing beaches                           10
   Theaters
      Movie (per seat)                                       5
      Drive-in (per car space)                               10
Commercial, industrial and miscellaneous
   Churches (per seat)                                          3
   Churches w/kitchens add (per meal)                           3
Construction camps or sites, factories
   W/toilets and showers                                        35
   W/toilets and no showers                                     20
Laundries (per customer)                                           50
Office and other day workers (per worker)                          15
Restaurants
   24-hour operation
      Per seat                                               60
      Per employee                                           25
      Lounge per seat                                        50
   12-hour operation
      Per seat                                               40
      Per employee                                           15
      Lounge per seat                                        35
   Coffee shop—6-hour operation
      Per seat                                               6
   Bar—no food
      Per seat                                               10
   Banquet rooms
      Per seat                                               5
   Meeting room
      Per seat                                               3
Schools
   Without cafeterias or showers                                15
   With cafeterias and showers                                  25
   With cafeterias or showers                                   20
Service station (per vehicle served)                               10
Shopping center (per 1,000 square feet floor area)                 250
Stores (per toilet room)                                           400
 
(Ord. 11-74, passed 2-17-2011; Am. Ord. 14-279, passed 10-16-2014)
CHAPTER 52: WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE EQUIPMENT
Section
   
52.01   Compliance required
   
52.02   Approved water supply
   
52.03   Size of water mains
   
52.04   Location of fire hydrants
   
52.05   Fire hydrant specifications
   
52.06   Drawings, plans and permits
   
52.07   Notice of use
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any water
mains or fire hydrants for a public or private fire service in any fire
department area or jurisdiction except in compliance with all the provisions of
this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 52.01) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.02 APPROVED WATER SUPPLY.
   A water supply shall be deemed to be an approved water supply for purposes
of this chapter when the fire flow therefrom complies with the following
minimum standards.
Required Fire Flow For Average City
Population Gallons Per Minute Million Gallons Per Day Duration Hours
Required Fire Flow For Average City
Population Gallons Per Minute Million Gallons Per Day Duration Hours
1,000      1,000              1.44                    4
1,500      1,250              1.80                    5
2,000      1,500              2.16                    6
3,000      1,750              2.52                    7
4,000      2,000              2.88                    8
5,000      2,250              3.24                    9
6,000      2,500              3.60                    10
10,000     3,000              4.32                    10
13,000     3,500              5.04                    10
17,000     4,000              5.76                    10
22,000     4,500              6.48                    10
27,000     5,000              7.20                    10
33,000     5,500              7.29                    10
40,000     6,000              8.64                    10
55,000     7,000              10.08                   10
75,000     8,000              11.52                   10
95,000     9,000              12.96                   10
120,000    10,000             14.40                   10
150,000    11,000             15.84                   10
200,000    12,000             17.28                   10
Over 200,000 population: 12,000 gallons per minute, with 2,000 to 8,000 per
minute additional for a second fire, for a 10-hour duration
 
(1980 Code, § 52.02) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
§ 52.03 SIZE OF WATER MAINS.
   (A)   All primary feeder lines from an approved water supply shall be not
less than ten inches in diameter.
   (B)   All water mains installed or constructed in areas zoned for
industrial, commercial or multi-family residential purposes shall be not less
than ten inches in diameter.
   (C)   All water mains installed or constructed in areas for single-family or
two-family residential purposes shall be not less than six inches in diameter.
(1980 Code, § 52.03) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 LOCATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All fire hydrants installed or constructed in areas zoned for
industrial, commercial or multi-family residential purposes shall be located so
as to be not more than 300 feet of roadway travel distance from another fire
hydrant.
   (B)   All fire hydrants installed or constructed in areas zoned for single-
family or two-family residential purposes shall be located so as to be not more
than 350 feet of roadway travel distance from another fire hydrant.
   (C)   All fire hydrants shall be installed so that the top thereof shall be
not more than four feet above the finished ground level, and the center of the
lowest cutlet shall be not less than 18 inches above the finished ground level.
(1980 Code, § 52.04) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 FIRE HYDRANT SPECIFICATIONS.
   All fire hydrants shall have 2 two and one-half- inch butts, 1 four and one-
half-inch steamer fitting and shall comply with the standards of A.W.W.A. No.
502. All threads shall be national standard thread.
(1980 Code, § 52.05) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of water mains, fire hydrants and valves for public or private
fire services shall be submitted to the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the fire
department having jurisdiction for examination and approval as to location and
construction.
   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to scale to show distances and
diameters and shall be explicit and complete.
   (C)   All water mains, fire hydrants and valves for public or private fire
services shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
(1980 Code, § 52.06) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 NOTICE OF USE.
   The Bureau of Fire Prevention of the authorities having jurisdiction shall
be advised in writing immediately after a water main is put into use for public
or private service.
(1980 Code, § 52.07) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(1980 Code, § 52.07) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 240, pp. 457—458, adopted 11-15-1972)
CHAPTER 53: WATER WELL PERMIT AND WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS
Section
   
53.01   Short title
   
53.02   Purpose
   
53.03   Definitions
   
53.04   Public water supply use
   
53.05   Water supply location, construction, repair and abandonment
   
53.06   Disinfection and analysis
   
53.07   Exemptions
   
53.08   Storage and water lines
   
53.09   Permit required
   
53.10   Required inspections and violations
   
53.11   Licensing of well drillers and pump installers and registration of
closed loop well contractors
   
53.12   Repeal and date of effect
   
53.13   Conflict of chapter, effect on partial invalidity
   
53.14   Injunctions
   
53.15   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited
 
   
53.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Fee Schedule
§ 53.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter will be known as the Will County Water Well Permit and Water
Supply Chapter.
(1980 Code, § 53.01) (Res. 89-189, adopted 7-20-1989; Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-
17-2009; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and supervise the construction of
water wells including closed loop wells; to require permits to construct,
modify, abandon, or deepen water wells and closed loop wells; to establish a
fee schedule for water well and closed loop well related charges; to offset the
cost of issuance of such permits; to regulate the inspection of new, modified
and deepened water wells and closed loop wells; to regulate the inspection of
the sealing of abandoned water wells and closed loop wells; to provide for the
incorporation by reference of the standards of the Illinois Department of
Public Health as set forth in its rules and regulations entitled Public Area
Sanitary Practice Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 895), Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 890), Illinois Ground Water Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 55),
Illinois Water Well Construction Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 920), Illinois Water
Well Pump Installation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 925), Surface Source Water
Treatment Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 930), Drinking Water Systems Code (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 900), Water Well and Pump Installation Contractors License Act ILCS
Ch. 225, Act 345, issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health and as may
be hereafter amended or revised and/or as may be amended by the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 53.02) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED WELL. A water, closed loop or monitoring well which is no longer
used or which is in such state of disrepair that the well or boring has the
potential for transmitting contaminants into an aquifer or otherwise threatens
the public health or safety.
   CISTERN. A cistern is a source of water supply developed by intercepting
rainfall with roof surfaces.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL. A sealed, watertight loop of pipe buried outside of a
building foundation intended to re-circulate a liquid solution through a heat
exchanger but is limited to the construction of the borehole, piping in the
borehole, heat exchange fluid, and the grouting of the borehole and does not
include the piping and appurtenances used in any other capacity. CLOSED LOOP
WELL does not include any horizontal closed loop well systems where grouting is
not necessary by law or standard industry practice. (Section 3(h) of the Act)
   CLOSED LOOP WELL CONTRACTOR. Any person who installs closed loop wells for
another person. CLOSED LOOP WELL CONTRACTOR does not include the employee of a
closed loop contractor. (Section 3(j) of the Act)
   CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM. A clustered group of closed loop wells that serve
the same facility.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. That person or persons designated by the County Board of
Health to enforce this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual, or firm, partnership, company, trustee, association,
or public or private entity.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A system for the provision to the public of piped water
for human consumption, if the system has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days
per year. The term PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM includes any collection, treatment,
storage and distribution facilities under control of the operator of such
system and used primarily in connection with such system and any collection or
pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily
in connection with such system.
      (1)   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system which serves at least
15 service connections used by residents or regularly serves at least 25
residents at least 60 days a year.
      (2)   NON-COMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A public water system that is
not a community water system that has at least 15 service connections used by
non-residents, or regularly serves 25 or more non-resident individuals daily
for at least 60 days a year.
   SEMI-PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. A water system which is not a public water
system, yet which serves a segment of the public other than an owner-occupied
single-family residence.
   WATER WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
jetted, dug, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation
is for the location, diversion, artificial recharge or acquisition of ground
water, but such term does not include an excavation made for the purpose of
obtaining or prospecting for oil, natural gas, minerals or products of mining
or quarrying or for inserting media to repressure oil or natural gas bearing
formation or for storing petroleum, natural gas or other products or for
observation or any other purpose in connection with the development or
operation of a gas storage project. (Section 3(e) of the Act)
(1980 Code, § 53.03) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.04 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY USE.
   In those locations where a public water supply is reasonably available, or
in areas where contamination risks are present based on past water sample
results from a similar water producing formation, that supply should be the
sole source of water for drinking or culinary purposes.
(1980 Code, § 53.04) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.05 WATER SUPPLY LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Water wells. Except as otherwise herein provided, the location,
construction, modification, repair, and abandonment of water wells, and the
installation of water well pumps, shall be in accordance with the requirements
set forth by the Illinois Department of Public Health, Illinois Water Well
Construction Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 920), and the Illinois Water Well Pump
Installation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 925), which are hereby made part of this
chapter by reference. Copies of the said regulations shall be available in the
office of the Health Authority. Wells that are abandoned shall be sealed in a
manner prescribed by the Illinois Water Well Construction Code.
   (B)   Surface water supplies. All water systems which receive their source
of water from ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, or other surface collectors of
water shall be designed, constructed, and operated in accordance with the
Illinois Department of Public Health Source Water Treatment Code (77 Ill. Adm.
Code 930).
   (C)   Cisterns. Cisterns shall not be used for a water supply except where
adequate ground water resources are not available. (Cistern water and surface
water supplies shall receive treatment in accordance with Illinois Department
of Public Health Surface Source Water Treatment Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 930).
   (D)   Closed loop wells. All closed loop or open loop geothermal wells shall
be constructed by contractors meeting all applicable registration and
certification requirements within the State of Illinois.
   (E)   Abandoned wells. Wells that are not being used for their intended
purpose and/or are in a state of disrepair as to present an endangerment to the
underground aquifer must be properly sealed in a manner prescribed by the
Illinois Water Well Construction Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 920). Abandoned well
sealing activities must be inspected by the Health Authority. A permit
application and the applicable fee (see Appendix A) shall be submitted for each
well abandonment or for each closed loop well system abandonment (up to ten
wells). The appropriate well abandonment documentation must be submitted by a
licensed well contractor within 30 days following the well abandonment.
   (F)   Temporary well seals. A well may be placed into a state of temporary
abandonment under the written approval of the Health Authority. Wells approved
for temporary abandonment must have the pump and drop pipe removed, the water
line from the building to the well cut off and capped, be disinfected, and have
either a plastic cap glued to the casing or be welded shut depending on
construction. The casing must then be painted a conspicuous color and protected
from damage. Wells not meeting current well construction and location
requirements will not be considered for temporary abandonment. A well may be
kept in a state of temporary abandonment for no longer than 12 months. An
extension of 12 additional months may be approved if a date can be provided in
writing when the well will be placed back into service.
   (G)   Existing wells. Any well being used which is not compliant with
current local and state requirements may remain in use until work is required
to maintain acceptable operation, at which time it must be brought into
compliance. Buried well seals must be eliminated and a pitless well adapter
installed at such a time when the buried seal is accessed for any reason. Pit
wells must be eliminated and the well brought into compliance at such a time as
the well pit indicates water inundation.
   (H)   Homeowner well abandonment. An individual who is not a licensed well
contractor may engage in well sealing activities in accordance with division
(E) of this section provided the well or wells are not part of a closed loop
well system and provided the well is located on land which is owned or leased
by such individual and is used by such individual for farming purposes or as
such individual's place of abode, provided a written request is made to the
Health Authority prior to commencement of well abandonment indicating
acceptable methodology. Abandoned well sealing activities must be inspected by
the Health Authority. A permit application and the applicable fee (see Appendix
A) shall be submitted for each well abandonment. The appropriate well
abandonment documentation must be submitted within 30 days following the well
abandonment.
   (I)   Supplemental wells. Construction of supplemental wells shall not be
approved on property connected to a community water supply except as approved
by the operator of the community water supply. The appropriate back flow
prevention device or check valve must be installed and inspected by a licensed
plumbing professional who is certified for such an inspection in accordance
with the Illinois State Plumbing code.
   (J)   Dewatering wells. Wells designed with the intended purpose of
groundwater diversion shall be constructed to industry standards and permitted,
either by IEPA, or the Health Authority, as such. The applicable permit fee
shall apply for each well constructed (see Appendix A). Abandoned dewatering
wells shall be handled in a manner consistent with division (E) of this
section.
   (K)   Groundwater ordinances reviewed for use as environmental institutional
controls. When a well is proposed to be installed within an area included in a
groundwater ordinance reviewed for use as environmental institutional controls
listed on the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency's website, the
requirements of the groundwater ordinance will take precedent.
(1980 Code, § 53.05) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.06 DISINFECTION AND ANALYSIS.
   All components of a new water well construction and/or modifications to an
existing well shall be thoroughly disinfected with a strong chlorine solution
which will yield a dosage of at least 100 parts per million to the water in the
well and piping system. After purging the water system of any chlorine
residual, a water sample shall be taken and analyzed by a certified laboratory
and satisfactory results obtained prior to utilizing the water system for
drinking and culinary purposes. All fees for samples analyzed by the Health
Authority must be paid in accordance with the fee schedule. A copy of the
analysis shall be filed with the Health Authority. The water obtained from a
semi-private water supply shall meet the nitrate/nitrite, chemical and
bacteriological requirements of the Primary Drinking Water Standards (35 Ill.
Adm. Code 611), and the water obtained from a private well shall meet the
bacteriological and nitrate/nitrite requirements of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards (35 Ill. Adm. Code 611). The water from a private water system,
having surface water as its source, shall meet the nitrate/nitrite,
bacteriological and turbidity requirements of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards (35 Ill. Adm. Code 611).
(35 Ill. Adm. Code 611) (1980 Code, § 53.06) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009;
Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19- 2015) Penalty, §
53.99
§ 53.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   The requirement for a permit in this chapter shall not be applicable to
wells intended to serve a community water supply system or to monitoring wells.
(1980 Code, § 53.07) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.08 STORAGE AND WATER LINES.
   Aside from water heater and on-demand systems, a minimum storage capacity of
ten gallons at a minimum pressure of 20 pounds per square inch must be
maintained for each residence served. All water lines from the well to the
storage tank must be installed below the suspected frost line but not less than
42 inches below grade. All water lines must be installed in compliance with all
applicable state and local plumbing regulations.
(1980 Code, § 53.08) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.09 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. No water well or closed loop well system shall be
constructed, modified, abandoned or deepened in Will County, except in
accordance with these regulations. It is unlawful to proceed with the
construction of a water well or closed loop well without first obtaining a
permit from the Health Authority. An approved well permit is valid for one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewable (see division (C) of this
section). All wells and pumps shall be maintained in a safe condition by the
owner. A non-community public water supply shall not be operated without first
obtaining a permit from the Illinois Department of Public Health. For the
purpose of this section, well modification shall be defined as any change,
replacement, or other alteration of a water well or closed loop well. This
includes, but is not limited to deepening of a well, replacing or repairing a
casing, repair or replacement of well screen, installation of a pitless adapter
and any other change of a well structure.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for permits shall be in writing and in the
format prescribed by the Health Authority. Each permit must be accompanied by a
detailed site plan including the location of the well or closed loop wells, lot
boundaries, every component of the existing or proposed private sewage disposal
system, public sewer and water lines (including storm sewers), buildings,
driveways, underground and overhead utilities, and any other prominent landmark
or fixture that may affect the location of the well. Neighboring wells, private
sewage disposal systems and all other sources of contamination if they are
within 200 feet of the proposed well or closed loop well system. Any
application not meeting the above mentioned requirements shall not be accepted/
approved. This Department requires a minimum three days permit review period
and may require additional reasonable review time as needed to ensure the
installation complies with all current state and local regulations.
   (C)   Fees. Each application for the construction, modification or deepening
of a water well or closed loop well system shall be accompanied by the
applicable permit fee (see
Appendix A) payable to the Will County Health Department. This fee is not
refundable in the event that an individual decides not to construct, modify, or
deepen the water well or closed loop well system. An applicable fee (see
Appendix A) shall be charged for the reissuance of any permit which has been
voided due to the fact that it is older than one year. At the time of permit
issuance, fees (see
Appendix A) for both the well inspection and initial water sample shall be paid
in full.
   (D)   Variances. If circumstances exist which make it impractical to achieve
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter, an applicant may seek a
variance from the Health Authority prior to the issuance of a permit. Such
requests shall be made in writing, and include a detailed explanation, site
plan drawn to scale, and variance fee (see
Appendix A). The Health Authority shall notify the applicant in writing of its
decision to either grant or deny the variance. After the variance is granted it
will be attached to the property's deed by the Will County Recorder of Deeds.
Wells drilled under variance must have a second water sample taken no later
than 60 days after the well is placed into active service. Any person aggrieved
by the decision of the Health Authority rendered as the result of the variance
request may file a written hearing request in the office of the Health
Department. A time and place for the hearing will be provided by the
Environmental Health Director within 30 days of the date on which the written
request was filed. The party requesting the hearing shall be notified of the
time and place of the hearing not less than five days prior to the date on
which the hearing is to be held. If after the hearing the Environmental Health
Director finds that strict compliance with the decision of the Health Authority
would not cause undue hardship on the party requesting the hearing, and that
the public health would be adequately protected and substantial justice done by
granting a variance, the Environmental Health Director may grant a variance and
if necessary make requirements which are additional to those prescribed by this
chapter, all for the purpose of properly protecting the public health. The
Environmental Health Director shall render a decision within ten days after the
date of the hearing which shall be in writing and placed on file in the office
of the Health Department and a copy thereof shall be served on the applicant
and the party requesting the hearing personally or by delivery to the
petitioner by certified mail.
(1980 Code, § 53.09) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015) Penalty, §
53.99
§ 53.10 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS AND VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notification. The Health Authority shall be notified by telephone or
in writing at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of any work to
construct, modify, or deepen a water well or closed loop well for which a
permit has been issued, or to seal a water well, boring (including de-watering
or closed loop wells), or monitoring well. The Health Authority shall be
allowed access to any property for the purpose of performing inspection of well
construction, to inspect the sealing of wells, or to investigate abandoned
wells.
   (B)   Violations. If by any means it is determined that a violation has
occurred of any provision of this chapter, the Health Authority shall give
notice of such alleged violation. Said notice shall be in writing and shall
include a statement of the violation and why the notice is being sent. Further
said notice shall include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to take
corrective action. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known
address;
      (3)   If notice is returned showing the letter was not delivered, a copy
thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on any structure affected by
such notice.
(1980 Code, § 53.10) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015) Penalty, §
53.99
§ 53.11 LICENSING OF WELL DRILLERS AND PUMP INSTALLERS AND REGISTRATION OF
CLOSED LOOP WELL CONTRACTORS.
   All individuals who construct water wells and install well pumps shall be
licensed by the Illinois Department of Public Health in accordance with the
Water Well and Pump Installation Contractors License Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act
345). Each person who constructs closed loop wells shall be in compliance with
the Illinois Water Well Construction Code and Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 30).
(1980 Code, § 53.11) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.12 REPEAL AND DATE OF EFFECT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effective immediately following its
adoption and publication as provided for by law and in accordance with the law,
and at that time all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed.
(1980 Code, § 53.12) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-
2015)
§ 53.13 CONFLICT OF CHAPTER, EFFECT ON PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any building, fire, safety, or health ordinance, or other
code, existing on effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail. If any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any
reason whatsoever, such invalidation shall not affect the remaining portions of
this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect. To this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be joint and severable.
(1980 Code, § 53.13) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-
2015)
§ 53.14 INJUNCTIONS.
   In the enforcement of this chapter, the Health Authority may bring any
action, legal or equitable, including an action for injunctive relief that it
deems necessary. All moneys collected from fines under this chapter shall be
deposited to the Will County Health Department.
(1980 Code, § 53.14) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
§ 53.15 USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. On and after the effective date of this section, no
person shall use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from
within the area designated as a Restricted Groundwater Zone, within the
corporate limits of the County of Will, as a potable water supply, by the
installation or drilling of wells or by any other method. This prohibition
expressly includes the County of Will.
   (B)   Restricted groundwater zone.
      (1)   The following properties shall be designated a Restricted
Groundwater Zone:
         Street Address         Property Tax ID
         Portion of 14944
          West Hoff Road      14-12-28-300-016-0000
         Commonwealth Edison
         Property         14-12-28-300-004-0000
         Portion Commonwealth
         Edison Property      14-12-28-400-007-0000
      (2)   Figure 1, attached to Ordinance 23-113 and incorporated herein by
reference, illustrates the area of the Restricted Groundwater Zone. Attachment
A, attached to Ordinance 23-113 and incorporated herein by reference, contains
the Global Positioning System coordinates along the portion of 14944 West Hoff
Road.
   (C)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply:
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, and any of its
or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, preparing foods, watering lawns, or watering gardens in which
produce intended for human consumption is grown.
   (D)   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of up to $750 for each violation. Each day of the
continued existence or use of a prohibited well shall be considered a separate
violation.
(Ord. 21-352, passed 10-21-2021; Ord. 23-113, passed 4-20-2023)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this ordinance, or refuses to
comply with any lawful order or requirement of the Health Authority duly made
in writing as provided herein shall, upon being found guilty, will be subject
to a fine of up to $500 for each and every violation. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served and after the expiration of the time
limit for abating unsanitary conditions and completing improvements to abate
such conditions as ordered by the Health Authority shall constitute a distinct
and separate violation.
(1980 Code, §53.99) (Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-49, adopted 2-19-2015)
APPENDIX A: FEE SCHEDULE
 
Service Fee
Service                                                              Fee
Abandon closed loop well system permit/sealing fee (for up to 10     $80
wells)
Abandon closed loop well system permit/sealing fee (for after 10     $10 each
wells)
Abandon well permit/sealing fee                                      $80
Bacterial analysis fee for water sample                              $20
Bacterial analysis with count fee for water sample                   $25
Bacterial and nitrate combo analysis fee for water sample            $38
Bacterial with count and nitrate combo analysis fee for water sample $43
Chlorine check fee for water sample                                  $5
Closed loop well system inspection fee (for up to 10 wells)          $100
Closed loop well system inspection fee (for after 10 wells)          $10 each
Fluoride analysis fee for water sample                               $24
Hardness analysis fee for water sample                               $18
Nitrate analysis fee for water sample                                $18
Nitrite analysis fee for water sample with processing/handling fee   $25
Reissued well permit fee                                             $25
Well/closed loop well system permit fee                              $100
Well inspection fee                                                  $100
Well variance processing fee                                         $50
All fees shall be made payable to the County Health Department and these fees
shall not be refundable.
 
(Ord. 09-291, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-327, adopted 10-18-2012; Ord. 15-49,
adopted 2-19-2015; Ord. 16-209, adopted 7-21-2016)
CHAPTER 54: WASTE HAULER REPORT
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Authority
   
54.03   Purpose
   
54.04   Reporting
   
54.05   Exemptions
 
   
54.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste disposal, see
Ch. 50
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE. Garbage, general household, institutional and commercial
waste, industrial lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste and construction
and demolition debris.
   RECYCLING. A method, technique or process designed to remove any contaminant
from waste so as to render the waste reusable, or any process by which
materials that would otherwise be disposed of or discarded are collected,
separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of
raw materials or products.
(1980 Code, § 54.01) (Res. 00-398, passed 11-16-2000)
§ 54.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by the Solid Waste
Planning and Recycling Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 15, §§ l et seq.).
(1980 Code, § 54.02) (Res. 00-398, passed 11-16-2000)
§ 54.03 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to assist the county in collecting
information pertinent in measuring compliance with the Solid Waste Planning and
Recycling Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.).
(1980 Code, § 54.03) (Res. 00-398, passed 11-16-2000)
§ 54.04 REPORTING.
   For the purpose of tracking the implementation progress of the Solid Waste
Management Plan, haulers shall submit semi-annual reports to the Waste Services
Division of the County Land Use Department documenting the volume and/or
tonnage of municipal waste collected from all residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional customers in the county. Semi-annual reports are
due July 31 for the period January 1 to June 30 and January 31 for the period
July 1 to December 31 and must include the following information:
   (A)   The total volume and/or tonnage of municipal waste collected in the
county by sector (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial and institutional);
and
   (B)   The total volume and/or tonnage of each category of recyclable
materials collected and recycled by sector (i.e., residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional).
(1980 Code, § 54.04) (Res. 00-398, passed 11-16-2000) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Local government entities collecting and hauling debris from storm
cleanup operations;
   (B)   Businesses to whom the hauling of waste is incident to their normal
provision of service; and
   (C)   Persons hauling municipal waste or other refuse from their own
residence for property disposal, recycling or processing.
(1980 Code, § 54.05) (Res. 00-398, passed 11-16-2000)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be a petty offense to violate this chapter, violators may be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
(1980 Code, § 54.99) (Res. 00-398, passed 11-16-2000)
CHAPTER 55: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Authority, Purpose and Definitions
   
55.001   Statutory authority
   
55.002   Will County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan
   
55.003   Purposes of this chapter
   
55.004   Reference to watershed plans
   
55.005   Definitions
Requirements for Stormwater Management
   
55.020   General information
   
55.021   General stormwater requirements
   
55.022   Site runoff requirements
   
55.023   Site runoff storage requirements (detention/extended detention)
   
55.024   Stormwater requirements for agricultural land use including croplands,
pasture lands and farmsteads
Sediment and Erosion Control
   
55.035   Site planning
   
55.036   Standards and specifications
   
55.037   General requirement
   
55.038   Extended construction shutdown periods
   
55.039   Hydraulic and hydrologic design requirements
   
55.040   “As-needed” practices on the plans
   
55.041   Sediment and erosion control plan requirements
   
55.042   Conveyance of off-site flow
   
55.043   Stockpiles
   
55.044   Storm sewer inlets
   
55.045   Construction dewatering
   
55.046   Protection of public/private roadways
   
55.047   Temporary stream crossings
Protection of Special Management Areas
   
55.060   General
   
55.061   Floodplain, regulatory floodplain, base flood elevation (BFE) and
regulatory floodway locations
   
55.062   General performance standards
   
55.063   Compensatory storage volume standards
   
55.064   Floodway standards
   
55.065   Riverine floodplain
   
55.066   Bridge and culvert standards
Stormwater Management Permit Submittal Requirements
   
55.080   General requirements
   
55.081   Duration and revision to permits
   
55.082   Required submittals
   
55.083   Submittals prior to permit issuance
   
55.084   Record drawings
   
55.085   Issuance or denial of permit and appeal of permit denial
Long Term Maintenance
   
55.100   Long-term maintenance
   
55.101   Transfer to permitting authority or other public entity
   
55.102   Transfer to homeowner’s or similar association
   
55.103   Conveyance to one or more persons
   
55.104   Incorporation of maintenance obligations in stormwater management
permit
   
55.105   Funding of long term maintenance of stormwater facilities
General Provisions
   
55.120   Scope of regulation
   
55.121   Exemptions
   
55.122   Community’s list of proposed exempt developments
   
55.123   Interpretation
   
55.124   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
55.125   Choice of planning jurisdiction
   
55.126   Violations
   
55.127   Amendments
   
55.128   Effective date
Variances
   
55.140   Purpose
   
55.141   Application for variance
   
55.142   Application fee
   
55.143   Public hearing
   
55.144   Granting of variances
   
55.145   Recommendations
   
55.146   Decision
   
55.147   Conditions
Administration
   
55.160   Responsibility for Administration
   
55.161   Duties of Director
   
55.162   Duties of Administrator
   
55.163   Representative capacity
   
55.164   Oversight Committee
   
55.165   Non-certified communities
   
55.166   Service
   
55.167   Publication
Certified Community Enforcement
   
55.180   Authority
   
55.181   Petition for certification and waiver of enforcement
   
55.182   Filing and contents of petition for certification
   
55.183   Committee consideration of petition for certification
   
55.184   Standards for grant of petition
   
55.185   Certified community records
   
55.186   Committee review of enforcement by a certified community
   
55.187   Investigations; complaints
   
55.188   Hearing on complaint
   
55.189   Committee decision
Performance Security
   
55.200   General security requirements
   
55.201   Development security
   
55.202   Sediment and erosion control security
   
55.203   Letters of credit
Fee-in-Lieu of On-Site Detention
   
55.215   Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention
Enforcement
   
55.230   Inspection and maintenance authority
   
55.231   Required inspections
   
55.232   Offenses
County Stormwater Management Technical Guidance Manual
   
55.245   Adoption by reference
 
   
55.999   Penalty
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
§ 55.001 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Will County
Stormwater Management Ordinance (the “WCSMO”).
   (B)   The County Board adopts this chapter pursuant to its authority to
regulate stormwater management and governing the location, width, course and
release rate of all stormwater runoff channels, streams and basins in the
county, in accordance with the County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater
Management Plan. The statutory authority for this chapter is contained in ILCS
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1041, 5-1049, 5-1063, 5-1104, 5-12001, 5-15001 et seq. and
5-40001 and other applicable authority, all as amended from time to time.
   (C)   As applicable, the communities within the county adopt and enforce
this chapter or in the alternative adopt and enforce a municipal ordinance that
is consistent with and at least as strict as the county regulations, pursuant
to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1062, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-
30-2, 11-30-8 and 11-31-2 and ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 4.9 et seq., including §
18g.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.002 WILL COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan was
recommended by the County Stormwater Management Committee and adopted by the
County Board, after review by the appropriate agencies and a public hearing, by
Resolution 98-20 on October 15, 1998. The Plan is available for public
inspection in the office of the County Clerk.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.003 PURPOSES OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   The principal purpose of this chapter is to promote effective,
equitable, acceptable and legal stormwater management measures by establishing
reasonable rules and regulations for development.
   (B)   Other purposes of this chapter include:
      (1)   Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage throughout the county through planning, appropriate engineering
practices and proper maintenance;
      (2)   Protecting from, and reducing the existing potential for, loss of
human life, health, safety and property from the hazards of flooding damages on
a watershed basis;
      (3)   Preserving and enhancing the natural hydrologic and hydraulic
functions and natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains to
protect water quality, protect aquatic habitats, reduce flood damages, reduce
soil erosion, provide recreational and aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development;
      (4)   Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities,
developments, agricultural fields and construction sites and reducing and
repairing stream bank erosion;
      (5)   Requiring that planning for development provide for water resource
management, taking into account natural features such as vegetation, wildlife,
waterways, wetlands and topography in order to reduce the probability that new
development will create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
      (6)   Protecting environmentally sensitive areas from deterioration or
destruction by private or public actions;
      (7)   Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff
control, especially when the land is developed with a large amount of
impervious surface;
      (8)   Requiring the design and evaluation of each site stormwater
management plan consistent with watershed capacities;
      (9)   Encouraging the use of stormwater storage and infiltration of
stormwater in preference to stormwater conveyance;
      (10)   Lessening the taxpayers’ burden for flood-related disasters,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      (11)   Meeting the State Department of Natural Resources-Office of Water
Resources floodway permitting requirements delineated in ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §
18g (“An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of
the state”), as amended from time to time;
      (12)   Making federally subsidized flood insurance available to
individual communities and for property throughout the county by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
      (13)   Complying with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified in C.F.R. Title 44;
      (14)   Minimizing conflicts and incompatibilities between agricultural
and urban drainage systems and maintaining agriculture as a viable and
productive land use;
      (15)   Encouraging cooperation and consistency in stormwater management
activities within and between the units of government having floodplain and
stormwater management jurisdiction;
      (16)   Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities
that will not adversely affect the potential for flood damage;
      (17)   Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management
facilities;
      (18)   Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and
realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls;
      (19)   Providing a procedure by which communities throughout the county
may petition the Committee for authority to implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter; and
      (20)   Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   The purposes of this chapter are consistent with and supercede the
Plan.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.004 REFERENCE TO WATERSHED PLANS.
   (A)   This chapter recognizes the integrated nature of the watershed system
and the need to study certain flood control alternatives and other stormwater
management functions on a watershed-wide basis. A generalized process for
development of watershed plans was recommended in the adopted “County
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan”. This process includes a public
hearing review and approval by the Committee, and adoption by the county.
   (B)   (1)   Individual watershed plans or interim watershed plans which
recognize the unique attributes of each watershed may be prepared and
periodically updated for the major watersheds, to identify management projects
and establish criteria for development. These plans may also recommend changes
to this chapter effective within the study boundary.
      (2)   Watershed plans or interim watershed plans may be adopted which
recommend more or less stringent criteria than the criteria in this chapter.
When adopted by the County Board, these watershed-specific criteria established
in watershed plans or interim watershed plans shall be set forth as §§
55.035 through
55.047 of this chapter.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION. Occurs when rules and procedures regarding permit
applications and stormwater management permits are not followed.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the permitting authority to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL REVIEW ADVISORY COMMITTEE. Shall be composed of at least three
county residents who live and own and operate or tenant operate at least 60
contiguous acres of farmland in the county and representatives appointed by the
following agencies: Will and South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District
U.S.D.A., Natural Resource Conservation Service and the County Farm Bureau. The
Stormwater Management Committee will appoint these individuals in accordance
with Article 3, § 1D of the bylaws. The Stormwater Committee will consider
Committee member nomination recommendations from any active county agricultural
not for profit organization.
   AGRICULTURAL SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. A water management technique driven by
economic and safety concerns, where the rate at which surplus ground water
should be removed is determined primarily by the moisture/air requirements of
the vegetation (commonly called “tiles”, “field tiles” and the like).
   APPLICABLE ENGINEERING PRACTICE. Procedures, methods or materials
recommended in standard engineering textbooks or references as suitable for the
intended purpose.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to
carry out construction of a development from the county or appropriate
certified local governmental unit.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The list of permissible uses is
contained in §§
55.060 through
55.066.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in a given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The highest water surface elevation that can be
expected during the base flood.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). A measure used to control the adverse
stormwater-related effects of development. BMPs include structural devices
(e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches and detention basins)
designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes and protect
aquatic habitats. BMPs also include nonstructural approaches, such as public
education efforts to prevent the dumping of household chemicals into storm
drains.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   BUFFER. An area of predominantly vegetated land located adjacent to
channels, wetlands, lakes or ponds for the purpose of reducing contaminants in
stormwater that flows to those areas.
   BULLETIN 70. Frequency Distributions of Heavy Precipitation in Illinois:
Updated Bulletin 70 by James Angel and Momcilo Marcus of the Illinois State
Water Survey, Prairie Research Institute (March 2019).
   BYPASS FLOWS. Stormwater runoff or ground water from upstream properties
tributary to a property’s drainage system but not under its control.
   CERTIFIED COMMUNITY. A community which has met the requirements to be
delegated the responsibility for ordinance enforcement as determined by the
Stormwater Committee.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or human-made drainage way, which has a definite bed
and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface, ground water, effluent or
industrial discharges flow either perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted vegetation
but does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash or dredging to
previously documented thalwag elevations and side slopes.
   COMMERCIAL. Sale of goods to the public at large where the traffic generated
warrants construction of site improvements.
   COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT. Development on a parcel upon which the existing
condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
commercial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious
surfaces added after the effective date of the chapter are specifically
excluded from this definition.
   COMMITTEE. The County Stormwater Management Committee.
   COMMUNITY. The county or any city or village within the county.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An excavated, hydrologically and hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood
storage.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA). A FEMA comment letter on a
development proposed to be located in, and affecting only that portion of, the
area of floodplain outside the regulatory floodway and having no impact on the
existing regulatory floodway or base flood elevations.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter that indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM after the record
drawings are submitted and approved.
   COE. The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
   CONSERVATION PLANNING. The practices and procedures associated with the
management of soil, water, plants, plant nutrients and other elements of
agricultural production. Documentation of the management system shall only be
as required by the NRCS or in cases of a complaint, as requested by the
Administrator in response to a notification of a complaint.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to limit the rate of flow that
passes through the structure to a specific rate, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
   COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.
   CRITICAL DURATION. The duration of a storm event that results in the
greatest peak runoff.
   DAM. Any obstruction, wall embankment or barrier, together with any
abutments and appurtenant works, constructed to store or divert water or to
create a pool (not including underground water storage tanks).
   DEPARTMENT. The County Land Use Department.
   DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE. The volume contained below a closed contour on a one-
foot contour interval topographic map, the upper elevation which is determined
by the invert of a surface gravity outlet.
   DETENTION BASIN (SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY). A constructed structure for
the temporary storage of stormwater runoff with a controlled release rate.
   DEVELOPER. A person who creates or causes a development.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any constructed change to real estate including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a
building or an addition to a building;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on-site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use;
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts, channel modifications, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface, storage materials,
deposit of solids or liquid waste;
         (e)   Any other activity of humans that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal; and/or
         (f)   Plowing and cultivation and other similar agricultural practices
that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees as regulated in
§
55.024.
      (2)   The following are not considered development: maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads
with an impervious surface when there is no increase in elevation.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE SITE. Parcels of land, or portions thereof, which are
immediately adjacent and naturally drain directly to the banks of the Des
Plaines River, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, DuPage River and Kankakee River
without crossing over other private or public property.
   DIRECTOR. The County Executive or his or her designee charged with
performing the duties specified in this chapter.
   DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A disconnected impervious surface (DIS) is
a built-upon area (usually a solar panel farm or a canopy) that discharges
runoff to a vegetated area that is sized and graded to reduce runoff and
pollutants. The structure shall have no impervious surface under it, other than
supports required to support the structure, such as posts or piers. These
foundations will count as impervious surface and be added to the total
impervious surface on the site. The vegetated receiving area shall not include
any impervious surface.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The land area above a given point that may contribute runoff
flow at that point from rainfall.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date to be determined by the County Board.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by FEMA, or its equivalent, that is
used to certify the base flood elevation and the lowest elevation of usable
space to which a building has been constructed.
   EPHEMERAL STREAM. A stream whose bed elevation does not intersect the ground
water table, it carries flow only during and immediately after a runoff
producing rainfall event.
   EROSION. The process whereby soil is detached by the action of water or
wind.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   EXTENDED DETENTION. A volume of runoff temporarily detained and released
over a long period of time as specified in §
55.023.
   FEE-IN-LIEU OF DETENTION. A fee paid by a developer to the permitting
authority, commensurate with the costs and fee schedules adopted by the county
and/or the certified community based on the detention volume required for the
development to meet the ordinance release rates. Rules and procedures for fee
in lieu of detention are contained in §
55.215 of this chapter.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency and its
regulations, at 44 C.F.R. §§ 59 through 79, effective as of September 29, 1989
or as amended.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal ways or the unusual
and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A floodplain management map issued
by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analysis, the boundaries of the base
flood, the 0.2% probability flood and the floodway.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. Normally expressed as a period of years, based on a percent
chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical analysis, during which
a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. For
example, the two-year flood frequency has a 50% chance of occurrence in any
given year. Similarly, the 100-year flood frequency has a 1% chance of
occurrence in any given year.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map, which depicts generalized areas of floodplains, replaced by a
detailed flood insurance study.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map, on which map FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map may or
may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). A study of flood discharges and flood profiles
for a community, adopted and published by FEMA.
   FLOODPLAIN. The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation including detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas and the
like. The floodplain is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA).
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the BFE plus one foot of
freeboard for structures within the plan limits of the base flood elevation.
Outside the plan limits, the water table or 100-year design water surface
elevation of any adjacent stormwater facility, whichever is higher, plus one
foot of freeboard.
   FLOODPROOF. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
   FLOODWAY or DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. Includes the channel, on stream lakes, and
that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or channel which is needed
to store and convey the critical duration 100-year frequency flood discharge
with no more than a one-tenth-foot increase in flood stage due to the loss of
flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.
   FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE. The measure of the flow carrying capacity of the
floodway section and is defined using Manning’s equation as:
   K = 1.4863 AR 23 /n
where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective area of the
cross-section, and “R” is ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of height added to the BFE or 100-year design water
surface elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in
calculations, unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects
such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   FUNCTIONAL. Refers to stormwater facilities, which serve their primary
purpose of meeting developed release rate requirements but do not meet all of
the final design conditions. For example, a detention basin, which has been
excavated but has not, had the side slopes graded, nor the final landscaping
placed, may be considered FUNCTIONAL as a site runoff storage facility.
   GOOD HUSBANDRY. Generally accepted agricultural practices found in good farm
management.
   GROUND WATER. Water that is located within soil or rock below the surface of
the earth. Same as SUBSURFACE WATER.
   GROUND WATER CONTROL SYSTEM. A designed system which may consist of tiles,
under drains, French drains or other appropriate stormwater facilities whose
purpose is to lower the ground water table to a predictable elevation
throughout the year.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)    Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by
the State Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDRAULICS. The science and study of the mechanical behavior of water in
physical systems and processes.
   HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA. Consists of those areas of
concrete, asphalt and gravel surfaces along with roof tops which convey flows
directly to an improved drainage system consisting of storm sewers or paved
channels. Rooftops whose downspouts discharge to unpaved surfaces which are
designed for the absorption and filtration of stormwater runoff shall not be
considered as HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACES. Roadways whose
primary conveyance is through open ditches and swales shall not be considered
as HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Roadways drained by curb and
gutter and storm sewer, and driveways hydraulically connected to those roadways
shall be considered as directly connected impervious surface.
   HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE. Compensatory storage either
adjacent to the floodplain fill or not located adjacent to the development but
can be shown by hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be equivalent to
compensatory storage located adjacent to the development.
   HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED. An area where the land surface has been cleared,
grubbed, compacted or otherwise modified that changes runoff, volumes, rates or
direction.
   HYDROLOGY. The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics,
composition and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth and
underground.
   IDNR-OWR. The State Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   IMPERVIOUS. Surfaces that cause the majority of rainfall to be converted to
direct runoff. Asphalt, concrete and roofing systems will be considered
IMPERVIOUS.
   INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT. Development on a parcel upon which the existing
condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
industrial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious
surfaces added after the effective date of the chapter are specifically
excluded from consideration as INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT.
   INTERIM WATERSHED PLAN. A regional study of a watershed which does not
address the entire range of purposes, goals and objectives outlined in the
Countywide Stormwater Management Plan approved by the Committee and adopted by
the county.
   INTERMITTENT STREAM. A stream whose bed intersects the ground water table
for only a portion of the year on the average or any stream which flows
continuously for at least one month out of the year but not the entire year.
   LAKE. A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two or
more acres, which retains water throughout the year.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). The official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain. A LOMA amends the
effective FHBM, FBFM or FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A letter from FEMA that revises base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown
on an effective FHBM, FBFM or FIRM.
   MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM. The portion of a stormwater facility needed to
store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor stormwater system.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MASS GRADING. Development in which the primary activity is a change in
topography affected by the movement of earth materials.
   MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM. Consists of all infrastructure including curb,
gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and swales, storm sewers and subsurface
drainage systems intended to convey stormwater runoff at less than a 100-year
flood frequency. The design frequency for MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEMS shall be in
accordance with the applicable ordinances of the local Community or Highway
Department jurisdiction.
   MITIGATION. Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development in
wetlands or the floodplain.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program whose
requirements are codified in C.F.R. Title 44.
   NET BENEFIT IN WATER QUALITY. The institution of best management practices
as part of a development that when compared to the pre-development condition
can be judged to reduce downstream sediment loading or pollutant loadings.
   NET WATERSHED BENEFIT.
      (1)   A finding that, when compared to the existing condition, the
developed project will do one of the following:
         (a)   Substantially reduce (more than 10%) downstream peak discharges;
         (b)   Reduce downstream flood stages (more than one-tenth foot); or
         (c)   Reduce downstream damages to structures occurring in the pre-
development condition.
      (2)   The demonstration of one of these conditions must be through
detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of watersheds on a regional scale as
approved by the Administrator.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
   NON-RIVERINE. Areas not associated with a stream or river such as isolated
depressional storage areas, ponds and lakes.
   NRCS. The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
   OBSERVATION STRUCTURES. Structures built on a field tile where the pipe
inflow and outflow is visible upon removal of a lid.
   OPEN CHANNEL. A conveyance system with a definable bed and banks carrying
the discharge from field tiles and surface drainage. OPEN CHANNELS do not
include grassed swales within farm fields under agricultural production, which
are ephemeral in nature.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristic.
   OVERLAND FLOW PATH. A design feature of the major stormwater system which
carries flows in excess of the minor stormwater system design capacity in an
open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to
withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
   OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE. A certified community’s body of officials charged by
the certified community with overseeing variance of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance within the certified community. The Oversight Committee may be a body
of elected or appointed officials. See §
55.164.
   PERENNIAL STREAMS. Riverine watercourses whose thalwag generally intersects
the ground water table elevation and flows throughout the year.
   PERMITTING AUTHORITY. The county or a certified community.
   PLAN. The County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan,
adopted by the County Board on October 13, 1998, as amended from time to time.
   POND. A body of water of less than two acres, which retains a normal water
level year round.
   PRIMARY GRAVITY OUTLET. The outlet structure designed to meet the release
rate requirements of this chapter.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the state, under the State
Professional Engineering Practice Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.),
as amended.
   PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state, under
the State Land Surveyors Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et seq.), as
amended.
   PROPERTY. Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft in whole or in part for commercial uses and purposes
and all lakes, rivers and streams, which in their natural conditions were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and
submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly
accessible thereto.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project, which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing
buildings and structures, which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of
the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing in
whole or in part of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
public agencies.
   PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT. An easement acceptable to the appropriate
jurisdictional body that meets the regulations of the OWR, the Department and
the community, and that provides legal assurances that all areas subject to
flooding in the created backwater of the development will remain open to allow
flooding.
   RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings prepared, signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor representing the final “as-
built” record of the actual in-place elevations, location of structures and
topography.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational camping travel or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the
state as a structural engineer.
   REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN.  The floodplain as depicted on maps recognized by
FEMA as defining the limits of the SFHA.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. Those portions of the floodplain depicted on maps as
floodway and recognized by the IDNR-OWR for regulatory purposes.
   RETENTION FACILITY. Stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release.
   RIVER FRONTAGE. The property that is immediately adjacent to and naturally
drains directly to the Des Plaines River, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal,
DuPage River or Kankakee River without crossing over other private or public
property.
   RIVERINE. Related to, formed by, or resembling a channel (including creeks
and rivers).
   RUNOFF. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a
tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of
that basin.
   SEASONAL HIGH GROUND WATER TABLE. The upper limits of the soil temporarily
saturated with water, being usually associated with spring wetness conditions.
This may be indicated by soil mottles with a Munsell color of two chroma or
less.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits hydraulically moved soils, debris
and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
stormwater drainage systems.
   SEDIMENT TRAP. A structure or area that allows for the temporary deposit and
removal or disposal of sediment materials from stormwater runoff.
   SEEPAGE. The movement of drainable water through soil and rock.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area having special flood, mudslide or
mudflow, or flood-related erosion hazards and which area is shown on an FHBM or
FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E.
   STORMWATER FACILITY. All ditches, channels, conduits, bridges, culverts,
levees, ponds, natural and human-made impoundments, wetlands, riparian
environment, tile, swales, sewers or other natural or artificial structures or
measures which serve as a means of draining surface and subsurface water from
land.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT. The permit issued under §§
55.080 through
55.085.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a built change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than 180 days unless they are fully licensed and ready for
highway use.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   The following three occasions, when work is performed on an
existing building taking place during a ten-year period, cumulatively, is
classified as a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
         (a)   An improvement made to a building whose cost is equal to or
exceeds 50% of the buildings’ market value before the improvement;
         (b)   Reconstruction or repair of a building, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building before reconstruction or
repair; or
         (c)   Additions to an existing building whose cost equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of a structure, or increases the floor area by more
than 20%.
      (2)   Note that if a building is substantially improved, then the entire
building must comply with the building protection standards.
   SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. The removal of excess soil water to control water table
levels at predetermined elevations for structural, environmental or other
reasons in areas already developed or being developed for agricultural,
residential, industrial, commercial or recreational uses.
   SUBSURFACE WATER. Water beneath the ground or pavement surface. Sometimes
referred to as GROUND WATER or SOIL WATER.
   T FACTOR. The soil loss tolerance. It is defined as the maximum amount of
erosion at which the quality of a soil as a medium for plant growth can be
maintained. Erosion losses are estimated by Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)
and Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE).
   TECHNICAL MANUAL. The manual adopted by the County Board, which refers to
this chapter and provides additional explanations and examples.
   THALWAG. A line along the lowest point in a channel.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section, or vice versa.
   USABLE SPACE. Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities or other
beneficial purposes, including without limitation basements.
   WATER TABLE. The upper limit of a free water surface in a saturated soil or
underlying material.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. As defined by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers in their Federal Methodology for the Regulation of Wetlands. For
purposes of this chapter, WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES include wetlands, lakes,
rivers, streams, creeks, bogs, fens and ponds. WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES do
not include maintained stormwater facilities.
   WATERSHED. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same
stream, lake, stormwater facility or draining to a point.
   WATERSHED BENEFIT. See NET WATERSHED BENEFIT.
   WATERSHED CHARACTERISTICS. Include land use, physiology, habitat, climate,
drainage system and community profile.
   WATERSHED PLAN. A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin’s
stormwater management, floodplain management, water quality and flood control
needs and capabilities.
   WETLAND. As defined in current federal methodology recognized by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers for regulatory purposes.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Res. 10-72, passed 3-18-2010; Ord. 19-239, passed 9-19-2019;
Ord. 22-24, passed 2-25-2022)
REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT
§ 55.020 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Other applicable regulations. All developments shall meet the
requirements specified for general stormwater development (§
55.020), site runoff (§
55.022), sediment and erosion control (§§
55.035 through
55.047), performance security and maintenance (§§
55.200 through
55.203).
   (B)   Applicability of site runoff storage requirements (detention).
      (1)   All developments shall comply with the site runoff storage
requirements provided in §
55.023 of this subchapter in which:
         (a)   More than two single-family structures or one two-family
structure are to be constructed on a site five or more acres in size;
         (b)   Multi-family or nonresidential land use is to be constructed on
a site more than one acre in size;
         (c)   Existing multi-family or nonresidential land uses on a site one
acre or more in size, on which new development after the effective date of this
chapter in the aggregate exceeds 25,000 square feet;
         (d)   Roadway developments in rights-of-way under the ownership or
control of a unit of local governments when the contiguous area of new roadway
construction (excluding previously paved areas) exceeds two acres; and
         (e)   The developer of a commercial or industrial redevelopment may
request that a fee-in-lieu of detention be approved provided that all of the
following are demonstrated to the sole satisfaction of the Administrator:
            1.   The drainage plan will not increase existing flood damages;
and
            2.   The drainage plan provides a net benefit in water quality
compared to the existing development.
      (2)   The Administrator shall determine the appropriate fee to be
collected as defined in §
55.215, and his or her decision in the matter shall be considered final.
   (C)   Exemptions from site runoff storage requirements (detention). Site
run-off storage is not required under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Direct discharge industrial sites; and/or
      (2)   Non-industrial direct discharge sites 160 acres or less having the
following minimum river frontage:
 
Site Area       Required Frontage
0—2 acres     50 feet
Up to 5 acres   100 feet
Up to 10 acres  150 feet
Up to 40 acres  200 feet
Up to 80 acres  350 feet
Up to 160 acres 500 feet
 
      (3)   In solar farm developments, the solar panels will be considered
"disconnected" and therefore pervious, if the following criteria are met:
         (a)   Groundcover vegetation must be maintained in good condition in
those areas receiving disconnected runoff, specifically the area under and
between the rows of panels. Typically this maintenance is no different than
other lawn or landscaped areas. However, care should be taken to avoid soil
compaction in these areas.
         (b)   The total proposed impervious area on the surface of the ground
must be less than 25,000 square feet. The total impervious must include any
gravel, pavement, asphalt, concrete, panel posts, and so on.
         (c)   The open space between panels must be equal to or greater than
the width of the row of panels. The runoff must sheet flow onto and across the
vegetated area to maintain the disconnection. Sheet flow is optimal on sites
with gradual slopes (<5%). Level spreaders, terraces, or berms may be used to
maintain sheet flow conditions if the average slope is steeper than 5% and
<10%. Installations on slopes >10% will require a detailed engineering study to
demonstrate the safe and non-erosive conveyance of runoff to the property line
or downstream storm water management practice.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 22-24, passed 2-25-2022)
§ 55.021 GENERAL STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements applicable to all developments. No development shall:
      (1)   Result in any new or additional expense to any person other than
the developer for flood protection; or
      (2)   Increase flood elevations or decrease flood conveyance capacity
upstream or downstream of the area under the ownership or control of the
developer. This requirement shall not prohibit the removal or reduction of
built obstructions to flow, such as increasing culvert capacity or lowering
roadway elevations.
   (B)   Building permits. Stormwater facilities shall be functional before
building permits are issued for residential and nonresidential subdivision.
   (C)   Single parcel developments. Stormwater facilities shall be functional
where practicable for single parcel developments before building construction
begins.
   (D)   Overland flow paths. The development shall have an overland flow path
at the downstream limit of the property that will pass the base flood flow
without increasing damage to structures or property. If the upstream drainage
area is less than 20 acres, the storm sewer pipe and inlet sized for the base
flood can be constructed in lieu of providing an overland flow path. Overland
flow paths internal to the site shall be considered as part of the major
stormwater system and shall be designed for conveyance of the base flood
(critical duration) and shall be a minimum of one cfs per tributary acre
without damage to structures.
   (E)   Protection of buildings. All usable space in new buildings or added to
existing buildings hydraulically connected to a major stormwater system, site
runoff storage facility or overland flow path shall be elevated, floodproofed
or otherwise protected to at least one foot above the 100-year design elevation
or current FIS elevation, which ever is greater. The design elevation is the
elevation associated with the design release rate as determined in §
55.022(C).
   (F)   Depressional storage. The function of existing on-site depressional
storage shall be preserved for both on-site and off-site tributary flows in
addition to required detention. When depressional storage is removed it must be
compensated for in the site runoff storage facility at a one to one ratio
provided that offsite areas tributary to the existing depressional storage are
routed through the site runoff storage facility. This requirement is in
addition to the site runoff storage required in §
55.022. The Administrator may allow the function of depressional storage to be
preserved if the applicant performs detailed pre- and post-project hydrologic
and hydraulic modeling to identify the effect of the depressional storage on
discharges over a range of rainfall frequencies.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004) Penalty, see §
55.999
§ 55.022 SITE RUNOFF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    Stormwater facility discharges. Stormwater facilities shall be
required and designed so that runoff exits the site at a point where it exited
prior to the subject development and in a manner so that flows will not
increase flood damage to adjacent property except when otherwise approved by
the Administrator. Concentrated discharges from new developments must enter
conveyance systems capable of carrying the design flow rate without increasing
flood damages or maintenance costs downstream.
   (B)   Minor stormwater system criteria. Minor stormwater systems shall be
sized to convey runoff from the tributary watershed under fully developed
conditions consistent with the design requirements of the local jurisdiction.
   (C)   Major stormwater system criteria. Major stormwater systems shall be
sized to carry the base flood without causing additional flood damage.
   (D)   Existing subsurface and surface drainage systems.
      (1)   Stormwater systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible
with existing subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural
systems. Designs shall not cause damage to the existing drainage system(s) or
the existing adjacent or tributary land including those with agricultural uses.
      (2)   The following principles and requirements shall be observed in the
design.
         (a)   Off-site outfall. Agricultural subsurface and surface drainage
systems shall be evaluated with regard to their capacity and capability to
properly convey low flow ground water and site runoff storage facility release
without damage to downstream structure and land use on the adjacent property.
If the outfall drain tile and surface drainage systems prove to be inadequate,
it will be necessary to modify the existing systems or construct new systems
which will not conflict with the existing systems and will not impact the
existing agricultural land use. Existing subsurface systems shall only be used
with extended detention design.
         (b)   On-site. Agricultural drainage systems shall be located and
evaluated on-site. All existing on-site agricultural drain tile not serving a
beneficial use shall be abandoned by trench removal prior to other development
and recorded on record plans. If any existing drain tiles continue to upland
watersheds, the developer must maintain drainage service during construction
until new sewers can be installed for a permanent connection.
         (c)   Off-site tributary. Existing drainage systems shall be evaluated
with regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion
capacities. All existing tributary drain tiles shall be incorporated into the
new conduits including observation structures located at the property limits,
shall provide a free flow discharge and shall not allow surface runoff to enter
the system.
         (d)   New roadway construction. New roadway construction shall
preserve existing subsurface systems within the right-of-way. Inspection wells
shall be placed at the right-of-way (ROW) and tiles found to not be flowing
between inspection wells at the end of the construction shall be replaced.
   (E)   Design runoff rate. Design runoff rates for conveyance may be
calculated using the Rational Method.
   (F)   Design rainfall. Any design runoff rate calculation method for
conveyance shall use data from Illinois State Water Survey Updated Bulletin 70
(March 2019) Northeast Sectional Code.
   (G)   Stormwater system easements. For projects involving subdivision major
and minor stormwater systems shall be located within easements or rights-of-way
explicitly providing for public access for maintenance of the facilities. For
all other projects requiring a permit, easements are required for public access
for maintenance of stormwater facilities only for new construction or
modifications involving components of a drainage system that conveys runoff
from off-site properties. For I-2, I-3 or equivalent zoning property, the
stormwater system does not have to be located within an easement or public
rights-of-way. Instead, the owner’s representative shall provide a signed
agreement to the appropriate government entity authorizing it to enter the
facility to maintain the stormwater system if the owner fails to correct any
deficiencies brought to the owner’s attention by the governmental entity.
   (H)   Flow depths. Maximum flow depths for new transverse stream crossings
shall not exceed one foot at the crown of the road during the base flood
condition. The maximum flow depth on a roadway shall not exceed six inches at
the crown for flow parallel to the roadway. For flow over a new roadway or
parallel to a new roadway, the product of the flow depth (in feet) and velocity
(in feet per second) shall not exceed four for the base flood condition.
   (I)   Diversion of flow to another watershed. Transfers of waters between
watersheds (diversions) shall be prohibited except when the transfers will not
violate the provisions of §
55.021(A) and are otherwise lawful. Watersheds for purpose of regulation under
this section shall be the major watershed divides as defined in the County
Plan.
   (J)   Best management practices requirement. Developments shall incorporate
all best management practices as may be required pursuant to the United States
Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 19-239, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 55.023 SITE RUNOFF STORAGE REQUIREMENTS (DETENTION/EXTENDED DETENTION).
   (A)   Release rate.
      (1)   If no release rate is specified in an adopted watershed plan in
accordance with §
55.004, then sufficient flood storage shall be provided so that the site will
not discharge at a rate greater than 0.15 cfs/acre of development during and
after a rainfall event with a 100-year frequency except for sites exempted in
this section. Unless exempted in this section, sites shall not discharge at a
rate greater than 0.04 cfs/acre of development during and after a rainfall
event with a two-year frequency.
      (2)   This area of hydrologic disturbance on the site shall be used to
calculate the required site runoff storage volume. The on-site watershed area
tributary to the point of discharge shall be used to calculate the allowable
release rate for the site runoff storage facility, which shall be the maximum
release rate allowed considering only the on-site watershed area runoff.
   (B)   Design methods.
      (1)   Event hydrograph routing methods or the modified rational method
may be used to calculate design runoff volumes for site runoff facilities. The
methods must be HEC-1, (SCS methodology), HEC-HMS, TR-20 or TR-55 tabular
method. Event methods shall incorporate the following assumptions:
         (a)   Antecedent moisture condition equals two;
         (b)   Appropriate Huff rainfall distribution; and
         (c)   Twenty-four-hour duration storm with a 1% probability (100-year
frequency) of occurrence in any one year as specified by data from Illinois
State Water Survey Updated Bulletin 70 (March 2019) Northeast Sectional Code.
      (2)   When the modified rational method is used, rainfall statistics
shall be from the Illinois State Water Survey Updated Bulletin 70 (March 2019)
Northeast Sectional Code and the volume determined shall be multiplied by the
following factor based on the date of final engineering approval:
         (a)   In the first year after the effective date of the chapter: 110%;
         (b)   In the second year after the effective date of the chapter:
120%; and
         (c)   After the third year following the effective date of the
chapter: 130%.
   (C)   Existing release rate less than allowable. For sites where the
undeveloped release rate is less than the maximum release rate in division (A)
above, the developed release rate and corresponding site runoff storage volume
shall be based on the existing undeveloped release rate for the development.
   (D)   Downstream water surface elevations. All hydrologic and hydraulic
computations must utilize appropriate assumptions for downstream water surface
elevations, from low flow through the base flood elevation, considering the
likelihood of concurrent flood events.
   (E)   Extended detention requirement.
      (1)   The requirements of this section will apply only when an existing
agricultural land use is downstream of and adjacent to a site runoff storage
facility outlet. The runoff from a 0.75-inch rainfall event over the
hydraulically connected impervious area of the new development shall be stored
below the elevation of the primary gravity outlet (extended detention) of the
site runoff storage facility. The facility may be designed to allow for
evapotransporation or infiltration of this volume into a subsurface drainage
system and shall not be conveyed through a direct positive connection to
downstream areas.
      (2)   The hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation
of required extended detention volume may be reduced by the Administrator if
the soils are prepared to maximize infiltration and deep rooted grasses or
other plants selected for their ability to promote infiltration or water
absorption are planted in areas appropriately dedicated. The reduction in
hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal
to the area of the development meeting the above soils/native planting
requirement.
      (3)   Subsurface drainage systems may be designed as a component of the
extended detention portion of the detention basin to assist in infiltration in
accordance with the following criteria.
         (a)   The extended detention volume shall be discharged at a rate no
greater than that required to empty the calculated extended detention volume
within five days of the storm event.
         (b)   No subsurface drainage pipe shall be located within ten feet of
drainage pipes directly connected to the detention basin.
         (c)   For purposes of meeting the maximum subsurface drainage
discharge requirements, flow control orifices and weirs may be used.
         (d)   All design extended detention volume shall be provided above the
seasonal high ground water table or the invert elevation of the ground water
control system.
         (e)   Farm field tile shall not be considered a subsurface drainage
system.
   (F)   Site runoff storage facility design requirements. Storage facilities
shall be designed and constructed with the following characteristics.
      (1)   The site runoff storage facility shall provide one foot of
freeboard above the design high water elevation.
      (2)   The storage facilities shall be accessible and easily maintained.
      (3)   Storage facilities shall facilitate sedimentation and catchment of
floating material. Unless specifically approved by the Administrator, concrete
lined low-flow ditches shall not be used in detention basins.
      (4)   Storage facilities shall minimize impacts of stormwater runoff on
water quality by incorporating best management practices.
      (5)   Storage facilities shall maximize the normal flow distance between
detention inlets and outlets, to the extent possible.
      (6)   Storage facilities shall be designed so that the existing
conditions pre-development peak runoff rate from the 100-year, critical
duration rainfall will not be exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is
blocked.
      (7)   Storage facilities with single pipe outlets shall have a minimum
inside diameter of 12 inches. If design release rates necessitate a smaller
outlet, structures such as perforated risers or flow control orifices shall be
used.
   (G)   Site runoff storage facility requirements. Within the regulatory
floodplain storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain shall:
      (1)   Conform to all applicable requirements specified in §§
55.060 through
55.066 of this chapter;
      (2)   Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the release rate
requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in the receiving
stream up to the ten-year flood elevation;
      (3)   Detention volume provided by enlarging existing regulatory
floodplain storage without providing a structure controlling discharge (on-
stream detention) will be allowed only as a variance. The applicant must
demonstrate that flood damages are not increased and the development will not
increase flood flows for both the two-year and 100-year floods on the stream
with developed conditions on the site; and
      (4)   The Administrator may approve designs which can be shown by
detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to provide a net watershed benefit
not otherwise realized by strict application of the requirements in a through c
above.
   (H)   Site runoff storage facility requirements within the regulatory
floodway. Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodway shall:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for locating storage facilities in the
regulatory floodplain;
      (2)   Be evaluated by performing hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
consistent with the standards and requirements for any adopted watershed plans;
and
      (3)   Provide a net watershed benefit.
   (I)   Off-site facilities. Site runoff storage facilities may be located
off-site if the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The off-site storage facility meets all of the requirements of this
subchapter, §§
55.020 through
55.024.
      (2)   Adequate storage capacity in the off-site facility is dedicated to
the development.
      (3)   The development includes means to convey stormwater to the off-site
storage facility.
   (J)   Cross-stream structures for site runoff storage facilities. Structures
constructed across the channel to impound water to meet detention requirements
shall be prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a public flood
control project with a net watershed benefit. Those streams appearing as blue
on a USGS quadrangle map shall be assumed perennial unless better data is
obtained. All cross-stream structures for the purpose of impounding water to
provide detention in all cases on perennial and intermittent streams must
demonstrate that they will not cause short-term or long-term stream channel
instability.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 19-239, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 55.024 STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND USE INCLUDING CROPLANDS,
PASTURE LANDS AND FARMSTEADS.
   (A)   Applicability. Regulations under this section apply only to croplands,
pasturelands, farmsteads and outbuildings associated with those agricultural
practices. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be construed
as compliance with the stormwater chapter for the above land uses and no
further regulation under the chapter will apply. Any other land use, including
greenhouses, nurseries, container grown plants, equestrian facilities, the sale
of agricultural products to the public or where commercial activities involving
the new construction of gravel or paved parking facilities or buildings whose
aggregate area is 25,000 square feet or more are required to comply with all
applicable sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Conservation planning and performance standards.
      (1)   To comply with this section, landowners shall practice conservation
planning whose product shall be a management system, which addresses site
runoff, soil erosion and sediment control, surface and subsurface drainage. Any
acreage with a signed and approved NRCS conservation plan is exempt from the
requirements of this section and the chapter.
      (2)   Applicable approved practices include:
         (a)   Vegetated grass waterways;
         (b)   Contour buffer strips;
         (c)   Critical area planting and cover crops;
         (d)   Terrace ridges and diversions;
         (e)   Contour strip cropping;
         (f)   Contour farming;
         (g)   Crop rotation;
         (h)   Conservation tillage and crop residue management; and
         (i)   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance
with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the County NRCS District Conservationist or the County Agricultural
Admini- strator.
      (3)   The performance standard for conservation planning shall be a
management system which will develop a set of field practices which will reduce
the calculated actual soil loss to the “tolerable soil loss” (T) as calculated
by the revised universal soil loss equation for the actual site conditions.
Cropland tillage and resource management methods shall be consistent with the
Technical Guide Notice IL-108 and shall be considered evidence of compliance
with the T performance standard.
   (C)   Drainage practices, requirements and design criteria.
      (1)   Drainage for agricultural purposes shall be consistent with those
practices identified as appropriate for “good husbandry” given the soil types,
slopes and crops. An agricultural drainage system may consist of both
subsurface drainage systems and surface drainage systems. Where active drainage
districts maintain drainage systems, they shall be consulted on surface and
subsurface drainage within the district boundaries.
      (2)   Requirements applying to subsurface and surface drainage system
shall be as follows.
         (a)   Subsurface drainage systems. Drain tile systems shall be
maintained and constructed in accordance with subsurface drainage
recommendations for the appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the
State Drainage Guide, University of Illinois Extension Service Circular No.
1226. Surface inlets into the subsurface drainage system shall be allowed only
to maintain good husbandry. Where their use cannot be practicably avoided due
to topography, they shall be installed using flow controls such as orifices and
perforated risers with gravel filters and/or vegetative filters.
         (b)   Surface drainage systems. Surface drainage systems shall be
maintained and constructed in accordance with surface drainage recommendations
for the appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the State Drainage
Guide, University of Illinois Extension Service No. 1226. Surface drainage
systems shall be built with geotechnically stable slopes and the surface when
applicable shall be further stabilized utilizing the establishment of cool and
warm season grass mixes as identified in Field Office Technical Guide (Illinois
108).
         (c)   Buffer strips. Open channels with a definable bed and banks
shall use buffer strips in order to reduce the amount of erosion occurring from
the conveyed flows as well as to help filter the runoff from the site into the
waterway. Buffer strips shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide from the top of bank
except where smaller widths are necessary due to site limitations and when
approved by the Administrator.
         (d)   Agricultural drainage systems. Agricultural drainage systems
shall also comply with all regulations regarding wetlands as enforced by
federal, state and local agencies.
   (D)   Sediment control for open channels.
      (1)   All open channel drainage systems shall maintain practices adjacent
to the open outlet channel that will reduce the transportation of sediment off-
site. Runoff from agricultural fields must pass through a sediment control
system prior to discharge into the open channel conveyance system.
      (2)   Approved sediment control systems may consist of the following:
         (a)   Vegetated buffer zones planted with permanent grasses
appropriate for soil stabilization and filtering;
         (b)   Grade control structures for over fall stabilization;
         (c)   Sediment traps adjacent to the stream channel; and
         (d)   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance
with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the County NRCS District Conservationist or the Administrator.
   (E)   Maintenance and construction of drainage systems. Agricultural
drainage systems shall be maintained so as to convey the expected flows for
good drainage practices. The existing agricultural surface drainage systems
shall not be enlarged unless the enlargement is consistent with all other
sections of this section. Maintenance and construction of subsurface drainage
systems will not be subject to the requirements of other sections of this
chapter except as they are regulated by other agencies. Maintenance projects by
legally functioning drainage districts on existing agricultural drainage
systems will not be subject to further permitting requirements under this
chapter except as they relate to the jurisdiction of other agencies.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
§ 55.035 SITE PLANNING.
   (A)   Sediment and erosion control planning shall be part of the initial
site planning process. In planning the development of the site, the applicant
shall consider the susceptibility of existing soils to erosion and topographic
features such as steep slopes and stream corridors which must be protected to
reduce the amount of sediment and erosion which occurs. Where appropriate,
existing vegetation shall be protected from disturbance during construction by
fencing or other means.
   (B)   In the planning process, the applicant shall also address the
following.
      (1)   For projects that involve phased construction, existing land cover
for those areas not under current development shall be addressed. If existing
land cover does not consist of an appropriate ground cover then these phases
shall be planted temporarily to reduce erosion from idle land.
      (2)   In planning the sediment and erosion control strategy, preference
shall be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling sediment. In order
to accomplish this, the plan must carefully consider the construction sequence
of the phases so that the amount of land area exposed to erosive forces is the
minimum consistent with completing construction.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.036 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance with the
Illinois Urban Manual (1995) or latest edition. Sediment and erosion control
planning shall be in accordance with Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois (revised July, 1988) by the Urban
Committee of the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts
(The Green Book) Chapters 1 through 5. Where the Illinois Urban Manual
supercedes sections of The Green Book, the Illinois Urban Manual shall prevail.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.037 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   The runoff from disturbed areas shall not leave the development site without
first passing through sediment control facilities. This requirement shall apply
to all phases of construction and shall include an ongoing process of
implementation of measures and maintenance of those measures during both the
construction season and any construction shut down periods.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.038 EXTENDED CONSTRUCTION SHUTDOWN PERIOD.
   The condition of the construction site for the winter shut down period shall
address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall growing season so
that slopes and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or
permanent vegetative cover. All open areas that are to remain idle throughout
the winter shall receive temporary erosion control measures including temporary
seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanketing prior to the end of the
fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of the growing
season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do not rely on
vegetative cover such as erosion control blankets and heavy mulching.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.039 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In the hydraulic and hydrologic design of major erosion control
measures (those whose tributary drainage area is greater than three acres) such
as sediment basins and traps, diversions and the like, the design frequency
shall be commensurate with the risk of the design event being exceeded.
   (B)   The following design frequencies shall be regarded as minimum design
frequencies for the construction period.
      (1)   For those projects whose construction period is less than six
months, then the storm event having a 50% chance (two-year event) of being
exceeded in any year shall be used for design purposes.
      (2)   For those projects whose construction period is greater than six
months but less than one year, the design frequency for major sediment basins
shall be a rainfall event with a 20% (five-year event) chance of being exceeded
in any one year.
      (3)   For those construction projects expected to last more than one
year, major sediment basins shall be designed for a rainfall event with a 10%
(ten-year event) chance of being exceeded in any one year.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.040 “AS-NEEDED” PRACTICES ON THE PLANS.
   (A)   The sediment and erosion control plan shall designate a series of
practices which shall be implemented either at the direction of the permittee
or the permittee’s representative on-site or at the direction of the
Administrator should an inspection of the site indicate a deficiency in soil
and sediment erosion control measures.
   (B)   As a minimum, these measures shall include the following:
      (1)   Sedimentation basins;
      (2)   Sediment traps;
      (3)   Diversion swales;
      (4)   Silt fences;
      (5)   Temporary seeding;
      (6)   Mulching; and
      (7)   Erosion control blankets.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.041 SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Sediment and erosion control plans shall be in accordance with §§
55.080 through
55.085 but shall include the following.
   (A)   Detailed construction phasing plan identifying sediment and erosion
control measures to be in place for each phase shall be submitted prior to
stripping the site of existing vegetation or cover.
   (B)   Sediment and erosion control measures to be installed initially prior
to stripping existing vegetation or mass grading shall be indicated on the
plans.
   (C)   Permanent stabilization measures shall be indicated on a separate
plan.
   (D)   The expected two-year and ten-year runoff rates from all off-site
areas draining into the site shall be identified on the plan.
   (E)   Methods for conveying flows through the site during construction shall
be indicated. These methods must include the temporary and permanent
stabilization measures to be used to reduce velocity and erosion from flow
through the construction zone.
   (F)   A maintenance schedule of each measure used shall be indicated on the
plan. As a minimum, all sediment and erosion control measures on-site shall be
inspected weekly and also by the applicants designee or after a one-half inch
or greater rainfall event and any required repairs shall be made to keep these
measures functional as designed. All repairs and modifications shall be
reviewed by the Administrator or his or her designee.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.042 CONVEYANCE OF OFF-SITE FLOW.
   (A)   To the extent practicable, proposed ditches and waterways which are to
convey off-site flows through the site shall be stabilized upon construction.
   (B)   Where new waterways are constructed, they shall be stabilized to the
extent practicable prior to their use to convey flood flows.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.043 STOCKPILES.
   (A)   Stockpiles of soil and other erodable or floatable building materials
(sand, limestone and the like) shall not be located in floodplains, overflow
routes or areas subject to frequent inundation.
   (B)   If a stockpile is to remain in place for more than three days, then
sediment and erosion control shall be provided for the stockpile.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.044 STORM SEWER INLETS.
   Storm sewer inlets shall be protected with sediment trapping and/or filter
control devices during construction.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.045 CONSTRUCTION DEWATERING.
   Water pumped or which is otherwise discharged from the site during
construction dewatering shall be filtered and a means provided to reduce
erosion.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.046 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC/PRIVATE ROADWAYS.
   Graveled roads, access drives, parking areas of sufficient width and length
and vehicle wash down facilities, if necessary, shall be provided to prevent
soils from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any soil tracked onto
a public or private roadway shall be removed before the end of each workday or
sooner as directed by the authority maintaining the roadway.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.047 TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSINGS.
   Temporary stream crossings of intermittent and perennial streams used only
for and during construction shall be designed to convey a two-year flood
(minimum) or other flood event approved by the Administrator without
overtopping unless a more frequent design event is allowed by the
Administrator. The entire crossing shall be designed to withstand hydrodynamic
forces and erosive forces up to the base flood event without washing out.
Ephemeral streams may be crossed at temporary at-grade crossings provided that
the crossing point is stabilized with materials resistive to the erosive forces
produced by runoff from the upstream drainage area, and the design is approved
by the Administrator. Temporary stream crossings shall be removed upon
completion of construction activities. All temporary stream crossing shall be
completely removed and the stream restored to its preconstruction condition
upon completion of construction. Restoration shall incorporate appropriate
vegetation consistent with the adjacent existing vegetation prior to
construction or in accordance with a restoration plan approved by the
Administrator.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
PROTECTION OF SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS
§ 55.060 GENERAL.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth requirements for developments within
floodplains and floodways. In addition, developments in the SFHA draining more
than one square mile with no designated floodway must meet IDNR/OWR Ill. Adm.
Code Part 3700 Rules. References to IDNR/OWR permits or approvals in this
section shall be construed as “their designee” where a portion or all of their
authority has been delegated.
   (B)   Development that qualifies for any of the self-issuing statewide or
regional permits administered by IDNR/OWR (Statewide Permit Nos. 1 though 14
and Regional Permit No. 3) are similarly permitted under this subchapter. The
developer need only submit to the Administrator information as shall show the
Administrator that the development qualifies for the particular statewide or
regional permit in question under the regulations established by IDNR/OWR for
the permit and no further submittal need be made under this subchapter. All
other provisions of this chapter applicable to the development, however,
continue to apply. However a permit from the county or the certified community
must still be issued.
   C)   All development shall meet the requirements set forth in Table 1. The
table is intended only as a guide to indicate the applicable ordinance sections
for development in floodplains.
Table 1: Summary of Applicable Chapter Sections for Development in Floodplains
When This   All Development Must Meet the Requirements of Sections (Except as
Occurs on   Noted)
Development 55.061 55.062 55.062 55.062 55.062 55.062 55.063 55.064 55.065 55.066
Site                      (B)    (C)    (D)    (E)
Table 1: Summary of Applicable Chapter Sections for Development in Floodplains
When This   All Development Must Meet the Requirements of Sections (Except as
Occurs on   Noted)
Development 55.061 55.062 55.062 55.062 55.062 55.062 55.063 55.064 55.065 55.066
Site                      (B)    (C)    (D)    (E)
                   (A)(6)
Floodplains X      (A)(7) —    —    —    X      —    —    —    —
                   only
                                                                           Bridge
Regulatory  X      X      X      X      X      --     X(1)   —    —    and
floodplains                                                                Culvert
                                                                           Projects
Regulatory  X      X      X      X(2)   X      —    X      X      —    —
floodways
Riverine
regulatory  X      X      X      X      X      —    —    —    X      —
floodplains
Notes:
(1)   Riverine, floodplains only
(2)   For buildings meeting appropriate use criteria
 
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.061 FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) AND
REGULATORY FLOODWAY LOCATIONS.
   (A)   The BFE shall be delineated onto the site topography to establish the
regulatory floodplain area limits for regulation under this chapter. Regulatory
floodplains shall be delineated onto the site map from the current FEMA FIRM,
FBFM or LOMR and include those areas of the SFHA which are not regulatory
floodplains. Each community, whether certified or not, remains responsible for
maintaining the effective FIS and a list of FIRM panels for their respective
communities.
   (B)   The BFE shall be:
      (1)   The elevation of the 100-year profile corresponding to the location
of the development as indicated in the flood profiles in the FEMA Flood
Insurance Studies listed in Appendix A, or as adopted by each community (which
may be updated from time to time);
      (2)   In the case of FEMA delineated “AH Zones” the elevation noted on
the map shall be the BFE. In the case of FEMA delineated “AO Zones” the BFE
shall be the depth number shown on the map added to the highest adjacent grade,
or at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
provided;
      (3)   (a)   When no BFE information exists and the upstream tributary
drainage area is 640 acres or greater, the BFE shall be determined using a site
specific floodplain study by a professional engineer using appropriate
hydrologic and hydraulic models as follows:
            1.   Hydrologic models: TR-20, HEC-1, HEC-HMS;
            2.   Hydraulic models: HEC-2, HEC-RAS, WSP-2; or
            3.   A technique approved by the Administrator and the IDNR/OWR.
         (b)   Where a channel has a tributary drainage area of 640 acres or
more, the above analyses shall be submitted to the IDNR/OWR for concurrent
approval.
         (c)   For a non-riverine regulatory floodplain, the historic flood of
record plus three feet may be used for the BFE instead of performing a detailed
hydrologic and hydraulic study.
      (4)   For floodplains that are not regulatory, are not draining more than
640 acres, and with no BFE determined, the Administrator may require a site-
specific floodplain study for the purpose of establishing an FPE for the
development.
   (C)   (1)   The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated
on the current effective regulatory maps maintain by each community. The
location of the regulatory floodway boundary shall be scaled onto the site plan
using references common to both the map and the plan (typically the center
lines of adjacent roadways). Where an interpretation is needed to determine the
exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be
contacted.
      (2)   Note: If an area of the site is located in the regulatory floodway
that is higher than the BFE, that area is subject to the floodway standards of
§
55.064, including the appropriate use criteria, until a time as a LOMR is
received from FEMA with concurrence by IDNR/OWR.
      (3)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory
floodway are as follows.
            1.   The flood profiles, flows and data in the current effective
FIS must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears
to be in error or conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall be contacted
for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
The Director shall be copied on all related correspondence.
            2.   If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected
by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area,
the proposed development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this
section with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.
            3.   If the applicant is informed by IDNR/OWR, local governments,
or a private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert
is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control
project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the
next five years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to meet
the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control
project is built, removed or modified as applicable.
            4.   If the appropriate use will result in a change in the
regulatory floodway location or a change in the BFE, the applicant shall submit
the information required to be issued a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. A public notice inviting public comment on the
proposed change in the BFE or location of the regulatory floodway will be
issued by IDNR/OWR or its designee before a CLOMR is issued. Filling, grading,
dredging or excavating may take place upon issuance of a conditional approval
from IDNR/OWR and the Administrator. No further development activities shall
take place in the existing or proposed floodplain until a letter of map
revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA unless the activities meet all the
requirements of §
55.062 of this chapter. The Director shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
            5.   For those circumstances listed below and located in a
regulatory floodway, at a minimum, the following information shall be submitted
to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence:
               a.   Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge,
culvert crossings and roadway approaches;
               b.   An engineer’s deter- mination that an existing bridge,
culvert crossing or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the
analysis indicating the proposed flood profile;
               c.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage; and
               d.   Stormwater management permits to local units of government
for regulatory floodway and floodplain development.
            6.   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams
and the like all other state, federal or WCSMC or certified community projects.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 18-305, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 55.062 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The following general performance standards are applicable
to all development in a regulatory floodplain. The standards of this section
apply except when superseded by more stringent requirements in the subsequent
sections.
      (1)   No development except as allowed in §
55.066 shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain that singularly or
cumulatively creates an increase in flood stage or velocity off-site, or a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity on-site
or threat to public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   For all projects involving a channel modification, fill, stream
maintenance or a levee, the flood conveyance and storage capacity of the
regulatory floodplain shall not be reduced.
      (3)   If the proposed development would result in a change in the
regulatory floodplain or BFE as indicated in Appendix A, or as adopted by each
community, the applicant shall obtain a LOMR from FEMA. No buildings may be
built in the existing or proposed regulatory floodplain until the LOMR receives
concurrence from IDNR/OWR and is issued by FEMA and the building meets all the
building protection standards (division (C) below). Proposed changes to the
regulatory floodway delineation and the BFE must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for
concurrence.
      (4)   If the development is located in a public body of water, as defined
by IDNR/OWR, a permit or a waiver of a permit must also be received from IDNR/
OWR.
      (5)   Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or
removal of a dam the developer shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required.
      (6)   (a)   For public flood control projects, the Floodplain Management
standards will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR
and WCSMC that each of the following conditions are met:
            1.   Demonstrate by hydraulic and hydrologic modeling that the
proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood
heights outside the project site or demonstrate that any increases will be
contained in easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event;
            2.   Demonstrate that the project will be operated and maintained
by a public agency; and
            3.   Demonstrate that the project will reduce flood damage to an
existing building or structure.
         (b)   These standards do not preclude the design, engineering,
construction or financing, in whole or in part of a public flood control
project by persons who are not public agencies.
      (7)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, planned
unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home park and additions
to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
data and floodway delineations.
   (B)   Public health protection standards.
      (1)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted if all manholes or other aboveground openings located
below the FPE are watertight.
      (2)   New on-site waste disposal systems, such as septic systems, are
allowed in the regulatory floodplain only if they meet all of the following
conditions.
         (a)   The invert of any wastewater distribution lines shall be a
minimum of two-feet above the water surface elevation of the base flow of any
perennial stream.
         (b)   The lateral distance from a ditch, creek or other riverine
source to the wastewater distribution lines shall be a minimum of 75.
         (c)   The elevation of any areas which are to receive wastewater
distribution shall be above the ordinary high water mark.
         (d)   The soil of the receiving field shall be of a type suitable for
septic fields.
         (e)   The tank shall be placed out of the floodplain with the invert
of the outlet above the BFE.
      (3)   New, substantially improved or replacement wastewater treatment
plants shall have watertight openings for those openings located below the FPE.
The facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the facility or
contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.
   (C)   Building protection standards. The building protection standards apply
to all buildings located in the regulatory floodplain; however, it should be
noted that most new and replacement buildings are not appropriate uses of the
regulatory floodway.
      (1)   The lowest floor including basements of all new residential
structures, substantially improved structures and additions shall be elevated
up to at least the FPE. An attached garage for a structure must be elevated up
to at least 0.1 feet above the BFE.
         (a)   If placed on fill, the top of the fill for the residential
structure shall be above the FPE. The top of fill for an attached garage shall
be at least 0.1 foot above the BFE. The fill shall be placed at that elevation
for a distance of ten feet out from the building unless the building design is
certified by a registered structural engineer to be protected from damages due
to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill shall not settle below the FPE
for the residential structure and not below 0.1 feet above the base flood for
an attached garage, and shall be adequately protected against erosion, scour
and differential settlement. The fill should not adversely affect surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
         (b)   If elevated by means of walls, pilings or other foundation, the
building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters and
not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The permanent
openings shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consist of a
minimum of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the BFE. The lowest inside grade must match the lowest existing
outside grade adjacent to the structure. The foundation and supporting members
shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining
structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice and floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including
basement) for the residential structure and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall
be located at or above the FPE. An attached garage must be elevated to at least
0.1 feet above the BFE. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the FPE. No area below the FPE shall be used for storage.
      (2)   The lowest floor including the basement of all new or substantially
improved nonresidential buildings shall be elevated at least to the FPE as
described above or be structurally dry floodproofed to at least the FPE. A
nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided that a professional engineer or registered structural
engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed
below the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight
and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design
shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or
ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and
without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this
division).
      (3)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed on a
site for more than 180 days shall be at or above the FPE and shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with the State
Manufactured Home Tie-Down Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 870), as amended.
      (4)   (a)   Accessory structures, such as tool sheds and detached garages
which are not substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be
constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with the
following criteria.
            1.   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
            2.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof
material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet the floodway
standards in §
55.064.
            3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and
movement.
            4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.
            5.   The building shall be no greater than 600 square feet in floor
size and be valued at less than $7,500. The building shall meet the permanent
opening criteria of division (C)(1)(b) above.
            6.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain basements or other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or
similar uses.
         (b)   Accessory structures that do not meet all of the above criteria
may be constructed if they are dry floodproofed or elevated at least one-half
of one foot above the BFE.
   (D)   Nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood,
fire, wind or other disaster may be restored unless the damage meets or exceeds
50% of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform
to the building protection standards of this chapter.
   (E)   LOMR-F. Certified communities may utilize FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-
01 for the issuance of LOMR-Fs.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 18-305, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 55.063 COMPENSATORY STORAGE VOLUME STANDARDS.
   The following standards apply within the regulatory floodplain.
   (A)   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage volume will be required
for development in a riverine regulatory floodplain and shall be at least equal
to the regulatory floodplain flood storage volume displaced. The storage volume
displaced below the existing ten-year frequency flood elevation must be
replaced below the proposed ten-year frequency flood elevation. The storage
volume displaced above the ten-year existing frequency flood elevation must be
replaced above the proposed ten-year frequency flood elevation.
   (B)   Compensatory storage volume for development in a non-riverine
regulatory floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be equal to
the storage volume displaced.
   (C)   Compensatory storage volume requirements for development in a non-
riverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a lake shall be replaced
in accordance with the requirements for the loss of depressional storage in §
55.021(F).
   (D)   Compensatory storage areas shall be designed to drain freely and
openly to the channel and shall be located adjacent to the development. This
standard does not apply to non-riverine regulatory floodplain.
   (E)   A recorded covenant running with the land is required to maintain the
compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide compensatory storage
volume.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.064 FLOODWAY STANDARDS.
   (A)   The only development in a regulatory floodway which will be allowed
are appropriate uses which will not cause an increase in flood heights or
velocities for all flood events up to and including the base flood. Only those
appropriate uses listed below will be allowed in the regulatory floodway.
   (B)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, fencing
(including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of
materials except as specifically defined below as an appropriate use. If the
development is proposed for the regulatory floodway portion of the regulatory
floodplain, the following standards apply in addition to the standards for the
regulatory floodplain.
      (1)   Only the construction, modification, repair or replacement of the
following appropriate uses will be allowed in the regulatory floodway:
         (a)   Public flood control structures and private improvements
relating to the control of drainage and flooding of existing buildings,
erosion, water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
         (b)   Structures or facilities relating to functionally water
dependent uses such as additions, modifications and improvements to existing
wastewater treatment plants (except for additions to habitable structures on
the site) and facilities and improvements relating to recreational boating
(this does not include new wastewater treatment plants);
         (c)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
         (d)   Underground and overhead utilities;
         (e)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields, open pavilions
and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed
from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows;
         (f)   Detached garages, storage sheds, boat houses or other non-
habitable structures without sanitary facilities that are accessory to existing
buildings and will not block flood flows nor reduce regulatory floodway
storage;
         (g)   Bridges, culverts and associated roadways, sidewalks and
railways, required for crossing the regulatory floodway or for access to other
appropriate uses in the regulatory floodway and any modification thereto;
         (h)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade provided that
either:
            1.   The BFE is less than one foot above the proposed parking lot;
or
            2.   The parking lot is accessory to short-term outdoor
recreational facilities and the owner agrees to restrict access during periods
of inundation and agrees to accept liability for all damage caused by vehicular
access during flooding events.
         (i)   Regulatory floodway grading, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slope toward a channel;
         (j)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of water-tight window wells, elevating
structures or the construction of flood walls or berms around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall or berm shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of
the existing structure, and, which are not considered to be substantial
improvements to the structure;
         (k)   The repair, replacement or reconstruction of a damaged building,
provided that none of the outside dimensions of the building are increased and
provided that the cost of repair is less than 50% of the building’s value
before it was damaged. When damage is 50% or more (a substantial improvement),
the activity shall conform to §
55.062(C) of this chapter; and
         (l)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase
the enclosed floor area of the building below the BFE and which will not block
flood flows. These modifications include fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios
and second story addition. No enclosed floor areas may be built on stilts. The
modifications may not singularly or cumulatively equal 50% or more of the
building’s market value.
      (2)   Additions or changes to the above list of appropriate uses must be
approved by the Committee prior to the adoption by the County Board and IDNR/
OWR.
      (3)   All development in the regulatory floodway shall require a permit
from IDNR-OWR and must be in accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible
provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and
mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data prepared and signed by a professional engineer.
         (a)   All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the
development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on-
stream structures or dams, shall be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the base flood.
         (b)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used to
determine transition sections in calculations of effective regulatory floodway
conveyance.
            1.   Flowing water will expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length.
            2.   Flowing water will contract no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length.
            3.   Flowing water will not expand or contract faster than one foot
vertical for every ten feet of flooded stream length.
            4.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
            5.   Transition sections must be used to determine the effective
conveyance areas on adjacent properties.
         (c)   Development of an appropriate use will not result in an increase
in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage. However, in
the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose
of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may
be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
      (5)   In the case of on-stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water during normal or flood flows, the increase in flood stage when
compared to existing conditions for all storm events up to and including the
base flood event shall be contained within recorded easements or the channel
banks. A dam safety permit or letter indicating a dam safety permit is not
required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for the structures.
      (6)   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams and the
like and for all other state, WCSMC or certified community projects.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.065 RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN.
   (A)   These standards apply to riverine regulatory floodplains without a
regulatory floodway.
   (B)   The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR for all development
any portion of which is located partially or completely within the regulatory
floodplain (without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a tributary drainage
area of 640 acres or more.
      (1)   The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in an
obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due to
an increase in flood heights, velocities or loss of floodplain area storage.
      (2)   A professional engineer shall submit a study that demonstrates one
of the following:
         (a)   Determine a floodway which meets the definition of a regulatory
floodway and demonstrate that the proposed development meets the floodway
standards in §
55.064; or
         (b)   Determine a BFE and demonstrate that the proposed development
will maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase flood
velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will compensate for any lost
floodplain storage.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.066 BRIDGE AND CULVERT STANDARDS.
   These standards are for the reconstruction, modification or new construction
of bridges, culvert crossings and roadway approaches located in the regulatory
floodplain.
   (A)   A proposed new structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one- tenth foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the base flood event unless
contained within the channel banks or recorded easements. The evaluation must
be submitted to the IDNR-OWR for review and a permit obtained.
   (B)   If the proposed new structure will increase upstream flood stages
greater than one-tenth foot, the applicant must contact IDNR/OWR for a dam
safety permit or waiver. The Director shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
   (C)   Lost regulatory floodplain storage must be replaced as required in §
55.063, compensatory storage volume standards, except that artificially created
storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind an existing bridge or
culvert crossing shall not be required to be replaced, provided no flood damage
will be incurred downstream.
   (D)   Velocity increases must be mitigated by use of appropriate measures to
avoid scour, erosion and sedimentation at the structure.
   (E)   For modification or replacement of existing structures, the existing
structure must first be evaluated in accordance with IDNR/OWR Rules (17 Ill.
Adm. Code Part 3708) to determine if the existing structure is a source of
flood damage. If the structure is a source of flood damage, the applicant’s
engineer shall submit justification to allow the damage to continue and
evaluate the feasibility of relieving the structure’s impact. Modifications or
replacement structures shall not increase flood stages (0.0 feet) compared to
the existing condition for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event. The evaluation must be submitted to IDNR/OWR, for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued. The Director shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
   (F)   If any work is proposed in, near or over a public body of water, a
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR.
   (G)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing
the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
   (H)   (1)   Construction vehicles shall cross-streams by the means of
existing bridges or culverts.
      (2)   Where an existing crossing is not available, a temporary crossing
that has been issued a permit or waiver by IDNR/OWR shall be constructed in
which:
         (a)   The approach roads will be 0.5 feet or less above existing
grade;
         (b)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall;
         (c)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two
feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-
erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel; and
         (d)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Administrator.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 55.080 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Stormwater management and other permits required.
      (1)   A stormwater management permit shall be required if:
         (a)   The development or a substantial improvement is located in the
regulatory floodplain or there is regulatory floodplain within the property
boundary; or
         (b)   The development disturbs more than one acre (43,560 square feet)
of ground cover, unless the development solely involves one or more of the
following:
            1.   Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system,
potable water service line or other utility to serve an existing structure;
            2.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in rights-of-way or public
utility easements for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities not
including storm sewers;
            3.   Maintenance, repair or at grade replacement of existing lawn
areas not otherwise requiring a stormwater permit under this chapter; or
            4.   Maintenance of an existing stormwater facility, not requiring
other state or federal permits or approvals.
      (2)   All development shall secure all appropriate stormwater management
related approvals, including, without limitation, an IDNR-OWR floodway/
floodplain construction permit, a USACOE 404 permit and an IDNR-OWR dam safety
permit if required, from all federal, state and regional authorities and other
appropriate federal, state and regional approvals prior to the issuance of a
stormwater management permit for areas of a site requiring other approvals.
   (B)   Permit review fees. All permit fees shall be paid at the time of
application. Permit fees shall be established by separate resolution of the
permitting authorities. Fees may include, but are not limited to, the cost of
permit administration, review and inspections prior to construction, during
construction and within the permanent cover establishment period following
construction.
   (C)   Professional seals and certifications required.
      (1)   The design of stormwater facilities, calculations for the
determination of the regulatory floodplain or calculations of the impacts of
development shall meet the standards of this chapter and shall be prepared,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer. The professional engineer shall
provide an opinion that the technical submittal meets the criteria required by
this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance.
      (2)   (a)   For structures (not including earth embankments) that are
subject to a differential water pressure greater than three feet, the submittal
shall include evidence that the subject design has been reviewed by a qualified
professional who shall, as a minimum, have registration as a professional
engineer. The reviews shall include stability of the structure under design
conditions considering the protection of downstream life and property in the
event of a failure. When directed by the Administrator, the calculations
submitted for the structures shall be reviewed, signed and sealed by a
registered structural engineer.
         (b)   For projects which include earth embankments which are subjected
to a differential water pressure, the submittal shall include evidence that the
embankment design and construction specifications are adequate for the design
conditions. This review shall include consideration of the existing foundation
soils for the embankment, the materials from which the embankment is to be
constructed, compaction requirements for the embankment and protection of the
embankment from failure due to overtopping. Construction and materials
specifications for all embankments shall be included with the plan set
submittal. When directed by the Administrator, or when the impounded water
pressure differential exceeds three feet, or when appropriate considering the
volume impounded and water surface elevation differential to which the
embankment is subjected, these calculations may be required to be reviewed,
signed and sealed by a qualified geotechnical or structural engineer.
      (3)   A topographical map of the site, record drawings and other required
drawings shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor
or professional engineer and tied to NAVD 88 and any FEMA benchmarks.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 18-305, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 55.081 DURATION AND REVISION TO PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit expiration. Permits expire December 31 of the third year
following the date of permit issuance or upon expiration of state or federal
permits required for stormwater management.
   (B)   Permit extension. If the permitted activity has been started but is
not completed by the expiration date of the permit, and the permittee intends
to pursue the permitted activity, then the permittee may submit a written
request that the expiration date be extended. Upon receipt of the request, the
Administrator may extend the expiration date in one-year increments a maximum
of three times for permitted activities outside regulatory floodplains and
floodways. Expiration dates for permitted activities in regulatory floodplains
and floodways may be extended in one-year increments a maximum of three times
provided the activity is in compliance with the then current requirements of
this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance.
   (C)   Permit revision. If, after permit issuance, the permittee decides to
revise the approved plans, the permittee shall submit revised plans to the
Director or the Administrator, along with a written request for approval. If
the Director or the Administrator determines that the revised plans are in
compliance with the then current requirements of this chapter or the applicable
certified community ordinance, an approval of the revised plans may be issued.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.082 REQUIRED SUBMITTALS.
   (A)   Generally. All permit submittals shall include the material listed in
the sections noted in Table 2 for the applicable type of development, unless
the submittal requirements are specifically modified by the procedure in
division (B) below.
Table 2: Permit Submittal Requirements
 Required Submittals (refer to Sections listed for specific material)
 Section No./Description
 55.082(C)   55.082(D) 55.082(E)  55.082(F)  55.083(A)   55.083(B)    55.084
 Application Plan Set  Stormwater Floodplain Performance Maintenance  Record
 and Project Submittal Submittal  Submittal  Security    Schedule and Drawings
 Overview                                                Funding
Table 2: Permit Submittal Requirements
             Required Submittals (refer to Sections listed for specific material)
             Section No./Description
             55.082(C)   55.082(D) 55.082(E)  55.082(F)  55.083(A)   55.083(B)   55.084
             Application Plan Set  Stormwater Floodplain Performance Maintenance Record
             and Project Submittal Submittal  Submittal  Security    Schedule    Drawings
             Overview                                                and Funding
All
requiring a  X           X                               X           X           X
permit
All
developments
on sites     X           X                    X          X           X           X
with
floodplains
All
developments
on sites
with or      X           X                               X           X           X
adjacent to
waters of
the United
States
All
applications X           X         X          If on site X           X           X
requesting
variances
All
requiring    X           X         X                     X           X           X
detention/
retention
Note:   Corporations with a bond rating of “A” of higher from a major investment firm,
(i.e. Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent), would be judged to have met the long term
maintenance funding requirement
 
   (B)   Modification of submittal requirements. The Administrator may, at his
or her discretion, modify the submittal requirements on a case-by-case basis
considering the size, complexity and likelihood that a development will affect
the discharge of stormwater. The modifications shall be requested and answered
in writing. The Administrator’s response shall note the relevant findings, and
be specific as to what submittal requirements are changed. The Director shall
be copied on all related correspondence. The Administrator may not modify
submittal requirements for any aspect of the development requiring state or
federal permits or approvals, nor for any application in which any variance of
the permitting authorities ordinance is requested.
   (C)   Application and project overview. The applicant shall provide the
following information as a minimum, on forms or in a format approved by the
Administrator:
      (1)   The name and legal address of the owner(s) of the site and the
permit applicant;
      (2)   The common address, legal description, property identification
number (PIN) of the site;
      (3)   The name of the project, area of the site in acres, type of
development;
      (4)   A general narrative description of the development, existing and
proposed conditions, and project planning principles considered, including best
management practices used;
      (5)   Affidavits signed by the owner or the applicant’s authorized
representative attesting to their understanding of the requirements of this
chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance and their intent to
comply therewith;
      (6)   A statement of opinion by a qualified person either denying or
acknowledging the presence of floodplain on the development site;
      (7)   Copies of other stormwater related permits or permit applications
as required;
      (8)   A subsurface drainage investigation report; and
      (9)   An engineer’s estimate of probable construction cost of the
stormwater facilities.
   (D)   Plan set submittal. All applicants for a stormwater permit shall
provide the following basic plan exhibits: site topographic map, general plan
view drawing, sediment/erosion control plan and a vicinity topographic map.
Each exhibit may be on more than one drawing for clarity. The specific
information to be included on each exhibit shall be as noted below.
      (1)   Site topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
         (a)   Map scales as one inch equals 100 feet (or less) and accurate to
+/- 0.5 feet;
         (b)   Existing and proposed contours on-site and within 100 feet of
site;
         (c)   Existing and proposed drainage patterns and watershed
boundaries;
         (d)   Delineation of pre-development regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits;
         (e)   Delineation of post-development regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits;
         (f)   Location of cross-sections and any other hydrologic/hydraulic
computer modeled features;
         (g)   Location of all on-site drain tiles;
         (h)   Boundary of all wetlands, lakes, ponds and the like with normal
water elevation noted;
         (i)   Location of all existing buildings and those to remain on the
site noted;
         (j)   Nearest base flood elevations;
         (k)   FEMA and any site-specific benchmarks (tied to county
benchmarks) used; and
         (l)   Highlight all contours used in the calculation of depressional
storage.
      (2)   General plan view drawing meeting the following requirements shall
be submitted:
         (a)   Drawing at the same scale as the site topographic map;
         (b)   Existing major and minor stormwater systems;
         (c)   Proposed major and minor stormwater systems;
         (d)   Design details for stormwater facilities (i.e. structure and
outlet work detail drawings and the like);
         (e)   Scheduled maintenance program for permanent stormwater
facilities including BMP measures;
         (f)   Planned maintenance tasks and schedule;
         (g)   Identification of entities responsible for maintenance;
         (h)   Permanent public access maintenance easements granted or
dedicated to, and accepted by, a government entity;
         (i)   Proposed regulatory floodplain and floodway location (with the
base flood and flood protection elevations noted); and
         (j)   Highlight all plan areas at elevations below the 100-year high
water elevation of site runoff storage facilities.
      (3)   Sediment and erosion control plan meeting the following
requirements shall be submitted:
         (a)   Drawings at the same scale as the site topographic map;
         (b)   Sediment/erosion control installation measures and schedule;
         (c)   Existing and proposed roadways, structures, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces;
         (d)   Limits of clearing and grading;
         (e)   Floodplain/floodway locations;
         (f)   Proposed buffer location, existing soil types, vegetation and
land cover conditions; and
         (g)   List of maintenance tasks and schedule for sediment/erosion
control measures.
      (4)   Vicinity topographic map meeting the following requirements shall
be submitted:
         (a)   Vicinity topographic map identifying all off-site areas draining
to the development and downstream to the receiving intermittent or perennial
stream. (A two foot contour map is preferred at a scale readable by the
reviewer but a USGS quadrangle map is acceptable);
         (b)   Watershed boundaries for areas draining through or from the
development;
         (c)   Soil types related to hydrologic soils group, vegetation and
land cover affecting runoff upstream of the site for any area draining through
the site;
         (d)   Location of development site within the major watershed(s); and
         (e)   Show the overland flow path from the downstream end of the
development to the receiving intermittent or perennial stream.
   (E)   Stormwater submittal. The stormwater submittal shall include narrative
discussion and calculations to support a finding that the proposed development
complies with the technical requirements of the permitting authorities
ordinance. The submittal shall consist of, at a minimum, the following
material:
      (1)   A narrative description of the existing and proposed site drainage
patterns and conditions. Include description of off-site conditions, which help
to identify stormwater issues considered in the design;
      (2)   A schedule for implementation of the site stormwater plan;
      (3)   On-site and off-site runoff calculations which address the
following:
         (a)   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for sizing major and minor systems;
         (b)   Cross-section data for open channels;
         (c)   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under design
flow conditions; and
         (d)   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under base
flood flow conditions.
      (4)   Site runoff storage calculations, which address the following:
         (a)   Calculation of hydraulically connected impervious area and
corresponding retention volume;
         (b)   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the allowable release rate;
         (c)   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
on-site depressional storage;
         (d)   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the storage volume;
         (e)   Elevation-area-storage data and calculations for site runoff
storage;
         (f)   Elevation-discharge data and calculations specifically related
to the outlet control structure depicted in the plan exhibits; and
         (g)   The general plan view drawing of division (C)(2) above shall
indicate the areas of directly connected impervious areas and any offsetting
landscaped areas as defined in §
55.022(E).
   (F)   Floodplain submittal. The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR-
OWR and FEMA for all new base flood and floodway determinations for those cases
in which their permitting authority applies or as noted in §
55.061 of this chapter. The stormwater management permit will not be issued
until approval is received. Documentation supporting a finding that the
proposed development is in compliance with §§
55.060 and
55.061 shall be submitted with the application. At a minimum, the following
material shall be submitted for approval with the application:
      (1)   Regulatory floodplain boundary determination:
         (a)   Provide source of flood profile information; and
         (b)   Provide all hydrologic and hydraulic study information for site-
specific floodplain studies, unnumbered Zone A area elevation determinations
and floodplain map revisions.
      (2)   Floodway hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for the following
conditions:
         (a)   Existing conditions (land used and stream systems);
         (b)   Proposed conditions (land used and stream systems);
         (c)   Tabular summary of 100-year flood elevations and discharges for
existing and proposed conditions;
         (d)   Calculations used for model development; and
         (e)   Hydraulic/hydrologic computer model input/output.
      (3)   Floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations for below and
above ten-year flood elevation up to the base flood elevation:
         (a)   Tabular summary for below and above ten-year flood elevation of
fill, compensatory storage and compensatory storage ratios provided in proposed
plan; and
         (b)   Cross-sections used for the above calculations.
      (4)   Floodproofing measures: narrative discussion of floodproofing
measures including material specifications, calculations and design details,
operation summary; and
      (5)   Flood easements when required by this chapter or the applicable
certified community ordinance.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.083 SUBMITTALS PRIOR TO PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The following additional submittals as noted in divisions (A) and (B) below
are required prior to issuance of the stormwater permit.
   (A)   Performance security. Performance security in accordance with §§
55.200 through
55.203 shall be required prior to permit issuance.
   (B)   Maintenance schedule and funding. A completed maintenance schedule for
the stormwater management facilities and special management areas, in
accordance with §§
55.100 through
55.105 shall be submitted along with identification of the entity responsible
for maintenance and funding and back-up funding sources for maintenance in
accordance with §
55.105.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.084 RECORD DRAWINGS.
   The developer is required to submit record drawings of all permitted
stormwater facilities. The record drawings shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or professional land surveyor who shall state that the
project as constructed is substantially in conformance with the project as
permitted. The record drawings shall include calculations verifying that the
volumes of detention and compensatory storage required in the permit have been
provided.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.085 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL.
   (A)   The Administrator shall either issue or deny a stormwater permit
within 30 days of receiving a complete permit application and all required
submittals and fees, unless additional time is granted by both the
Administrator and the applicant. When a permit is denied, the applicant may
appeal the Administrator’s decision to the Director provided the appeal is made
in writing within 15 days of the date of the notification of denial. The
Director shall render a decision to issue the stormwater permit, issue the
permit with conditions, or uphold the Administrator’s denial of the permit. The
Director shall render his or her decision within 30 days of the appeal. Failure
to take action shall be deemed action to uphold the permit by the
Administrator.
   (B)   Upon denial by the Director, the applicant may file an appeal in
writing within 15 days of the denial or decision or the communities action to
the County Board.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
LONG TERM MAINTENANCE
§ 55.100 LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Unless maintenance responsibility has been delegated to and accepted
by another qualified entity under this section, the owner shall maintain that
portion of a stormwater drainage system located upon his or her land. With the
approval of the Administrator, the stormwater drainage system, or specified
portions thereof, may be:
      (1)   Dedicated or otherwise transferred to and accepted by the
permitting community or other public entity;
      (2)   Conveyed or otherwise transferred to and accepted by a homeowner’s
association, or similar entity, the members of which are to be the owners of
all of the lots or parcels comprising the development; or
      (3)   Conveyed to one or more persons or in one or more undivided
interests to one or more persons.
   (B)   Except for those portions of a stormwater drainage system to be
dedicated or otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public
entity, included in the application for a stormwater permit shall be a plan for
the long-term management, operation and maintenance of the stormwater drainage
system and a description of the sources of funding therefore. Amendments to the
plan must be approved by the Administrator.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.101 TRANSFER TO PERMITTING AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY.
   If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be dedicated or
otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity under
§
55.100(A)(1), appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance
of the portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the entity on the final
plat.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.102 TRANSFER TO HOMEOWNER’S OR SIMILAR ASSOCIATION.
   If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed or
otherwise transferred to a homeowner’s or similar association under §
55.100(A)(2) then:
   (A)   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of the
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the association and the
permitting authority on the final plat;
   (B)   The association shall be duly incorporated and a copy of the
certificate of incorporation, duly recorded and bylaws and any amendment to
either of them, shall be delivered to the Administrator;
   (C)   The bylaws of the association shall, at a minimum, contain:
      (1)   A provision acknowledging and accepting the association’s
obligation to maintain certain portions of the stormwater drainage system as
required by this chapter;
      (2)   A mechanism for imposing an assessment upon the owners of all of
the lots or parcels comprising the development sufficient, at a minimum, to
provide for the maintenance of those portions of the stormwater drainage system
as required by this chapter and the payment of all taxes levied thereon;
      (3)   A provision adopting the plan of long term maintenance set forth in
the application for a stormwater management permit, with approved amendments;
      (4)   A provision identifying the officer of the association responsible
for carrying out the obligations imposed upon the association under this
chapter, and an obligation to inform the Administrator of the name, address and
phone number of this officer and any changes thereto;
      (5)   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to
any amendment of the bylaws changing any of the provisions of the bylaws
required by this chapter; and
      (6)   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to
the dissolution of the association.
   (D)   Any conveyance or other instrument of transfer delivered under §
55.100(A)(2) shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon the
association the obligations set forth in this section and the association’s
affirmative acceptance thereof.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.103 CONVEYANCE TO ONE OR MORE PERSONS.
   If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed to one or
more persons under §
55.100(A)(3), then:
   (A)   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of the
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the permitting authority on the
final plat;
   (B)   The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance
obligations of this section upon the grantee and his or her successors in
interest as a covenant running with the land and incorporating by reference the
plan of long term maintenance set forth in the application for a stormwater
management permit, with approved amendments;
   (C)   The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the
permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required
in this section if the owner does not do so and to place a lien against the
land for the cost thereof; and
   (D)   Any conveyance delivered under §
55.100(A)(3), and any subsequent conveyance, shall include a covenant
affirmatively imposing upon the grantee the obligations, restrictions and
provisions set forth in this section and the grantee’s affirmative acceptance
thereof.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.104 INCORPORATION OF MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS IN STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PERMIT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be incorporated by reference in the
stormwater management permit and the applicant’s acceptance of the permit shall
be deemed to be the applicant’s acceptance and assumption of the obligations
imposed under this section. At the option of the Administrator, the stormwater
management permit may be recorded.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.105 FUNDING OF LONG TERM MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   As a condition of approval of any application for a stormwater
management permit, unless the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater
drainage system to be constructed or installed in connection therewith has been
accepted by a public entity, the Administrator will require assurance of long-
term funding in a form found acceptable to the permitting authority. A
corporation with a bond rating of “A” or higher from a major investment firm
(i.e. Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent) will be considered to have met
the long-term maintenance funding requirement. Absent some other form of
agreement, then the Administrator shall require the establishment of a special
service area pursuant to ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq., either as the
primary means of providing for the long term maintenance of the facilities, or
as a backup vehicle in the event the entity designated by the applicant as
having primary maintenance responsibility fails to adequately carry out its
duties.
   (B)   If the establishment of a special service area is required, the
Administrator shall make consider and approve a good faith estimate by the
applicant of the tax rate required to produce a tax to be levied upon all
taxable property within the area, sufficient for the long term maintenance of
the facilities and submit the same to the permitting authority which shall
incorporate the rate into its enactment of the ordinances necessary for the
establishment of the area. The ordinances to be enacted by the permitting
authority shall be substantially in the form set forth in Appendix F.
   (C)   On or before August 1 of each year thereafter, the Administrator shall
submit to the permitting authority a good faith estimate of the amount of tax
required to be levied upon all taxable property within the area for the next
fiscal year for the continued maintenance of the stormwater drainage system.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.120 SCOPE OF REGULATION.
   This chapter applies to all development within the county, including that
under the control of any governmental entity, agency or authority. A certified
community undertaking development in the regulatory floodway, or regulatory
floodplain where no regulatory floodway has been designated, shall obtain a
permit from IDNR-OWR prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit. All
units of local government shall obtain stormwater management permits from the
permitting authority within whose boundaries the development is located.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.121 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   Development which has been substantially completed before the
effective date of the chapter; and
      (2)   Development, which has been determined to be exempt by the
permitting authority.
   (B)   Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any
manner unless the replacement or enlargement conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.122 COMMUNITY’S LIST OF PROPOSED EXEMPT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   The county or a community may place a development or industrial site
on its list of exempt developments only if:
      (1)   A site specific stormwater plan, master plan or a regional master
plan has been submitted and substantially approved by the community engineer;
or
      (2)   A contractual agreement, specifically exempting the development
from the stormwater regulations of the community, was entered into before the
effective date of the chapter.
   (B)   A community’s list of exempt developments shall be adopted by an
official action of the corporate authorities of the community. Prior to taking
the action, the Community shall publish in accordance with §
55.167, a notice in substantially the following form:
      On [date], at [time], the [corporate authorities] of the [type of
community] of [community] will consider and take formal action with respect to
the approval of the following list of developments proposed as exempt from the
provisions of the county Stormwater Management Ordinance, adopted by the County
Board on October 17, 2002. Any person wishing to do so, may attend the meeting
and be heard prior to the [corporate authorities] taking the action.
      [List of proposed exempt developments]
   (C)   At any time before January 1, 2004, upon similar notice and by similar
official action, a community may revise the list by adding or deleting
developments there from. If a development is to be deleted from the list, an
additional notice shall be served in the manner set forth in §
55.166 upon the affected developer. Revisions to the list shall be submitted to
the Director. After January 1, 2004, the list may not be changed without review
and recommendation by the Committee, which shall be forwarded to the County
Board for approval.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.123 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall be liberally construed to protect the health,
welfare, safety and the environment of the residents of the county and to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and the enabling legislation.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to consent to, license, permit
to locate, construct or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation, or
to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or activity.
   (C)   When provisions of this chapter differ from any other applicable law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall
apply.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all other laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations which relate to the subject matter
hereof and, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as a limitation upon the application or enforcement
of any law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent
with the provisions of other laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations,
and with each other, to the end that all provisions may be given their fullest
application.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.124 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond
the control of any governmental authority. This chapter does not, therefore,
guarantee that areas outside the floodplain or permitted land uses within the
floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied in any manner to
create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the county, any
municipality or other governmental authority, or any elected official, or any
officer, agent or employee of any of the foregoing, or any certified review
specialist for any flood damage resulting from reliance on the provisions of
this chapter.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.125 CHOICE OF PLANNING JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062(b), a community that is
located in more than one county may choose, at the time of the formation of the
committee, and based upon watershed boundaries, to participate in the
stormwater management planning program of either or both of the counties.
   (B)   The Committee shall include the community within the scope of its
planning and enforcement jurisdiction unless the community provides evidence of
its participation or intent to participate in the stormwater management-
planning program of another county.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.126 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development
without first securing a stormwater management permit as required by this
chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect
and refuse to comply with, or resist enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or any condition of a stormwater management permit.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004) Penalty, see §
55.999
§ 55.127 AMENDMENTS.
   No amendment to this chapter may be passed without a public hearing first
being held before the Land Use and Zoning Committee of the County Board upon
notice as provided in §
55.167.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.128 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect for all purposes and its effective date shall
be January 1, 2004.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
VARIANCES
§ 55.140 PURPOSE.
   In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be
granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is
impossible or impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this
chapter may be granted according to the standards set forth in this subchapter.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.141 APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   Generally. An application for a variance, signed by the owner or
developer of the development to which it relates, shall be filed with the
Administrator. No application for a variance will be accepted for filing unless
it relates to a previously or contemporaneously filed application for a
stormwater management permit. Applications for a variance shall be filed in the
number of duplicate copies as the Administrator may designate by administrative
order. No action will be taken on an application for a variance unless it and
the corresponding application for a stormwater management permit to which it
relates are complete as determined by the Administrator. The Administrator
shall send a copy of the complete application to the Director and to all other
certified communities within the same watershed.
   (B)   Form. Applications for a variance need not be made upon any specific
form, but shall contain the information set forth in division (C) below.
   (C)   Application for variance. An application for variance shall set forth:
      (1)   The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands comprising
the development;
      (2)   The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal title
of all lands comprising the development;
      (3)   If title to any of the land comprising the development is held in
trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust;
      (4)   The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if different
from the owner;
      (5)   The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the
developer in connection with the application for a variance;
      (6)   The names and addresses of all property owners within 250 feet of
the development;
      (7)   The specific feature or features of the development that require a
variance;
      (8)   The specific provision of this chapter from which a variance is
sought and the precise extent of the variance there from;
      (9)   A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (10)   A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance
necessary to permit the development; and
      (11)   A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the
standards set forth in §
55.144 of this chapter.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.142 APPLICATION FEE.
   With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay
the fee prescribed by a separate act of the permitting authorities.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.143 PUBLIC HEARING.
   When the application is complete, the Administrator will so notify the
applicant and will schedule a public hearing on the application before the Land
Use or Oversite Committee as applicable. Not more than 30 nor less than 15 days
before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the applicant, to the Director, to all property owners
within 250 feet of the development as disclosed in the application, and to each
certified community within the same watershed as the development and to the
Committee. Within the same time period, notice of the hearing shall be
published at least once in a newspaper published within the certified community
having jurisdiction over the application, or within the county if the county
has jurisdiction over the application. If no newspaper is published within the
certified community, then the notice shall be published in a newspaper with a
general circulation within the certified community, which is published in the
county. The notices given under the section shall set forth the common name,
address and legal description of the development and a brief description of the
variance is requested.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.144 GRANTING OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Land Use or Oversite Committee shall not recommend nor shall the
County Board or corporate authority grant a variance for a project from the
provisions of this chapter unless the variance is consistent with the purpose
of this chapter (§
55.003) and meets the following standards based upon substantial evidence
submitted at the hearing.
      (1)   The variance will not increase measurably the probability of flood
damage to insurable structures.
      (2)   The variance requested is the minimum required considering each of
the following statements of underlying intent of this chapter and there are no
means other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardships can be
avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable
continuation of the development.
         (a)   Detention of stormwater shall also contribute to the improvement
of the quality of stormwater runoff.
         (b)   The volume of detention storage provided in open air vegetated
facilities is maximized consistent with other land use site constraints
including zoning requirements essential for the proposed development.
         (c)   Conveyance of stormwater from the project shall not increase
peak discharges from existing offsite conveyance facilities beyond design
capacity for any storm event from the two-year to the 100-year flood frequency.
         (d)   High quality natural areas shall be preserved on the site,
including without limiting the generality of the foregoing, stands of native
trees, existing wetlands, natural floodplain storage or other valuable
environmental and biological resources.
      (3)   The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of increasing
the density of the development nor impervious areas on the site.
      (4)   The variance is not requested solely as a result of economic
hardship.
      (5)   If applicable, the variance is required due to unique, natural
topographical features of the site.
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are not self-imposed.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory
floodway, the effect of which would be to create regulation less restrictive
than the federal or state minimum standards applicable to development in the
areas.
   (C)   When a variance would lessen the degree of flood surface runoff
protection to any structure, the Administrator shall notify the applicant that
the variance, if granted, may result in increased rates for flood insurance.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.145 RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (A)   The Administrator, or his or her designee, shall review the
application for a variance and present his or her written recommendations to
the Land Use or Oversite Committee at the public hearing.
   (B)   Not more than 45 days after the close of the hearing, the Land Use or
Oversite Committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the County Board or Corporate Authorities. The written
recommendations of the Land Use Committee, when forwarded, shall be accompanied
by written findings of fact with respect to each of the considerations set
forth in §
55.144 with citations to the evidence taken at the public hearing.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.146 DECISION.
   (A)   The County Board or Corporate Authorities shall grant the variation,
grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in
writing within 45 days after receipt of the written recommendations of the Land
Use or Oversite Committee.
   (B)   In the event the County Board or Corporate Authorities do not act as
aforesaid, then the application is denied.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.147 CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted
when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief, but not to the
relief requested.
   (B)   In granting a variance, the County Board or corporate authorities may
impose specific conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating to
the purposes and objectives of this chapter on the applicant as may be
necessary or appropriate.
   (C)   Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or
limitation to be met by the applicant, upon meeting the conditions, the
applicant shall file evidence to that effect with the Administrator.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 55.160 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The County Board shall determine policy related to this chapter.
   (B)   The Director and Administrator shall administer this chapter. In
performing their duties, the Director and the Administrator may delegate and
oversee enforcement of responsibilities to any named designee.
   (C)   Each community shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the
National Flood Insurance Program, including:
      (1)   The maintenance of all records and the submission of all reports
required for eligibility in the program, including elevation certificates,
floodproofing certificates and lowest floor elevations; and
      (2)   The notification of the Director, FEMA and IDNR-OWR of any proposed
amendment to this chapter.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.161 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The Director shall:
   (A)   Supervise the enforcement of this chapter;
   (B)   Supervise the development, revision and implementation of the Plan for
approval by the Committee and the County Board;
   (C)   Supervise the review of complex stormwater management permits for any
community that requests assistance;
   (D)   Notify all of the communities in the county, FEMA, IDNR-OWR, USACOE,
the State Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency of any amendments to the Plan or to this chapter;
   (E)   Review variance requests for the Committee; and
   (F)   Assume the duties of the Administrator for the unincorporated county
and non-certified communities.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.162 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Administrator shall:
   (A)   Receive a listing of all required federal, state, regional and county
permit applications filed for the project prior to issuing a permit under this
chapter for areas covered by other stormwater related jurisdictions. The
Administrator may request copies of the stormwater related permit applications;
   (B)   Ascertain whether any floodplains/floodways exist on any site which is
the subject of an application for a permit under this chapter and whether or
not any new development is within the SFHA;
   (C)   Review permit applications and determine whether to issue or deny
permits;
   (D)   Ensure that the required notice of an application for a variance has
been given in accordance with §§
55.166 and
55.167;
   (E)   Notify an applicant for a variance that the variance may result in
increased rates for flood insurance;
   (F)   Notify the Director of an application for a variance CLOMR or LOMR;
   (G)   Provide for inspections of developments as required by this chapter;
   (H)   Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter within his or her
community;
   (I)   Notify violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to comply
with the provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program could make them
ineligible to receive flood insurance;
   (J)   Initiate any proceeding necessary to enforce this chapter within his
or her community;
   (K)   Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to
promote the purposes of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain copies of all applications and submittals, federal and state
permits, variances, CLOMR, LOMR, CLOMA, LOMA and all documentation associated
with any of the foregoing for public inspection;
   (M)   Maintain documentation and data on the cost of any improvement to a
structure in the floodplain in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to substantial improvements to the structures; and
   (N)   Notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to issuing a
permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.163 REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.
   In all cases when any action is taken by the Director or the Administrator,
or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, the action shall be taken either in the name of the county or the
certified community as the case may be, and neither the Director nor the
Administrator, nor his or her designee, in so acting shall be rendered
personally liable.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.164 OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
   The corporate authorities of each community within the county shall
establish an oversight committee to oversee the implementation and enforcement
of this chapter within its jurisdiction and to perform the duties assigned to
the Oversight Committee in this chapter. The Oversight Committee may be
comprised of the corporate authorities or any committee thereof, plan
commission, zoning board of appeals, or other existing body, or the corporate
authorities may, according to their own rules and procedures, establish a
separate Oversight Committee. The Land Use Committee shall act as the Oversight
Committee for the county.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.165 NON-CERTIFIED COMMUNITIES.
   The Director may delegate the duties of the Administrator for non-certified
communities. The county may designate an oversight committee in these non-
certified communities.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.166 SERVICE.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, service of any notice or instrument under
this chapter may be made upon any person in one of the following manners:
   (A)   By certified mail/return receipt requested, postage prepaid and
addressed to the address then on file for the person, if any, or if none, to
the person’s last known address; or
   (B)   By any method prescribed under the State Code of Civil Procedure.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.167 PUBLICATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of any notice or other
instrument under this chapter shall be made by publishing the notice or other
instrument once in a newspaper published within the community having
jurisdiction over the matter to which the publication relates (or, if no
newspapers published within the community then a newspaper published in the
county and having a general circulation within the community), the publication
being not less than 15 or more than 30 days before the hearing or other event
to which the publication relates.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
CERTIFIED COMMUNITY ENFORCEMENT
§ 55.180 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to § 5-1062 of the Counties Code (ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062),
the provisions of this chapter shall not be enforced by the county in any
certified community.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.181 PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION AND WAIVER OF ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any community that desires to enforce the provisions of this chapter
within its borders shall file a petition for certification and waiver of
enforcement (“petition for certification”), on or before January 1, 2004.
   (B)   After January 1, 2004, petitions for certification may be filed during
the month of June of each year.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.182 FILING AND CONTENTS OF PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION.
   A petition for certification shall be filed with the Director. The petition
need not be on any particular form but, at a minimum, shall set forth and be
accompanied by:
   (A)   The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community to adopt,
if certified, the provisions of this chapter by reference;
   (B)   The community’s plan for the implementation and enforcing of this
chapter, including proposed staffing;
   (C)   The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community to include
in any new annexation agreement a provision requiring every other party to the
agreement to affirmatively agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter
as amended from time to time;
   (D)   The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community that the
community will be bound by the rules and procedures of the Committee by which
certification is granted or revoked and county jurisdiction is reasserted over
the enforcement of this chapter within the boundaries of the community; and
   (E)   The list of projects to which this chapter or some portion of this
chapter do not apply (grandfathered projects) pursuant to the requirements of
§§
55.120 through
55.128.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.183 COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION OF PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION.
   The Committee shall consider each properly filed petition for certification
at a regular or special meeting called for the purpose not later than 60 days
after the filing of the petition. The meeting may be continued from time to
time. The Committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and conduct of
meetings.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.184 STANDARDS FOR GRANT OF PETITION.
   Upon a finding of the Committee that the community has complied with §§
55.181 and
55.182, that the community’s plan for the implementation and enforcement of
this chapter is reasonably feasible, the Committee shall grant the petition for
certification. The Committee’s decision shall be in writing, and shall specify
the reasons for granting or denying the petition.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.185 CERTIFIED COMMUNITY RECORDS.
   (A)   Every certified community shall maintain adequate records of every
stormwater management permit issued and every variance granted under this
chapter for development within its borders.
   (B)   Every certified community shall retain record drawings of all
structures erected or constructed pursuant to a stormwater management permit
issued or variance granted by the community.
   (C)   The records of each certified community maintained under this chapter
may be periodically inspected by the Department.
   (D)   Every certified community shall report annually to the Director on
forms provided by the Department regarding stormwater management permits issued
in the preceding year.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.186 COMMITTEE REVIEW OF ENFORCEMENT BY A CERTIFIED COMMUNITY.
   The Committee shall periodically review the implementation and enforcement
of this chapter by each certified community.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.187 INVESTIGATIONS; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The Director upon his or her own initiative or at the request of any
person may conduct an investigation into a certified community’s implementation
and enforcement of this chapter. The investigation may include, without
limitation, making an inspection of all relevant records maintained by the
community and making field inspections of relevant developments, structures or
stormwater facilities. If, upon the investigation, the Director determines that
the community has failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly failed, to
implement or enforce this chapter, then he or she shall prepare a report of his
or her findings along with a complaint for the revocation or partial revocation
of the community’s certification and then file the same with the Committee. The
complaint shall contain a short and plain statement describing how the
certified community has failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly
failed, to implement or enforce this chapter.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a written complaint, the Committee shall serve a copy
thereof along with a copy of the report of the Director upon the community
named therein. A copy of the complaint and report shall also be sent to IDNR-
OWR, FEMA, all communities within the same watershed, and to any person who has
requested an investigation of the community’s enforcement of this chapter by
the Director within six months immediately preceding the filing of the
complaint. The Community may file a written answer to the complaint within 30
days after being served.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.188 HEARING ON COMPLAINT.
   (A)   The Committee shall conduct a hearing on the complaint not less than
45 nor more than 90 days after service of the complaint upon the Community.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing shall be given to the community. The hearing may
be continued from time to time.
   (C)   The Committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and conduct
of the hearings.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.189 COMMITTEE DECISION.
   Within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall
recommend to the County Board what action to be taken which may include whether
or not to revoke in whole or in part the certification of the community. The
recommendation of the Committee shall be in writing and shall include the
specific findings and conclusions supporting its determination. The County
Board shall decide appropriate remedies, and shall take any actions necessary
to implement the remedies. A copy of the decision County Boards and order, if
any, shall be served upon the community. The decision of the County Board to
revoke the certification of the community is final, subject only to the right
of the community to reapply for certification at or after a time as the county
shall specify in its order of revocation.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
PERFORMANCE SECURITY
§ 55.200 GENERAL SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   As security to the county or the certified community for the
performance by the developer of the developer’s obligations to complete the
construction of any stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management
permit, to pay all costs, fees and charges due from the developer pursuant to
the permitting authorities of this chapter and to otherwise faithfully perform
the developer’s undertakings pursuant to this chapter or the applicable
certified community ordinance, the developer shall, prior to issuance of a
stormwater management permit:
      (1)   Post a development security as provided in §
55.201 of this chapter; and
      (2)   Post a sediment and erosion control security as provided in §
55.202 of this chapter, if a sediment and erosion control plan is required
pursuant to §
55.082 of this chapter.
   (B)   The developer shall bear the full cost and responsibility of securing
and maintaining the securities required by this section.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.201 DEVELOPMENT SECURITY.
   (A)   A development security shall be posted and shall include:
      (1)   A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the Director or the
Administrator, for the completion of the construction of any stormwater
facilities required by the permit;
      (2)   An irrevocable letter of credit, or other adequate security as the
Director or the Administrator may approve, in an amount equal to not less than
110% of the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any
stormwater facilities required by the stormwater management permit, which
estimated probable cost shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer
and shall be approved by the Director or the Administrator. A corporations with
a bond rating of “A” or higher from a major investment firm (i.e., Standard and
Poor, Moody or equivalent) would be deemed to have adequate credit worthiness
and thus is not required to post a letter of credit for projects that are not
required to be located in public easements;
      (3)   A statement signed by the applicant granting the Director or the
Administrator the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete required work in the event that work is not
completed according to the work schedule; and
      (4)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall
indemnify the community and the Department for any additional costs incurred
attributable to the concurrent activities of or conflicts between the
applicant’s contractor and the community or Department’s remedial contractor at
the site.
   (B)   The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed
by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the Director or the
Administrator until the conditions set forth in this section or other
applicable provisions are satisfied.
   (C)   The Administrator may approve periodic reductions in the letter of
credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than 90% of the
security provided for in this section may be released prior to approval of
record drawings and final inspection. A minimum of 10% of the security shall be
retained for a period of time not to exceed one year after completion of
construction of all stormwater facilities required by the permit.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.202 SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL SECURITY.
   (A)   If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to §
55.082 of this chapter, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be
required. The security shall include:
      (1)   An irrevocable letter of credit, or other adequate security as the
Director or the Administrator shall approve, in an amount equal to not less
than 110% of the estimated probable cost to install and maintain the sediment
and erosion control measures, which estimated probable cost shall be approved
by the Director or the Administrator; and
      (2)   A statement signed by the applicant granting the Director or the
Administrator, as applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right
to enter the development site to complete sediment and erosion control measures
in the event that the measures are not installed and/or maintained according to
the established schedule.
   (B)   The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed
by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the Director or the
Administrator, as applicable, until the conditions set forth in this section
are satisfied.
   (C)   After completion of construction, establishment of vegetation, removal
of all sediment from stormwater facilities, and final inspection and approval
by the Director or Administrator, as applicable, 100% of the sediment and
erosion control security shall be released.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.203 LETTERS OF CREDIT.
   (A)   Letters of credit posted pursuant to §§
55.200 through
55.203 of this chapter shall be in a form satisfactory to the Director or the
Administrator, as applicable.
   (B)   Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution:
      (1)   Acceptable to the Director or the Administrator, as applicable;
      (2)   Having capital resources of at least $10,000,000, or other amount
acceptable to the Director or the Administrator;
      (3)   With an office in the Chicago metropolitan area; and
      (4)   Insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
   (C)   Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
      (1)   It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the
Director or the Administrator; and shall not expire without written
notification of the Director or Administrator at least 45 days prior to
expiration;
      (2)   It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw
on it by the Director or the Administrator; and
      (3)   If at any time it will expire within 45 or any lesser number of
days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the Director
or the Administrator, and if any applicable obligation of the developer for
which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the Director
or the Administrator may, without notice and without being required to take any
further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of
credit and thereafter either hold all proceeds as security for the satisfactory
completion of all obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all
obligations and reimburse the county or the certified community for any and all
costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by
the county or the certified community, as the Director or the Administrator
shall determine.
   (D)   If at any time the Director or the Administrator determines that the
funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to
pay in full the remaining unpaid cost of all stormwater facility construction
or sediment and erosion control measures, then, within ten days following a
demand by the Director or the Administrator, the developer shall increase the
amount of the letter of credit to an amount determined by the Director or the
Administrator to be sufficient to pay the unpaid costs. Failure to so increase
the amount of the security shall be grounds for the Director or the
Administrator to draw down the entire remaining balance of the letter of
credit.
   (E)   If at any time the Director or the Administrator determines that the
bank issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least
$10,000,000, is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves,
is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing or is otherwise in
danger of being unable to honor the letter of credit at any time during its
term, or if the Director or the Administrator otherwise reasonably deems the
bank to be insecure, then the Director or the Administrator shall have the
right to demand that the developer provide a replacement letter of credit from
a bank satisfactory to the Director or the Administrator. The replacement
letter of credit shall be deposited with the Director or the Administrator not
later than ten days following the demand. Upon the deposit, the Director or the
Administrator shall surrender the original letter of credit to the developer.
   (F)   (1)   If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its
obligations under this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance,
then the Director or the Administrator may, in his or her discretion, draw on
and retain all or any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit.
      (2)   The Director or the Administrator thereafter shall have the right
to take any action he or she deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the
effects of the failure or refusal, and to reimburse the county or the certified
community from the proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and
expenses, including legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or
incurred as a result of the developer’s failure or refusal to fully meet its
obligations under this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance.
      (3)   If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to
repay fully the county or the certified community for all costs and expenses,
and to maintain a cash reserve equal to the required letter of credit during
the entire time the letter of credit should have been maintained by the
developer, then the developer shall, upon demand of the Director or the
Administrator therefore, immediately deposit with the Director of the
Administrator additional funds as the Director or the Administrator determines
are necessary to fully repay costs and expenses and to establish the cash
reserve.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
FEE-IN-LIEU OF ON-SITE DETENTION
§ 55.215 FEE-IN-LIEU OF ON-SITE DETENTION.
   (A)   The Director or the Administrator may require the payment of a fee-in-
lieu of on-site detention to fulfill all or part of the on-site detention
requirement for a development. Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be the
lesser of:
      (1)   The fee computed for each acre-foot or part thereof of detention
required and approved in accordance with the procedures and schedules as
approved and adopted by the county or the certified community; or
      (2)   The estimated construction cost, as approved by the county or the
certified community of the applicant’s proposed and approved on-site detention,
including land costs.
   (B)   The following fee-in-lieu of detention procedures apply to communities
with adopted procedures for requiring and collecting fee-in-lieu of revenues
for detention requirements.
      (1)   The Director or the Administrator may require, or the applicant may
submit, a written request for the payment of a fee-in-lieu of on-site detention
to fulfill all of part of the on-site detention requirement in accordance with
§
55.022(B) a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be either
rejected or approved within 45 days of the written request unless additional
engineering studies are required.
      (2)   Approval of a request for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention on a
development site shall be determined by the Director or the Administrator.
      (3)   A fund will be maintained by the certified community or the county
for non-certified communities for each of the major watersheds for the purpose
of identifying and controlling all revenues and expenses related to stormwater
drainage services resulting from fee-in-lieu of on-site detention approvals.
All moneys collected for fee-in-lieu of on-site detention shall be deposited in
these funds and may only be used for purposes related to stormwater management
as noted in division (B)(4) below.
      (4)   Fee-in-lieu of on-site detention revenues from development site may
be used to plan, design or construct an upgrade to existing or future
stormwater management systems if the upgrade is consistent with a basin plan,
floodplain study or stormwater system improvement that has been approved by the
county for non-certified communities or the community elected board of
officials in a certified community.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 55.230 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1104 and 5-
1062, the county may, after 30 days notice to the owner or occupant, enter upon
any lands or waters within the county for the purpose of inspecting and/or
maintaining stormwater facilities or causing the removal of any obstruction to
an affected watercourse.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.231 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   Any development constructed pursuant to a stormwater management permit shall
be subject to periodic inspections by the Administrator, Director or their
designee to ensure conformity with permit provisions and conditions.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
§ 55.232 OFFENSES.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses
to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter
(“ordinance violation”) or any requirement or condition in any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter (“permit violation”), and, in the case of a permit
violation, fails to correct the violation, omission or neglect, or cease the
disobedience, refusal or resistance after notice and reinspection as provided
in division (B) below, shall be guilty of an offense under this chapter.
   (B)   Permit violation; notice. Whenever the Administrator or Director
determines that a permit violation exists, he or she shall give notice of the
violation in the manner prescribed in §
55.166 to the permittee. The notice shall state the nature of the violation and
fix a date not less than ten days after the date of the notice when the site
will be reinspected.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004) Penalty, see §
55.999
COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNICAL GUIDANCE MANUAL
§ 55.245 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Technical Guidance Manual is to help applicants
better understand the intent of this chapter and to allow for technical
discussions and example to be given to help guide development in a manner that
is consistent with this chapter.
   (B)   The County Stormwater Management Technical Guidance Manual, copies of
which are on file in the office of the County Clerk, is adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Res. 10-72, passed 3-25-2010; Ord. 10-260, passed 8-19-2010)
§ 55.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found guilty of an offense under this chapter shall pay a
civil fine in an amount not less than $25 and not more than $750. Each calendar
day during which the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. Where monetary penalties are imposed for violations of §
55.024 by regional, state or federal agencies, the amount of these other agency
fines will be offset against the monetary penalties for violation of this
chapter.
   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed under division (A) above, the
Administrator or the Director may revoke any stormwater management permit
issued to the person.
   (C)   In addition to any fine imposed under division (A) above or action
taken under division (B) above, the Administrator or the Director may issue an
order requiring the suspension of any further work on the site. The stop-work
order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for its issuance, and
shall specify the action, if any, required to be taken in order to resume work.
One copy of the stop-work order shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous
place and one copy shall be delivered in the manner prescribed in §
55.166 to the permittee, if any, or if none, to the person in whose name the
site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records of the Supervisor
of Assessments.
   (D)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the Administrator or the Director
may bring any action, legal or equitable, including an action for injunctive
relief that may be necessary.
   (E)   (1)   An advisory committee, called the Agricultural Review Advisory
Committee, shall be appointed by the WCSMC. The Committee shall be comprised of
three members actively farming 60 or more contiguous acres in the county. The
Committee will also include representatives of the Soil and Water Conservation
District, the Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Farm Bureau.
      (2)   All complaints and ordinance violations related to §
55.024 shall be reviewed by the Agricultural Review Advisory Committee, who
shall render an opinion to the WCSMC on the validity of the complaint, remedies
and penalties to be imposed.
(Res. 02-441, passed 10-17-2002; Res. 02-495, passed 11-21-2002; Res. 04-87,
passed 3-17-2004)
CHAPTER 56: PERMIT AND ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
56.001   Title
   
56.002   Introduction
   
56.003   Purpose
   
56.004   Commentary
   
56.005   General word usage, abbreviations
   
56.006   Definitions
Administrative Provisions
   
56.020   General purpose
   
56.021   Authority
   
56.022   Coordination Council established
   
56.023   Jurisdiction
   
56.024   Plat approval
   
56.025   Enactment
   
56.026   Repealer and savings clause
   
56.027   Interpretation and separability; law governing
   
56.028   Enforcement; compliance; Division of Transportation powers and
responsibilities
   
56.029   Amendments
   
56.030   Variations
   
56.031   Appeals procedure
   
56.032   Fees
   
56.033   Violations and penalties
   
56.034   Inactivity
   
56.035   Responsibility of damage claims
Permit Types and Highway Classification
   
56.045   Highway classification
   
56.046   Access permit types
   
56.047   Agricultural access
   
56.048   Minimum access
   
56.049   Minor access
   
56.050   Major access
   
56.051   Designated freeway access
   
56.052   Temporary access
   
56.053   Use of right-of-way permit types
   
56.054   Special event
   
56.055   Utility
   
56.056   Single service connection
   
56.057   Right-of-way alteration
Access Requirements and Policies
   
56.064   Introduction
   
56.065   Access permits
   
56.066   Change in land-use or change in land-use density
   
56.067   General requirements
   
56.068   Joint highway improvements
   
56.069   Coordination of development
   
56.070   Costs of access improvements to county highways
   
56.071   Coordination with other WCDOT permits
   
56.072   Access policy
   
56.073   Access criteria
   
56.074   Restricted turning movements
   
56.075   Indirect access
   
56.076   Turnarounds
   
56.077   Parking
   
56.078   Access to corner lots
   
56.079   Access to subdivided or previously platted parcels
   
56.080   Shared access
   
56.081   Required highway improvements
   
56.082   Maintenance of driveways and streets
   
56.083   Access permit process
   
56.084   Resident engineer letter
Utility and Facility Permit Policies
   
56.100   Permit required
   
56.101   Utility or facility permit
   
56.102   General requirements
   
56.103   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities
Special Event Policies
   
56.120   Permit required
   
56.121   General requirements
   
56.122   Traffic control requirements
   
56.123   Access for emergency service providers
   
56.124   Other requirements
   
56.125   Revocation of permit
Construction Requirements
   
56.140   Notification of utility companies
   
56.141   Commencement of work
   
56.142   Normal and routine maintenance of county highways
   
56.143   Modification to plans
   
56.144   Access to highways with curb and gutter
   
56.145   Work zone protection
   
56.146   Traffic control
   
56.147   Responsibility for improvements
   
56.148   Construction of improvements
   
56.149   Restoration of right-of-way
   
56.150   As-built engineering plans
   
56.151   Final inspection and acceptance
Performance and Maintenance Guarantees, and Insurance Requirements
   
56.170   Required prior to permit
   
56.171   Performance guarantees
   
56.172   Irrevocable letter of credit
   
56.173   Cash bond
   
56.174   Surety bond
   
56.175   Performance guarantee amounts and length of term
   
56.176   Default
   
56.177   Maintenance guarantee
   
56.178   Escrow accounts
   
56.179   Insurance requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 56.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to as the "Will County
Division of Transportation Permit and Access Control Regulations Ordinance"
hereinafter referred to as "this chapter". This chapter provides the policy by
which the County Engineer can grant permits.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.002 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   A Technical Reference Manual serves as a companion to this chapter,
providing additional detail on technical and procedural requirements required
by the chapter. It is the intent of this manual to provide the necessary
guidance, reference materials and forms for developers, municipalities,
townships, and engineering consultants to understand the permitting process and
requirements, and to develop complete permit and engineering plan submittals.
   (B)   The Technical Reference Manual will be reviewed annually and updated
as necessary by the Will County Division of Transportation (WCDOT).
   (C)   The Technical Reference Manual is available for viewing at the office
of the Will County Division of Transportation between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
or downloaded at the WCDOT website.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The proper management and operation of the county highway's
infrastructure is critical to the safety of the motoring public and directly
related to the overall economic health and quality of life in Will County. The
economic vitality of the county is related to the availability of access to the
arterial highway system. This requires the implementation of access management
regulations that provide for a balance between the need to move traffic safely
and efficiently while still providing access to adjacent properties. The county
strives to provide transportation systems that provide for safe, efficient and
flexible movement through an integrated network of road, rail, public transit,
and non-motorized (bicycle and pedestrian) modes of travel.
   (B)   The construction, maintenance and improvement of the county highway
system represents a substantial investment of public funds. Impacts from
development on the county highway system shall be mitigated by development and
should not result in the need for the investment of additional public funds.
The use of the county highway system's rights-of-way by non-highway uses must
be properly managed to ensure that these non-highway uses do not constrain the
ability of the county to improve the county highway system in the future.
   (C)   Conflicts between vehicles using a county highway and vehicles
entering and exiting via access locations should be minimized through the
application of appropriate design standards. Therefore, the application of the
regulations and standards contained in this chapter will promote consistent
driver expectations, resulting in maximum operational efficiencies and safety,
and protect the public investment in county highways.
   (D)   The county also strives to allow for installation of utilities in a
safe and efficient manner. Prudent placement, removal, relocation,
modification, or abandonment of utilities and facilities will promote the most
effective and efficient use of the limited space available within the rights-
of-way of county highways.
   (E)   Therefore, this chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
      (1)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the county and the public using the rights-of-way.
      (2)   To promote the effective and efficient use of the rights-of-way of
county highways.
      (3)   To preserve an acceptable level of service on county highways.
      (4)   To preserve the rights-of-way of county highways for highways and
associated appurtenances.
      (5)   To minimize conflicts between vehicles using county highways and
vehicles entering and leaving via access locations on county highways.
      (6)   To establish reasonable rules, regulations, and specifications to
ensure the proper construction, installation, maintenance, removal, relocation,
and placement of utilities and facilities within the rights-of-way of county
highways in accordance with accepted engineering and design standards and
specifications, as well as the restoration of the disturbed portions of any and
all sections of the rights-of-way of county highways that are the result of the
placement, removal, relocation, modification, or retirement of utilities and
facilities within the rights-of-way.
      (7)   To establish reasonable regulations and procedures to ensure that
any public or private utilities and facilities are placed either within
existing rights-of-way such that future expansion of the county highway can be
accomplished at no additional cost to the county to relocate or remove such
utilities or facilities, or easements outside the right-of-way.
      (8)   To provide for the proper location and limit the number of access
locations to regulate safe and reasonable access from county highways to
abutting property and to provide sufficient spacing between access points to
minimize interference with traffic using adjacent access locations.
      (9)   To prohibit inappropriate use of a county highway as a portion of
the internal circulation system of abutting property or as parking for abutting
property.
      (10)   To provide for the establishment of sufficient pavement, right-of-
way, and easement widths.
      (11)   To establish reasonable requirements for performance and
maintenance guarantees, to ensure the proper construction of required
improvements, and to ensure that required improvements are completed in an
expeditious manner in accordance with accepted engineering and geometric
standards and specifications.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.004 COMMENTARY.
   Whenever a section of this chapter requires additional explanation to
clarify the intent, divisions prefaced "Commentary" are included. They are
intended solely as a guide for both officials and the general public to aid in
the administration and interpretation of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.005 GENERAL WORD USAGE, ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to define words, terms, and
phrases contained in this chapter.
   (B)   General word usage. In the interpretation of this chapter, the
following provisions shall be observed and applied except when the context
clearly requires otherwise:
      (1)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses and derivative forms.
      (2)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
      (3)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine
gender shall include the masculine.
      (4)   The word "shall" is mandatory.
      (5)   The word "must" is mandatory.
      (6)   The word "should" is advisory.
      (7)   The word "may" is permissive.
      (8)   In the event of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, or table, the text
shall control.
   (C)   Abbreviations. Abbreviations are used in this chapter and shall have
the meanings as set forth in §
56.006.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.006 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined and shall be
interpreted as such throughout this chapter.
   ABUTTING. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common
border by an alley, easement, or right-of-way.
   ACCESS. A private or public way for providing means of vehicular entry to or
exit from property abutting a street or highway.
   ACCESS CONTROL OFFICER. A member of the Will County Division of
Transportation staff designated by the County Engineer to oversee and
administer the process and technical requirements of access-related permits.
   ACCESS PERMIT. A permit issued by the WCDOT granting access to a county
highway from abutting property and allowing construction or reconstruction of
an access point in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   ACCESS POINT. The location of access, typically defined by a driveway or
street.
   ADJACENT ACCESS POINT. An adjoining access point which may be on either side
of the highway and either upstream or downstream of a proposed access point.
   AGRICULTURAL ACCESS. An access to a field or fields for vehicles and
equipment to perform farming activities. An AGRICULTURAL ACCESS is limited to
agricultural uses.
   APPLICANT. A local agency, person, or utility company that makes application
for a permit. For access permit projects, the APPLICANT is the property owner
and becomes the permittee.
   APPURTENANCES, HIGHWAY. In highway terms, all of the constituent components
subordinate to but nonetheless necessary for the operation, function and/or
maintenance of a roadway such as storm sewers, lighting, signage, and traffic
control devices, etc. Also called HIGHWAY ASSETS.
   APPURTENANCES, NON-HIGHWAY. All of the constituent components subordinate to
but nonetheless necessary for the operation, function and/or maintenance of a
utility or facility such as utility poles, pedestals, transformers, valves,
vaults, and manholes, etc.
   ARTERIAL. A highway generally characterized by its ability to quickly move
relatively large volumes of traffic but often with restricted capacity to serve
abutting properties. The arterial system typically provides for high travel
speeds and long trip movements. The rural and urban arterial systems are
connected to provide continuous through movements at approximately the same
level of service.
   BERM. A manmade, small hill or embankment-like facility made by the
placement of earth, sand, gravel, rock, organic material, or other similar
material usually linear in nature and used for screening or landscaping
purposes and/or in conjunction with drainage facilities.
   BERM, TOE OF. The point at which the bottom edge or slope of a berm meets
the existing grade of the ground.
   CASH BOND. A certified check or bank cashier's check payable to the Will
County Treasurer held by or deposited by the Will County Division of
Transportation to ensure that all permitted work will be completed in
compliance with this chapter and the conditions of the permit.
   CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE. An executed, completed, original document
providing evidence that the owners and contractors have insurance in the
amounts required inclusive of any additional required criteria.
   CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION. The act or process of attesting that the specific
inspections, calculations, or tests, where required, have been performed and
that they comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CLEAR ZONE. An unobstructed, relatively flat area provided beyond the edge
of the traveled way for the recovery of errant vehicles. The CLEAR ZONE
includes any shoulders or auxiliary lanes.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or firm engaged in construction, landscaping, or
maintenance on a contract basis.
   CORNER OR RETURN RADIUS. The pavement radius of the arc between the edge of
pavement of the access location and the edge of pavement of the abutting road
used to facilitate vehicular turning movements.
   COORDINATION COUNCIL. The ad hoc group established by the County under
Resolution 01-470 pursuant to ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-113, as amended, for the
purpose of facilitating the placement, removal, relocation, modification, or
retirement of utilities or facilities as deemed necessary by the county for
highway or highway safety purposes. The Coordination Council membership shall
consist of the County Engineer, the County Board Chair, or his or her designee,
and a representative designated, in writing to the County Engineer, by each
entity, either public or private, that owns, operates and/or maintains a
utility or facility, or any appurtenance thereto, as defined in this chapter,
that is located within a county highway right-of-way.
   COUNTY. County of Will, Illinois, also Will County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Will County, Illinois.
   COUNTY CLERK. The County Clerk of Will County, Illinois.
   COUNTY ENGINEER. The Will County Engineer, as defined in ILCS Ch. 605, Act
5, § 5-201, also the Will County Director of Transportation.
   COUNTY HIGHWAY. A public road as defined by the Illinois Highway Code as
part of the county highway system, including municipal extensions of county
highways and any proposed roads as yet un-built but designated as a part of the
county highway system.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The Recorder of Deeds of Will County, Illinois.
   COUNTY TREASURER. The Treasurer of Will County, Illinois.
   CROSS EASEMENT. Shared access between adjacent parcels to allow the
interaction of traffic without impacting public roadways.
   DEDICATION. The transfer of property interests from private to public
ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee-simple interest or
of a less than fee interest, including an easement.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A manmade facility for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff with controlled release during or immediately following a
storm.
   DESIGNATED FREEWAY ACCESS. An access which serves a property abutting a
county highway designated as a freeway.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or parcel of any land
proposed for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase.
   DEVELOPMENT. The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or
enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or
land; any extension of any use of land or any clearing, grading, excavation, or
other movement of land.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading, or other means. DRAINAGE includes the control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during or after development and includes the means
necessary for prevention or alleviation of flooding.
   DRIVEWAY. A private or public way for the use of vehicles providing service
between a highway and abutting property.
   EASEMENT. A right to use or control the property of another for designated
purposes, such as for drainage or placement of utilities. This may be temporary
or permanent.
   EMERGENCY ACCESS. An access which is designated and utilized solely by
emergency vehicles.
   EMERGENCY REPAIR. An immediate repair or reconstruction to the utility or
facility required to protect health, safety and welfare of the general public.
The emergency work can be required as a result of a natural disaster or other
state emergency. The duration of the work period for an emergency repair is
generally considered 72 hours or less.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any unauthorized object located partially or wholly within the
county highway right-of-way.
   ENCUMBRANCE. Prior easement, rights, or other legal constraint that would
limit or prohibit use of dedicated right-of-way by the Will County Division of
Transportation or others.
   ENGINEER. See PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.
   ENGINEERING PLANS. A set of design plans, specifications, and estimates of
cost containing all engineering elements necessary to construct an access
point, construct or perform work for a utility or facility, or construct a
highway improvement.
   ENTITY. See PERSON.
   EXCAVATION. An act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   FACILITY. A municipally owned non-roadway object, structure or device,
manmade or natural, which is designed and constructed, located, or placed to
serve a specific function or purpose or perform a particular service.
FACILITIES include, but are not limited to sidewalks, bike paths, street
lighting, signage, trees, public transportation shelters, or any other non-
highway appurtenance.
   FENCE. An artificial barrier constructed of any material or combination of
materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
   FREEWAY. A highway designated by the County Board as a freeway in accordance
with Article 8 of the Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8). A
FREEWAY can be either a full or partial access controlled facility.
   FRONTAGE. The distance, as measured along the highway right-of-way line,
between the property lines of the abutting property.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A road which is adjacent to or included in the right-of-way
of a highway or railroad, and which provides access to abutting properties and
separation from through traffic.
   GEOMETRIC PLAN. A preliminary plan identifying proposed roadway improvements
as warranted by the traffic study.
   HIGHWAY. See COUNTY HIGHWAY.
   HIGHWAY CLOSURE. A segment of the county highway that is partially or fully
closed to vehicular traffic for a period of time.
   IDOT. The Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   ILLINOIS HIGHWAY CODE. The laws of the State of Illinois relating to roads.
   IMUTCD. The current Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways as adopted by IDOT in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-301.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Any manmade changes to any land, structure, utility, facility
or highway.
   INTERSECTION. The general area where an access point and a road or two or
more roads or two access points join or cross.
   INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE. The distance, either right or left, at which a
driver stopped at an intersection can see an approaching vehicle and can enter
the road and reach the posted speed limit without an approaching vehicle
changing or altering from the posted speed limit.
   ITS. Intelligent transportation system. The use of computer and
communication technology to monitor traffic flow, control the operation of
traffic control devices and provide information to travelers about roadway
conditions.
   LAND-USE. See USE.
   LAND-USE DENSITY. An intensity measurement usually expressed in terms of the
number of units or square feet of a particular land-use permitted to be built,
constructed, or placed on a defined parcel of land.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. Qualitative measure describing operation conditions within
a traffic stream as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual.
   LOCAL AGENCY. A local unit of government organized and existing under the
laws of the State of Illinois. LOCAL AGENCIES include, but are not limited to,
fire protection districts, forest preserve districts, municipalities, park
districts, school districts, townships and township road districts.
   LOT. A single, legally divided parcel of land. A lot of record which is part
of a subdivision, the plat of which has been duly authorized and recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Will County, Illinois.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two roads at their juncture.
   MAINTENANCE EASEMENT. A permitted, platted easement outside of the right-of-
way for the maintenance of roadway related improvements.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit or cash bond, used to replace the performance guarantee upon
acceptance of the permitted and constructed work by the Will County Division of
Transportation (WCDOT).
   MAJOR ACCESS. An access which serves property abutting a county highway and
has an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance and
exit trips by vehicles using the access) of more than 50 trips or has regular
use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more (personal
recreational vehicles excluded).
   MAJOR MAINTENANCE. A repair or inspection of an existing utility or facility
that requires substantial disturbance of the county highway and/or right-of-way
as determined by the County Engineer.
   MEDIAN. A portion of a divided highway or divided driveway separating the
traveled ways for traffic flowing in opposite directions. A MEDIAN can either
be raised or flush.
   MEDIAN OPENING. A gap in a median provided for crossing and turning
vehicles.
   MINIMUM ACCESS. An access which serves a single family residence abutting a
county highway, has an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number
of entrance and exit trips by vehicles using the access) of no more than 20
trips and has no regular use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles
or more (personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   MINOR ACCESS. An access which serves property abutting a county highway, has
an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance and exit
trips by vehicles using the access) of no more than 50 trips and has no regular
use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more (personal
recreational vehicles excluded).
   MINOR MAINTENANCE. A repair or inspection of an existing utility or facility
that requires minimal disturbance of the county highway right-of-way as
determined by the County Engineer.
   MODIFICATION. Any alteration to an existing access location.
   MONTH. A total of 30 consecutive days.
   OTHER STREET. A road under the jurisdiction of another public agency and not
under the jurisdiction of the county.
   OWNER. The person or local agency having the right of legal title or
beneficial or controlling interest in or a contractual right to purchase a lot
or parcel of land, utility or facility.
   PARCEL. Any legally described piece of land.
   PAVEMENT. The bituminous or concrete hard surface of a highway used for
vehicular traffic. The PAVEMENT includes the through traffic lanes, turning
lanes, bypass lanes and paved shoulders.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee to ensure that all permitted
work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with this
chapter.
   PERMIT. A formal, written document authorizing certain work to be performed
within the right-of-way of a county highway which sets forth the terms and
conditions applicable to said work in conformance of this chapter.
   PERMITTEE. Any applicant to whom a permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, organization or business or charitable trust.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. A person as designated by the owner to be the responsible
party to insure the construction of the improvement per the approved
engineering plans.
   PLAT. A survey which defines the boundaries of a parcel of land.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A plan, preliminary in nature, showing engineering and
physical planning elements.
   PRIVATE ROAD. A road in which there is no public interest and for which no
public agency has jurisdictional or maintenance responsibilities.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the State of Illinois under
the Illinois Professional Engineering Act.
   PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A surveyor registered in the State of Illinois
under the Illinois Land Surveyor Act.
   PROOF OF INSURANCE. A certificate of insurance including any required
endorsement to the policy.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any improvement necessary to provide for public needs.
   PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY. Utility company subject to the regulation of the
Illinois Commerce Commission.
   PUBLIC WORKS AND TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE. The Public Works and
Transportation Committee of the Will County Board or its successor committee.
   RESIDENT ENGINEER. An engineer as designated by the owner to be the
responsible party to insure the construction of the developer's improvement per
the approved engineering plans.
   RESTRICTED ACCESS. An access that has geometric restrictions that limit
specific traffic movements to and from the roadway.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A manmade facility designed to completely retain a
specified amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration, or pumping.
   RETIRED UTILITY OR FACILITY. Any utility or facility not in use or operation
and with no immediate plans for repair or replacement to serve the same
function.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied for public
road purposes.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The boundary between the land acquired for or dedicated
to highway use and abutting property.
   ROAD. An approved place or way, private or public, however designated, for
vehicular travel which affords a principal means of access to abutting property
or other street, including rights-of-way, bridges, drainage structures, signs,
guardrails, protective structures and all other structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicular traffic.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. That portion of a utility or facility that runs from the
main line of the utility or facility along the county highway and connects to a
customer's property providing the service of the utility or facility.
   SHARED ACCESS. An access location used jointly by two or more properties.
   SHARED ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement permitting common access from and
through adjacent properties pursuant to specified terms and conditions.
   SHOULDER. The portion of the highway contiguous with the traveled way for
the accommodation of stopped vehicles and for emergency use.
   SITE PLAN. A plan of the proposed development as required by the
governmental agency having land use regulatory authority. If the property is
scheduled for phased development, the SITE PLAN would include the proposed
layout of the total projected development.
   SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment that will be permitted within the
county highway right-of-way under the "Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
Ordinance."
   SPECIAL EVENT. An event of public interest such as a parade, festival, race
or other public gathering which will impact normal operation of a county
highway.
   SPECIAL PROVISION. A specification or document which supplements information
contained in the engineering plans and provides details and requirements of
items that are unique to a project.
   STRATEGIC REGIONAL ARTERIAL (SRA). A highway as defined by the Chicago
Metropolitan Agency for planning (CMAP)
   STATE'S ATTORNEY. The State's Attorney of Will County, Illinois.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying stormwater.
   STREET. See OTHER STREET.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. An engineer whose principal professional practice is in
the field of structural engineering.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected, or placed which has location in or
on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground such
as buildings, cellular towers, and parking lots, etc.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person subdividing land.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division or redivision of a parcel of land into two or more
parts by means of mapping, platting, conveyance, change, or rearrangement of
boundaries.
   SURVEYOR. See PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR.
   "T" INTERSECTION. An intersection consisting of three approaches.
   TEMPORARY ACCESS. An access location permitted for a specific time period
and with restrictions on usage.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices, which
conform to the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY. A comprehensive collection and analysis of all
information necessary to accurately evaluate the effect and impact of traffic
generated by a development on the current and future road network surrounding
the development.
   TRAFFIC SIGNAL WARRANT STUDY. A study conducted to determine if a proposed
traffic signal meets the warrants based on the most recent edition of the
IMUTCD and if the installation of such a signal will improve the overall safety
and/or operation of the intersection.
   TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH BOARD. A unit of the National Research Council,
which serves the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering.
   TRAVELED WAY. The portion of the roadway, for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders.
   TURNAROUND. An area utilized by vehicular traffic to change direction
outside of the right-of-way.
   TURNING LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the
deceleration and queuing of vehicles leaving the through lanes.
   TURNING MOVEMENT. Vehicles making a designated turn.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land, or any structure thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   UTILITY. A unit, either publicly or privately owned, composed of one or more
pieces of aerial or underground related equipment or constructed materials
connected or a part of a structure or system designed to provide a service
including, but not limited to, fiber optic cable, coaxial cable, electric
cable, telecommunication cable, gas lines, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or
watermain.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. A platted easement, inside or outside of the county
highway right-of-way that is for the use or benefit of a public or private
utility to accommodate their utilities as defined by this chapter.
   WCDOT. The Will County Division of Transportation.
   WILL COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANNING COMMITTEE (SMC). The Will County
Stormwater Management Planning Committee established pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 5-1062 et seq. for the purposes of developing, revising, and
implementing a countywide stormwater management plan.
   WILL COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. A part of the adopted Will
County Comprehensive Stormwater Management Plan. Its purpose is to allow
management and mitigation of the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage.
   WORKING DAYS. Any calendar day except Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays
as observed by the county.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 56.020 GENERAL PURPOSE.
   This subchapter sets forth the administrative provisions for this chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.021 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, provide for the County
Board and the County Engineer to have authority over supervision of county
highways. This chapter is hereby adopted to preserve and protect the public
safety, health, and general welfare as they relate to the operation and use of
county highways, and their associated right-of-way.
   (B)   ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-413 et seq., as amended provides for access
roads and driveways for public and private use to be allowed onto a county
highway only upon the issuance of a permit by the County Engineer in accordance
with regulations adopted by the County Board. This chapter implements that law
but does not limit nor restrict the county insofar as other sections of the
Illinois Highway Code pertaining to access to and use of county highways.
   (C)   ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2 et seq., as amended, requires that written
approval be obtained from the appropriate local highway authority regarding
highway access prior to final approval and recording of a plat by a
municipality or county. For county highways, the authority shall be the County
Engineer.
   (D)   ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8-101 et seq., as amended, grants county boards
the authority to designate highways under their jurisdiction as freeways. ILCS
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8-102 et seq. gives the County Board the sole authority to
grant or deny any new points of access, or allow the modification, change, or
enlargement of any existing points of access.
   (E)   ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-101.1, as amended, authorizes the County
Engineer to consider additional detention in lands on the county right-of-way.
   (F)   ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-115.1, as amended, requires that drainage
facilities for the purposes of detention or retention of water may not be
constructed within a distance of ten feet plus one and one-half times the depth
of the drainage facility adjacent to the right-of-way of any public highway
without the written permission of the highway authority having jurisdiction
over the public highway. The toe of any earthen berm may not be constructed
nearer than ten feet to the right-of-way of any public highway without the
written permission of the highway authority having jurisdiction over the public
highway.
   (G)   The Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-414) of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, grants county boards the authority to
adopt regulations providing for the issuance of permits by the County Engineer
for the temporary closure to traffic of any portion of a highway under their
jurisdiction for any public purpose.
   (H)   The Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-113) of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, sets forth the powers and authority of
the appropriate highway authority as they relate to the placement, removal,
relocation, modification, or abandonment of utilities and facilities within
public highways including their placement within the rights-of-way of county
highways. For county highways, the appropriate highway authority shall be the
County Engineer.
   (I)   The Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-118) of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, set forth the power and authority of
the appropriate highway authority as relate to planting trees, shrubs, plants
or flowers in or upon the right-of-way of any highway. For county highways, the
appropriate highway authority shall be the County Engineer.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.022 COORDINATION COUNCIL ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Ch. 605,
Act 5, § 9-113) of the Illinois Compiled Statues, as amended, the county,
acting by and through the County Engineer, as the appropriate highway
authority, established a Coordination Council under Resolution 01-470 for the
purposes of implementing the provisions of said statute and facilitating the
communication and coordination relating to the placement, removal, relocation,
modification, or abandonment of public utilities owned and maintained by a
public utility company within county highway rights-of-way.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.023 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all access to and use of county highway
right-of-way, whether permanent or temporary, for purposes of providing service
from and/or to a county highway to any property after the enactment of this
chapter by the County Board. This includes any land in any township or
municipality located partially or entirely within the county.
   (B)   This chapter shall not be construed in any manner or form to limit or
restrict the power or authority of the county or the County Engineer to
maintain, operate, improve, construct, reconstruct, manage, widen, expand or
perform any other work on any county highway as may be best determined, as
provided by law, including the modification, restriction, or elimination of any
access location permitted under this chapter or any access location permitted
prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.024 PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority contained in ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2, as
referenced in §
56.021, the County Engineer shall have the authority to approve or disapprove,
in writing, plats with respect to highway access to county highways.
COMMENTARY:
The WCDOT's responsibility is access to and use of a county highway with
respect to the future planning, maintenance and management of the county
highway right-of-way. The responsibility for determining land-use requirements
rests solely with the governmental authority having the land-use regulatory
authority.
   (B)   The signature certificate which shall be included on the final plat of
subdivision to obtain written approval for access to a county highway is
provided in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.025 ENACTMENT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and effective date according to law except for all permit or use requests
submitted prior to the adoption of this chapter and which have received written
approval. All requests submitted prior to adoption of this chapter which have
not been given written preliminary approval and all requests submitted
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter shall be governed by the provisions
of this chapter as finally enacted or amended.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.026 REPEALER AND SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   The prior policies establishing rules, regulations, and specifications
governing access to or use of county highway rights-of-ways are hereby
repealed, provided such repeal shall not affect the right of the county to
institute any action at law or in equity to require compliance or prosecute
violations there under, it being the county's intention to preserve all such
causes of action and not to excuse any violation under the prior rules,
regulations, and specifications.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.027 INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY; LAW GOVERNING.
   (A)   Interpretation. The County Engineer shall render any interpretations
of this chapter, which are necessary to promote efficient administration and
review of permit requests. This chapter shall be interpreted strictly and in
accordance with the standards set forth herein. Whenever any provision of this
chapter overlaps, contradicts, or covers the same subject matter as any other
provision of this chapter or any other county ordinance regulation, or rule,
the more restrictive or higher standard shall control.
   (B)   Separability. Each chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word, provision, rule and regulation,
or restriction established by this chapter or any amendments thereto is hereby
declared to be separable and independent, in accordance with the following.
      (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision
of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any provision of
this chapter not specifically included in the judgment.
      (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter, such judgment shall not affect
the application of the provisions not specifically included in the judgment.
   (C)   Law governing. In any controversy or dispute under this chapter or in
any claims arising hereunder or related hereto, whether in contract or tort,
they shall be governed by the laws of Illinois. Any suit regarding
requirements, rules, regulations and specifications of this chapter must be
brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in Will County, Illinois.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.028 ENFORCEMENT; COMPLIANCE; DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION POWERS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Enforcement. Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes as referenced in §
56.021.
   (B)   Compliance. No access or use related work shall be performed in the
highway right-of-way which does not comply with the provisions set forth in
this chapter. Should an access, utility or facility be illegally placed within
the county right-of-way it shall be removed by the owner. If the owner refuses
or fails to remove an illegal access, utility or facility upon written notice,
WCDOT shall have the right, but not the duty, to remove the illegal access,
utility or facility and invoice the owner for the cost of the removal. Notice
from WCDOT will be given in writing, via certified mail, and shall allow the
owner a minimum of ten working days from receipt of the notice to remove the
illegal access, utility or facility. Removal shall include restoration of the
county right-of-way to an equal or better condition than existed before
construction.
      (1)   Whenever any provision of this chapter sets forth any time for any
act to be performed by permittee, such time shall be deemed to be of the
essence. The permittee's failure to perform within the time allowed shall, in
all cases, be sufficient grounds for the county to invoke an appropriate remedy
or penalty.
      (2)   The permittee shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements, rules, regulations, and specifications of this chapter as a
result of any failure of the county, on any one or more occasions, to insist on
the permittee's performance or to seek the permittee's compliance with said
requirements, rules, regulations, and specifications.
   (C)   Division of Transportation: powers and responsibilities. By authority
of the County Board and adoption of this chapter, through powers vested through
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, and all other applicable laws,
statutes, orders, and regulations of the State of Illinois and the County of
Will, the County Board of Will County hereby grants and assigns to the County
Engineer and the Will County Division of Transportation the following powers,
responsibilities, strategies and practices regarding enforcement of this
chapter:
      (1)   To review plans, specifications, studies, and estimates and issue
or deny permits for work within the county highway rights-of-way.
      (2)   To develop and set in place application procedures, issue permits
and maintain records thereof.
      (3)   To develop and publish a Technical Reference Manual to assist and
guide the public in procedures and requirements for such permits. This manual
shall include application procedures, forms, technical engineering standards
and requirements for type, extent and nature of the studies, drawings,
engineering plans, or any other types of documents that are needed for the
administration and implementation of this chapter.
      (4)   To update, modify and/or revise the Technical Reference Manual
including application procedures, forms, studies, drawings, engineering plans
and standards, or any other types of documents as needed.
      (5)   To review, approve, disapprove, or cause changes and modifications
to be made to all studies, drawings, engineering plans, and other documents
that are required by this chapter or the Technical Reference Manual as they
relate to access locations, highway improvements, or placement of utilities or
facilities.
      (6)   To conduct inspections and field investigations as necessary to
ensure compliance with the rules, regulations, and specifications of this
chapter.
      (7)   To institute any appropriate action as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, as amended, or this chapter and to request that the State's
Attorney institute any proceedings to prevent unlawful construction,
reconstruction, alteration, modification, enlargement, conversion, and/or
unlawful use of an access location providing service to a county highway or
unlawful placement of a utility or facility after the adoption of this chapter.
      (8)   To advise the County Board on all proposed amendments to this
chapter.
      (9)   To designate an "Access Control Officer" within the WCDOT to
oversee and administer the day-to-day implementation of this chapter.
      (10)   To grant and approve variations from the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with the standards as set forth in §
56.030.
      (11)   To render interpretations of this chapter in accordance with the
provisions set forth in §
56.027.
      (12)   To approve and disapprove plats in accordance with §
56.024.
      (13)   To hear and decide appeals from any decisions of the Access
Control Officer or any other administrative officials made in the performance
of their duties under the provisions of this chapter.
      (14)   To perform other such duties as are required by this chapter.
      (15)   To designate and supervise agents to operate in the County
Engineer's capacity to perform such duties as are assigned by this chapter.
      (16)   To coordinate the requirements and provisions of this chapter with
the governmental authority having land-use regulatory authority over a
development taking access to a county highway.
      (17)   To have established a Coordination Council, to be chaired by the
County Engineer, or his or her designee, to facilitate the timely placement,
removal, relocation, or modification of utilities and facilities deemed
necessary for highway and highway safety purposes pursuant to ILCS Ch. 605, Act
5, § 9-113, as amended.
      (18)   To establish rules of order and procedures, set meeting dates,
prepare and distribute agenda for, prepare minutes of, and conduct meetings of
the Coordination Council.
      (19)   To deliver on an annual basis as determined by the County Engineer
to each member of the Coordination Council a copy of the County Five-Year
Highway Improvement Program (ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-301, as amended), and the
annual program as developed by the County Engineer.
      (20)   To notify, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-113, as
amended, the owner or owners of the utilities and/or facilities that require
placement, removal, relocation and/or modification as a result of an impending
county highway improvement.
      (21)   To establish strategies and practices as may be necessary to
provide effective communication and coordination relating to proposed county
highway improvements and the placement, removal, relocation, modification, or
retirement of utilities or facilities within county highway rights-of-way.
      (22)   To cooperate with any contractor responsible for the
implementation of a county highway improvement in seeking the compliance of the
owner, or owners, of any utilities or facilities located or retirement within
the county highway right-of-way with the provisions of this chapter and ILCS
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-113, as amended.
      (23)   To collect, deposit in the County Highway Tax Fund, and expend
such funds as may be derived from any fees collected pursuant to the
administration of this chapter.
      (24)   To administer and carry out the provisions of this chapter in a
reasonable time given staffing levels, workload, and budgeting constraints.
      (25)   To act at the direction of the Public Works and Transportation
Committee in those matters relating to access improvements and programmed or
ongoing highway improvements, including the preparation of joint agreements;
recommending donation amounts; establishing escrow accounts for future highway
improvements; and collecting, depositing, and expending donations and other
such funds for county highway purposes.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.029 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   County Board action.
      (1)   In order to promote the public health, safety, comfort, and general
welfare, the County Board may from time to time amend the regulations imposed
by this chapter.
      (2)   These amendments shall not be adopted without the advice of the
County Engineer.
   (B)   Standards for amendments. Amendments to this chapter shall demonstrate
compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   The proposed amendment to this chapter shall state in particular
the chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, and word sought to be
amended.
      (2)   The proposed amendment shall contain the specific language of the
proposed amendment and shall recite the specific reasons for such a change.
      (3)   The proposed amendment shall be consistent with the intent and
purpose of this chapter and with its various rules, regulations, and
specifications.
      (4)   The proposed amendment shall not be detrimental to the safety,
operation, or capacity of a county highway.
      (5)   The proposed amendment shall in no manner limit, restrict, alter,
diminish, or unduly impede the county in its, or the County Engineer in his or
her, statutory authority as it relates to county highways.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.030 VARIATIONS.
   Minimizing congestion and delay, ensuring the safety of the traveling
public, and protecting the county's ability to maintain and improve the county
highway system are among the objectives of this chapter. Under conditions of
practical difficulty and extraordinary hardships, it may be difficult to
strictly comply with the requirements of this chapter. The purpose of a
variation is to provide relief from strict compliance with the regulations and
requirements of this chapter so long as the objectives of this chapter are not
compromised.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Where the County Engineer finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this chapter, the
County Engineer may approve variations to the requirements of this chapter so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest subserved thereby,
provided that such variations shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   The County Engineer may require that a traffic impact study or
other information, studies, or data be submitted when reviewing a request for a
variation from the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Variation requests. A petition for any variation shall be submitted in
writing to the County Engineer by the permittee. The permittee must prove that
the variation will not be contrary to the public interest and that a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship will result if it is not granted. In
particular, the permittee shall establish and substantiate that the variation
conforms to the requirements and standards as set forth in §
56.030.
   (C)   Standards for variations. No variation in the strict application of
the provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless it is found that the
following relevant requirements and conditions are satisfied. The County
Engineer may grant variations whenever it is determined that all of the
following have been met.
      (1)   The granting of the variation shall be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the regulations imposed by this chapter and shall not be
detrimental to the safety of the traveling public using the county highway.
      (2)   There must be proof of unique or existing special circumstances or
conditions where the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the permittee of reasonable access. Circumstances that would allow
reasonable access by a road or street other than a county highway,
circumstances where indirect or restricted access can be obtained, or
circumstances where engineering or construction solutions can be applied to
mitigate the condition shall not be considered unique or special.
      (3)   There must be proof of practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship. It is not sufficient to show that greater profit or economic gain
would result if the variation would be granted. Furthermore, the hardship or
difficulty cannot be self-created or self-imposed; nor can it be established on
this basis by the owner who purchases with or without knowledge of the
provisions of this chapter. The difficulty or hardship must result from the
strict application of this chapter and it must be suffered directly and solely
by the owner of the property in question.
      (4)   The variation is the least deviation from the provisions of this
chapter which will mitigate the hardship or practical difficulty.
   (D)   Action by the County Engineer. Upon receipt of the required variance
application form, all supporting documentation, data, studies and other
requested information and all related variance fees, the County Engineer shall
review and render a decision in writing to the owner. The County Engineer may,
in the decision for a variation, stipulate conditions or impose requirements in
granting of a variation from the provisions of this chapter. The written
decision of the County Engineer is valid for a period of six months.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.031 APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Access Control Officer. All objections to any action or decision
concerning access shall be filed in writing with the Access Control Officer.
The Access Control Officer shall consider the objections, and after a decision
has been made shall inform the permittee in writing of the action taken on said
objection.
   (B)   County Engineer. If the permittee is dissatisfied with the action or
decision of the Access Control Officer, a written objection may be filed with
the County Engineer. The County Engineer will consider the objection and
formulate a response, which will be communicated in writing. The County
Engineer may modify or overturn any previous action or decisions.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.032 FEES.
   (A)   All fees required for this chapter shall be established by the County
Engineer. Information regarding the required fees for each type of permit
application shall be provided in the Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   Existing agreements that have alternate permit fee schedules shall
remain in effect until and unless those agreements are expired, are terminated,
or are renegotiated, and are approved by the County Board.
   (C)   The County Engineer shall have the authority to waive any fees or
charges imposed by this chapter if said fees and charges are for a permit to
perform work within a county highway right-of-way that is needed due to a
county improvement or maintenance operation. The County Engineer may also waive
fees for permits for local government agency work. Application fees will be
charged when work is for the promotion of future development and for which work
is being performed by the developer and not under local government agency
contract.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.033 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whomever shall construct, or cause to be constructed, any access-
related improvements or any utility or facility within the right-of-way of any
county highway, or whoever shall repair, relocate, revise, modify, enlarge,
remove, reconstruct, or abandon any existing utility or facility within the
right-of-way in violation of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500 for each access location
so constructed as
outline in ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-117. Each day that the access location is
in place in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense,
subject to the above penalties. A violation shall also include any access-
related improvements or any utilities or facilities within the county highways
built without approval, and a permit as required by this chapter as well as
approved improvements built with substandard designs and specifications.
   (B)   The Will County Division of Transportation shall have the authority to
stop any and all work that it determines is proceeding in an unsafe or
substandard manner, or poses any danger to the public or the county highway. In
the event any aspect of the permittee's construction, placement, maintenance,
repair, use or operation of the county highway at any time violates or is
forbidden by any law, statute, rule, regulation, order, or requirement of any
governmental authority, the permittee shall immediately discontinue such
operations and, at its own expense, take all necessary corrective action.
   (C)   Whenever a violation shall come to the knowledge of the County
Engineer, the County Engineer may take any action as deemed appropriate and as
set forth in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. The provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed exclusive and shall not be deemed to prevent the
maintenance of any other action or proceeding in law or equity to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or to vacate and remove any improvements constructed
in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the County Recorder that
any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, as they relate to
plats, it shall be the County Recorder's duty to notify the County Engineer and
the State's Attorney.
   (E)   The County Engineer shall have the authority to delay the issuance of
permits to an applicant due to the failure of the applicant to comply with the
provisions of other permits issued to the applicant. The County Engineer shall
also have the authority to delay the issuance of permits if the property served
by the permitted work or facility is in violation of or has not complied with
the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, statute, regulation or
administrative order that may apply to such property. The County Engineer shall
also have the authority to revoke any active permit issued to the applicant due
to the failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of other permits
or the failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.034 INACTIVITY.
   (A)   An application for any permit under this chapter will be considered
inactive if no response is provided by the applicant, their agent, or their
engineer within six months from the date of the last written review comments
received from WCDOT.
   (B)   If that time period has lapsed, the application will be considered
invalid and the applicant must reapply and comply with any and all new
conditions, policies, standards or ordinances that may be in effect at the time
of the re-submittal. If more than one year has passed from the date of the last
written review comments, application fees must be paid as if it was a new
submittal. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to contact the Will
County Division of Transportation to determine the status of any permit
submittals.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.035 RESPONSIBILITY OF DAMAGE CLAIMS.
   (A)   The permittee and contractors shall indemnify and save harmless and
defend the WCDOT and the county, its officers, agents, and employees against
all loss, damage, or expense that it or they may sustain as a result of any
suits, actions, or claims of any character brought on account of property
damage, injury to or death of any person or persons, including all persons
performing any work under the permit, which may arise in connection with the
work to be performed under the permit.
   (B)   The permit is not intended by any of the provisions of any part of the
permit to make the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary of
the permit, or to authorize anyone not a party to the permit to initiate or
maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the terms
or provisions of the permit. The duties, obligations, and responsibilities of
the parties to the permit with respect to third parties shall remain as imposed
by law.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
PERMIT TYPES AND HIGHWAY CLASSIFICATION
§ 56.045 HIGHWAY CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The County Engineer may restrict the location and number of access
points. The degree of access control shall be based on two basic criteria: (1)
the size and nature of the development, which determines the volume and types
of traffic generated, and (2) the existing and/or future significance of the
highway being accessed.
   (B)   The highest degree of access control shall be applied to the county
freeways and S.R.A Routes. A list of designated county freeway and S.R.A Routes
are listed in Technical Reference Manual.
COMMENTARY:
Access management is the coordinated planning, regulation, and design of access
between roadways and land development. Studies have shown that an effective
access management program can reduce crashes by as much as 50%, increase
roadway capacity by 23% to 45%, and reduce travel time and delay as much as 40%
to 60% (source: Access Management Manual, Transportation Research Board, 2014.)
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.046 ACCESS PERMIT TYPES.
   Access to a county highway, whether temporary or permanent, shall be granted
via one of six types of access permit classifications. Access permit
classifications are a function of the traffic volumes that the access will
generate and the usage of the access. The six classifications of permits
followed by their definitions are:
   (A)   Agricultural access.
   (B)   Minimum access.
   (C)   Minor access.
   (D)   Major access.
   (E)   Designated freeway access.
   (F)   Temporary access.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.047 AGRICULTURAL ACCESS.
   (A)   An agricultural access is one which serves a farm field abutting a
county highway and is used by vehicles and equipment to perform farming
activities.
   (B)   An agricultural access is limited to agricultural uses.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.048 MINIMUM ACCESS.
   (A)   A minimum access is one which serves a single family residence and
other low-traffic - volume facilities abutting a county highway, has an
anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance and exit
trips by vehicles using the access) of no more than 20 trips and has no regular
use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more (personal
recreational vehicles excluded).
   (B)   A gated access for the sole use of emergency response providers may be
considered a minimum access if the access will be in place longer than 12
months. This access shall not be installed in place of proper internal
circulation or removing/relocating lots in the development. The access shall
follow all relevant fire codes.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.049 MINOR ACCESS.
   (A)   A minor access is one which serves property abutting a county highway,
has an anticipated normal daily two-way traffic volume (total number of
entrance and exit trips by vehicles using the access) of no more than 50 trips,
as estimated utilizing the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers Trip Generation Manual, and has no regular use by vehicles or vehicle
combinations of three axles or more (personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   (B)   Examples of land-uses served by a minor access can include, but is not
limited to, a small residential community (e.g., two to four houses), an
apartment complex with eight or fewer units, or an office building with less
than 3,000 gross square feet.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.050 MAJOR ACCESS.
   (A)   A major access is one which serves property abutting a county highway
and has an anticipated daily two-way traffic volume (total number of entrance
and exit trips by vehicles using the access) of more than 50 trips, or has
regular use by vehicles or vehicle combinations of three axles or more
(personal recreational vehicles excluded).
   (B)   Examples of land-uses served by a major access can include, but is not
limited to, regional shopping centers, multiple-unit, single-family, multi-
family residential developments, office, industrial complexes, public,
religious, education, or recreation uses.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.051 DESIGNATED FREEWAY ACCESS.
   (A)   ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8-101 et seq., as amended, grants the authority
to a county board to designate particular highways on the county highway system
as freeways for the purpose of promoting the safety and convenience of highway
traffic by regulating access to the freeway. This designation may also apply to
approach roads which intersect or approach the freeway. A permit for an access
to such freeways shall be termed a "designated freeway access permit."
Requirements shall follow the relevant access classification (agricultural,
minimum, minor, or major). The county board has the sole authority to grant or
deny new points of access or changes, modifications, and/or revisions to
existing points of access in accordance with ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8-102 et
seq. as amended.
   (B)   A list of designated county freeways is listed in the Technical
Reference Manual.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.052 TEMPORARY ACCESS.
   (A)   A temporary access is one which serves property abutting a county
highway and is used for a specified purpose for less than 12 months and then is
removed in its entirety or is replaced with a permanent access.
   (B)   Examples of temporary access can include, but are not limited to,
access for special events, construction access to backyards, access for a
construction entrance to begin initial site preparation work or construction of
on-site utilities prior to approval of a permanent access permit.
   (G)   The Access Control Officer may extend a temporary access permit in
special cases where temporary access is required for more than 12 months.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.053 USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT TYPES.
   Use of the county highway right-of-way for a non-highway function such as
special events, utilities or facilities, whether temporary or permanent, shall
be granted via one of four types of use permits. A permit is required for any
work performed in the county highway right-of-way, even if a temporary or full
closure of the roadway is not required. The four types of use permits are:
   (A)   Special event.
   (B)   Utility.
   (C)   Single service connection.
   (D)   Right-of-way alteration.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.054 SPECIAL EVENT.
   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-414 et seq. as amended, the County
Engineer may, upon application by the proper authorities of any governmental
agency or person, issue a permit to temporarily close any portion of a county
highway for any public purpose. Temporary closure of a highway for purpose of
special events of public interest and filming shall be authorized by issuance
of a special event permit.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of events can include, but are not limited to, parades, marathons, and
festivals, as well as special events of public interest and filming for a
movie, television, commercial, or documentary.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.055 UTILITY.
   A utility permit shall be required for the reconstruction, relocation,
repair, maintenance, modification, removal, upgrade, or any and all forms of
work relating to an existing utility, or any and all forms of work relating to
the construction or placement of a new utility within the right-of-way of any
county highway.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of utilities can include, but are not limited to, electric lines,
telephone lines, telecommunication lines, small cell wireless installations,
cable television lines, storm sewers, watermains, sanitary sewer lines, and
natural gas transmission lines.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.056 SINGLE SERVICE CONNECTION.
   A single service connection permit is limited to installation of a single
service connection to a utility or facility for a single family residence.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.057 RIGHT-OF-WAY ALTERATION.
   A right-of-way alteration permit shall cover additional work in the county
right-of-way, including:
   (A)   Drainage-ditch or field tile replacement.
   (B)   Landscaping such as tree clearing.
   (C)   Noise abatement barriers or retaining walls.
   (D)   Soil bores or pavement cores.
   (E)   Other work within or adjacent to the county right-of-way
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
ACCESS REQUIREMENTS AND POLICIES
§ 56.064 INTRODUCTION.
   Any owner of property abutting a county highway has the right of reasonable
access. Access which meets the requirements in this chapter shall be approved
through granting an access permit. To assist a property owner, developer, their
engineer, contractor, public agencies or any other applicant in the
administrative, procedural and engineering requirements of this chapter, refer
to the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.065 ACCESS PERMITS.
   (A)   An access permit shall be required for the construction of any new
access or the modification of any existing access within the right-of-way of a
county highway, when the work is to be done by any person or public agency
other than Will County. An access permit shall not be required for a public
agency when a joint agreement covers the work involved therein or at such times
as the County Engineer is exercising statutory supervisory authority.
   (B)   Requirements for access to a county highway are based on two factors:
      (1)   The type of access (agricultural, minimum, minor, major, designated
freeway, temporary).
      (2)   The access classification of the county highway from which the
access is being permitted.
   (C)   The owner must specify the type of access being requested. If the
access type is unknown or ambiguous, the owner shall consult the Access Control
Officer. The County Engineer has the responsibility and final authority for
determining the access type.
   (D)   he access permit is valid for as long as the use is consistent with
the approved access type, unless otherwise specified on the permit. The Access
Control Officer may, upon written request, extend the term of an access permit
for such a period as the Access Control Officer may determine.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.066 CHANGE IN LAND-USE OR CHANGE IN LAND-USE DENSITY.
   (A)   A change in use notification shall be required when a change in the
use of the access location or a change in the land-use or land-use density
occurs and the continued use of an existing access location is proposed.
Changes in land-use or land-use density may result in a significant change in
the number of or type of vehicles using an access location. Therefore, a new
access permit as well as modifications, improvements, additional right-of-way
dedications or revisions may be required to the existing access location and/or
the county highway to accommodate the change in traffic.
   (B)   Changes in land-use or land-use density are situations that may result
in a change in the number or type of vehicles using an existing access.
Modifications, improvements, or revisions may be required to the access point
and/or the county highway to accommodate the change.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of changes in land-use may be the conversion of an office space to a
medical office space, or an office space to a commercial retail space. Examples
of changes in land-use density may be the redevelopment of an existing gas
station to include a convenience store and car wash, installation of additional
parking spaces, or the expansion of a building on a property with an existing
access.
   (C)   If a change in land-use or land-use density occurs and an existing
access point is proposed to be used, the owner shall submit a change in land-
use notification form to the WCDOT prior to construction of proposed changes.
The notification and supporting information shall be reviewed to identify if
the existing access facility is suitable for the proposed land-use or land-use
density, under the provisions of this chapter. If determined suitable, the
owner will be notified to continue use of the existing access point. If the
existing access facility is not suitable for the proposed land-use or land-use
density, as determined by the Access Control Officer and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the design standards in the Technical Reference
Manual, the owner shall submit a new application for a new access permit and
make all modifications, improvements or revisions to the existing access point
and/or the county highway to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   If a property is being re-subdivided or redeveloped, the existing
access point(s) may require relocation, reconstruction, or the number of access
points reduced to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   An existing access may not be used for any aspect of a proposed
development including grading or construction, until a temporary access is
obtained.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.067 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all types of access permits.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.068 JOINT HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENTS.
   In certain circumstances, it may be advantageous to the motoring public to
construct access improvements as part of a larger overall improvement or in
conjunction with programmed county highway improvements. In order to minimize
disruptions to the public, the County Engineer may require access related
improvements to proceed in a coordinated and comprehensive manner.
   (A)   Programmed improvements.
      (1)   In certain circumstances, the WCDOT may have a highway improvement
programmed for the section of county highway for which an owner is applying for
access and the owner, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter, is required to construct highway improvements to accommodate the
proposed access. The County Engineer may recommend that both improvements
proceed simultaneously and as a coordinated joint improvement.
      (2)   For joint improvement projects, the County Engineer shall have the
option to require a formal joint agreement to be approved by the County Board.
The joint agreement shall be prepared by the WCDOT and shall specifically
provide for the responsibilities and obligations of the county and the owner as
related to the joint improvement. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
relieve the owner of any financial responsibilities related to an access
improvement.
      (3)   If the owner or the County Engineer determines a joint agreement
for a joint improvement is not appropriate, the County Engineer shall specify
the conditions to be made a part of the access permit so that construction of
the access-related improvement shall not interfere with the proposed county
highway improvement project.
   (B)   Ongoing improvements.
      (1)   In certain circumstances, the WCDOT may have a highway improvement
under construction for the section of county highway for which an owner, in
accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, is required to
construct highway improvements to accommodate a proposed access. The County
Engineer may recommend that the highway improvements for the access location be
incorporated into the ongoing county highway improvement project by means of a
formal joint agreement or by a donation of money to be made a part of the
access permit. If a formal joint agreement is recommended, the parties shall
proceed as in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   If a donation of money is recommended by the County Engineer, the
owner shall have the option to agree in writing to an amount determined by the
WCDOT. This amount shall be sufficient to cover the cost of the required access
improvement, including engineering costs and construction supervision, as part
of the ongoing county highway improvement project. The donation shall be
subject to acceptance by the Public Works and Transportation Committee, in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-101.7 et seq., as amended.
      (3)   If the Public Works and Transportation Committee, elects not to
proceed with a donation, the County Engineer shall specify the conditions to be
made a part of the access permit so that construction of the access improvement
by the owner required for the access shall not interfere with the ongoing
county highway improvement project.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the owner of
any financial responsibilities as related to an access or access improvements.
   (C)   Donations. The Public Works and Transportation Committee, in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-101.7 et seq., as amended, shall have
the authority to accept money or right-of-way or additional detention or
compensatory floodplain storage donated from any source and to use the same for
county highway purposes to mitigate the impacts to the county highway system
from the proposed development.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.069 COORDINATION OF DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   If property abutting a county highway is being developed and access is
requested to the county highway, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to
effect any coordination necessary to comply with the requirements and
provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the governmental authority
having land-use regulatory authority.
   (B)   If two or more owners of property abutting a county highway are being
developed during the same time period, the Access Control Officer may require
each owner to effect any coordination necessary to comply with the requirements
and provisions of this chapter. This may include constructing their respective
highway access improvements as a joint and coordinated effort as one
construction project.
   (C)   The issuance of an access permit by the WCDOT shall not be construed
to relieve an owner of any responsibility to secure any other permits or comply
with any requirements of any other governmental authority having any
jurisdictional responsibilities as it relates to a development. The owner shall
also be responsible for securing any permits or complying with any other
requirements of any governmental authority as they may relate to the
construction of an access or highway improvement.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.070 COSTS OF ACCESS IMPROVEMENTS TO COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   The permittee shall be solely responsible for paying all costs
associated with the design and construction of an access and all costs
associated with the design and construction of any improvements to a county
highway as required by this subchapter to accommodate the access and the
traffic using the access. Costs to the owner shall include but are not limited
to the following:
      (1)   Preparation of any plans, studies, information, or data required by
the WCDOT to review an access request and any revisions thereto.
      (2)   Collection of traffic counts and classification counts.
      (3)   Preparation of a traffic impact study and any revisions thereto.
      (4)   Preparation of preliminary plans and any revisions thereto.
      (5)   Preparation of a geometric plan and/or intersection design study.
      (6)   Preparation of a traffic signal warrant study and any revisions
thereto.
      (7)   Preparation of engineering plans and specifications, including
estimates of costs and any revisions thereto.
      (8)   Traffic control signage.
      (9)   Traffic signalization.
      (10)   Pavement markings and markers and all other traffic control
devices.
      (11)   Relocation of utilities and facilities out from underneath the
existing or proposed pavement.
      (12)   Relocation of above ground utilities and facilities including
utility poles to the proposed right-of-way line and outside of the clear zone.
      (13)   Removal of objects in the right-of-way (see § 56.081).
      (14)   All easements and right-of-way necessary to construct improvements
required by this chapter and the preparation of any plats and other legal
documents.
      (15)   Obtaining and posting performance guarantees, certificates of
insurance, and maintenance guarantees.
      (16)   Fees and other charges as required by this chapter.
      (17)   All other costs associated with access and improvements to a
county highway as required in this chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.071 COORDINATION WITH OTHER WCDOT PERMITS.
   After the engineering plans, specifications, estimate of cost, payment of
fees, performance guarantee, and certificate of insurance are received and
approved by the WCDOT, the plat of subdivision will be signed by the County
Engineer. Also at this time any utility/facility permits that have been applied
for can be issued with the issuance of the access permit. Construction may then
commence in accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications of this
chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.072 ACCESS POLICY.
   It is Will County policy that any owner of property abutting a county
highway has the right of reasonable access. Indirect access via other existing
or proposed streets or easements or restricted access is considered reasonable
access to a county highway.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.073 ACCESS CRITERIA.
   (A)   This section describes criteria applicable to all types of access. The
criteria presented include the maximum number of access points and their
permissible location with respect to adjacent access points and intersecting
streets.
COMMENTARY:
The number of access points along a county highway should be limited and spaced
far enough apart so that conflicting movements are minimized and safe operation
is promoted.
   (B)   Maximum number of access points.
      (1)   Each development or property regardless of the number of parcels
shall be limited to one access point, except as provided for otherwise in this
chapter.
      (2)   When subdividing existing developed parcels to create new lots, no
additional access will be permitted. When existing development undergoes a
change in land use, the existing access point(s) may require relocation or the
number of access points reduced per the requirements of the County Engineer to
improve safety of the motoring public.
      (3)   The Access Control Officer may permit one additional restricted
access, permitting right-turns in and right-turns out only, provided that the
owner clearly demonstrates a substantial need and complies with all the
applicable provisions of this chapter. This option will only be considered
where the enforcement of this restricted movement will be possible.
COMMENTARY:
Where additional access points are requested, first consideration shall be
given to supplemental access points, which restrict turning movements. Shared
access points or indirect access from adjacent public streets is encouraged.
Access classification of the roadway will be considered by the Access Control
Officer in evaluation of requests for additional access points.
   (C)   Alignment with existing access locations or roads. Where an existing
access location or road is on the opposite side of the county highway from an
abutting property for which access is being requested, the proposed access
shall be aligned with the existing access location or road whenever possible.
Given site specific characteristics or operational considerations on the county
highway, the Access Control Officer may waive this requirement under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The abutting property for which access is being requested has
insufficient frontage to allow for the proper alignment with the existing
access location or road and reasonable attempts made by the applicant to
acquire additional property have failed.
      (2)   The proposed point of access would not comply with other provisions
and requirements set forth in this chapter.
      (3)   The alignment of the proposed access point with an existing access
location or road would be detrimental to traffic flow, result in undue delay,
impede traffic operations, or impair traffic safety on the county highway.
      (4)   In the event that a proposed access point is not aligned as
provided for in this section, the spacing of access points with existing
adjacent access points and roads shall comply with the provisions in divisions
(D) and (E) of this section.
   (D)   Spacing of adjacent access points.
      (1)   To function effectively, adjacent access points shall be spaced to
ensure safe and efficient traffic movements and operations.
      (2)   The minimum distance between adjacent access points shall be
determined by the distance required to provide full left-turn tapers and
storage bays along the county highway for inbound turning movements to each
access location regardless of the present need for said tapers and storage
bays. These lengths shall follow the most current edition of the IDOT Bureau of
Design and Environment Manual (BDE). The applicant shall submit proposed
geometries to WCDOT for approval.
      (3)   If a property has inadequate frontage to meet this spacing
requirement, the Access Control Officer shall determine the location of the
access point using the standards and provisions established by the chapter. The
Access Control Officer may require that the access be shared, that indirect
access be used, or that the access restrict turning movements. The applicant is
required to make reasonable attempts to acquire additional property.
   (E)   Distance from intersecting streets.
      (1)   County designated freeways and S.R.A. routes.
         (a)   An intersection spacing of one-quarter mile (1,320') for full
access shall be required on all county designated freeways and S.R.A. routes.
This spacing may be modified at the discretion of the County Engineer dependent
on existing roadway conditions and features along the corridor or per findings
described in a final S.R.A Report.
         (b)   Restricted access may be considered provided the access
centerline is located a minimum of 500 feet from any other access centerline
and is consistent with other requirements contained within this chapter.
      (2)   All other county highways.
         (a)   For major access permits, an intersection spacing of one-quarter
mile (1,320') for full access is desirable. Any spacing less than 1/4 mile will
be considered provided a left turn lane can be designed that does not conflict
with any existing or future left turn lane improvements at any existing
intersection.
         (b)   Restricted access may be considered provided the access
centerline is located a distance from any other access centerline that is
consistent with other requirements contained within this chapter (i.e. right
turn deceleration requirements, number of access points, etc.)
   (F)   Proximity to adjacent intersections and access points.
      (1)   If construction of an access requires the widening of and
improvements to the abutting county highway, and an existing intersection,
access, or previously widened section falls within 500 feet (or at the
discretion of the County Engineer) of the limits of construction, then such
widening or improvements shall extend through and beyond the intersection or
access before tapering down to the existing pavement width. Exclusive left-turn
lanes shall be provided at the existing intersection or access.
      (2)   The Access Control Officer shall determine the limits of the
construction of widening and improvement to a county highway.
   (G)   Proximity to interchanges. Access points in the vicinity of
interchanges, interchange ramp terminals, crossroads, frontage roads and
service drive connections shall be restricted to eliminate hazardous and
congested conditions. Sufficient spacing between interchange ramps and access
points or crossroad intersections shall be provided to permit the development
of turning lanes and proper signing of the highway facilities. In addition, the
prior approval of the agency that has jurisdiction or functional oversight of
the interchange must be received in writing.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.074 RESTRICTED TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   Turning movements may be restricted under conditions where capacity,
delay, operational, or safety conditions make specific turns in or turns out
detrimental to the public interest. These conditions will be identified on a
site-specific basis. Refer to the Technical Reference Manual for additional
guidance on site-specific conditions.
   (B)   Turning movement restrictions shall be enforced with barrier median
channelization or driveway channelization. The Access Control Officer shall
determine the type of channelization based on site conditions and the access
classification. Design standards and details are provided in the Technical
Reference Manual
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.075 INDIRECT ACCESS.
   (A)   Access to other streets. Access to a county highway may be prohibited
when a property abutting a county highway has frontage on one or more other
streets and reasonable access can be provided from said streets. The Access
Control Officer shall determine, on a site-specific basis whether access will
be permitted to the county highway.
   (B)   Access to property for residential or non-residential subdivisions.
When property abutting a county highway is to be subdivided or developed,
direct access to a county highway shall not be used in lieu of an adequate
internal traffic circulation system. Indirect access to individual lots shall
be required from an internal traffic circulation system which itself provides
access to the county highway or other street. The Access Control Officer shall
determine, on a site-specific basis, which lots abutting the county highway may
have direct access and which lots shall have indirect access.
COMMENTARY:
As an area develops and subdivisions are platted contiguous to one another, the
internal street system should interconnect. Such interconnection permits local
movement between subdivisions without forcing trips between subdivisions to use
major roads such as county highways as part of an internal circulation system.
For non-residential developments, outlots and service to individual businesses
should be provided via cross easements, frontage roads or other internal
circulation system. The purpose of major roads such as county highways is to
carry traffic to and from such sites, not to augment or be a part of an
internal circulation system.
   (C)   Wording on the plat of subdivision. When indirect access is required
and there is a plat of subdivision, the following note shall be placed on the
plat of subdivision:
      (1)   Direct access to [county highway name] county highway [county
highway number], from lots [lot numbers] is prohibited.
      (2)   This note shall be placed on all plats that have additional lots or
outlots along the county highway frontage that will not take direct access to
the county highway.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.076 TURNAROUNDS.
   No access shall be permitted if such access would require backing or turning
maneuvers onto a county highway. Provisions for turnarounds shall be made
outside the county highway right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the Access
Control Officer.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.077 PARKING.
   (A)   No access shall be permitted if such access would result in parking on
a county highway or within the right-of-way of a county highway, unless
otherwise approved by the Access Control Officer. Provisions for parking shall
be made outside of the right-of-way of a county highway.
   (B)   No parking shall be allowed on the various county highway segments
listed in Chapter 73 of the County Ordinance.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.078 ACCESS TO CORNER LOTS.
   The following standards shall govern access to corner lots:
   (A)   For access to an abutting property located at the intersection of two
county highways
      (1)   One access point shall be permitted on the county highway having
the lower volume of traffic. The Access Control Officer shall determine which
highway has the lower volume of traffic. The requirements for the access point
shall comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   The Access Control Officer, on a case-by-case basis, may allow an
access point on the county highway with the higher volume of traffic provided
the left turns into the site are not counter to and are in the same direction
as the left turn movements at the intersection with the cross street.
   (B)   For corner lots at an intersection where only one of the abutting
roads is a county highway.
      (1)   Access shall be provided from the road having the lower volume of
traffic. The Access Control Officer shall determine which road has the lower
volume of traffic. If the Access Control Officer determines that the county
highway has the lower volume of traffic, one access shall be permitted, and the
requirements for the access point shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   If access has previously been granted by another highway authority
having jurisdiction over the road having a higher volume of traffic than the
county highway, then access to the county highway shall not be permitted.
   (C)   If access is being requested to both roads and one or both roads is a
county highway, the owner may apply for a variation from this section. In
addition to the provisions set forth in §
56.030, a traffic impact study shall be required.
   (D)   For major and minor accesses, regardless of whether access is
permitted along the county highway(s), the intersection of the two highways
shall be improved by providing appropriate capacity improvements per the
traffic impact study for the site.
      (1)   For intersections with two county highways the minimum improvements
to the intersection will be the construction of left turn lanes in each
direction along both county highways.
      (2)   For intersections with only one county highway the minimum
improvements to the intersection will be the construction of left turn lanes in
each direction along the county highway at the intersection of the existing
intersecting road.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.079 ACCESS TO SUBDIVIDED OR PREVIOUSLY PLATTED PARCELS.
   Access to land subdivided prior to the adoption of this chapter shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter to the extent possible. Owners of such
property for which access is being requested and for which compliance with this
chapter cannot be attained may request the Access Control Officer to grant
access. Such access granted by the Access Control Officer shall be the least
deviation from the rules, regulations, and specifications of this chapter.
COMMENTARY:
Many older existing subdivisions were platted with small lots fronting on
county highways. In these instances shared access or indirect access can be
used to reduce the number of access points on a county highway.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.080 SHARED ACCESS.
   Certain geometric, land-use, and site conditions may require shared access
among two or more developments or properties. This would occur when frontages
are limited and each development or property is unable to meet the requirements
of this chapter. In these instances, shared access shall be provided to
adjacent developments or properties. The Access Control Officer shall determine
on a site-specific basis when shared access shall be required.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.081 REQUIRED HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   In order to maintain safe and efficient traffic operations at the
access intersection and to ensure that the impact of a development accessing a
county highway does not result in a degradation of traffic operations,
improvements to the county highway system may be required with minor and major
access permits. These improvements may include dedication of additional right-
of-way to accommodate the widening required to maintain the existing level of
service.
COMMENTARY:
Increases in traffic from development result in two types of impacts to the
county highway system:
      (1)   Impacts that occur at the access point(s) and adjacent
intersections that result in an increase in delays at those specific locations
and are directly attributable to a specific development.
      (2)   Cumulative impacts to the overall roadway network that result from
the incremental increases in traffic from developments.
   (B)   Limits of required improvements for any minor or major access permit
shall be determined by the Access Control Officer, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and design guidance provided in the Technical
Reference Manual, Chapter 5.
   (C)   Right-of-way requirements.
      (1)   Right-of-way widths.
         (a)   All access permits, besides those classified as minimum or
agricultural use, shall be required to dedicate right-of-way (ROW). Minimum and
agricultural use accesses shall be required to dedicate ROW if the Access
Control Officer determines that it is required under one of the following
justifications:
            1.   Properties at intersecting ROW lines must still provide the
50' x 50' corner clip as outlined in this section.
            2.   The current ROW does not provide adequate space for sight
distance and clear zone concerns.
            3.   Additional ROW is required to correct existing or proposed
drainage problems.
            4.   WCDOT has a planned roadway widening project that requires
additional ROW.
            5.   If the property has one or more previous ROW dedication(s),
which are easement(s), any previous ROW easement dedication(s) shall be
transferred to the county as ROW interest(s) in fee simple.
         (b)   County designated freeways and S.R.A Routes shall have a minimum
right-of-way width of 150 feet, 75 feet half right-of-way width. County
highways shall generally have a minimum right-of-way width of 120 feet, 60 feet
half right-of-way width. However, some county highways may require right-of-way
widths of up to 160 feet, 80 feet half right-of-way widths.
         (c)   A minimum 50 foot corner clip shall be provided at intersecting
right-of-way lines. This means the legs of the triangle formed by the two
intersecting right-of-way lines shall be 50 feet each.
         (d)   All right-of-way dedications shall be in fee. Any previously
dedicated right-of-way as "dedicated for roadway purposes" (which are
easements) shall be transferred to the county as ROW interest(s) in fee simple
prior to approving any access permit.
         (e)   If the property abutting a county highway is to be subdivided or
an access is being requested, the owner shall dedicate, at no cost to the
county, sufficient land to satisfy this right-of-way requirement.
         (f)   If additional right-of-way is needed in order to construct the
required highway improvements or is needed to accommodate a future improvement
to a county highway due to the particular circumstances of the nature of the
major access, the additional right-of-way shall be dedicated by the owner at no
cost to the county. This may include additional right-of-way required to obtain
the required sight distance at the proposed access location. If the additional
right-of-way needed is from property not controlled by the owner, the owner
shall obtain the additional right-of-way in the name of the county at no cost
to the county.
      (2)   A plat of dedication shall be required for all minor and major
accesses. The following wording shall be used to dedicate right-of-way, on a
plat of subdivision or plat of dedication: HEREBY DEDICATED TO THE COUNTY OF
WILL.
      (3)   Restoration of right-of-way. Upon completion of any construction
work within the right-of-way, the right-of-way shall be restored in accordance
with the permitted plans acceptable to the WCDOT.
      (4)   Objects in the right-of-way. In general, no new objects, trees,
plants, bushes, landscaping, fences, signs, rocks, debris, berms, detention or
retention facilities, or any such materials shall be permitted within the
right-of-way. Trees may be allowed to be planted within the right-of-way, if a
municipality will accept maintenance of these trees via the municipal
acceptance form or via an agreement. In those instances where additional right-
of-way is being dedicated as required by this chapter, trees, plants, brush,
fences, signs, rocks, landscaping, objects, berms, detention facilities,
wetlands, floodplains, and other such obstacles shall be removed or relocated
beyond the new right-of-way line and clear zone. Note that all detention
facilities and berms shall follow ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-115.1, as amended,
based on the proposed right-of-way. All affected existing utility poles shall
be relocated to the new right-of-way line along the entire frontage of the
development.
      (5)   Right-of-way encumbrances. All right-of-way to be dedicated shall
be free and clear of any existing encumbrances, which would render the right-
of-way in any manner or form unusable for road purposes or would in any manner
or form, result in any extraordinary costs to the county at such time as said
right-of-way is to be used for road purposes. This would include the mitigation
and/or fee for future mitigation of any wetlands within the proposed right-of-
way.
      (6)   Right-of-way monumentation. All new right-of-way boundary corners,
points of curvature and points of tangency shall be monumented with iron pipes
or rods that are a minimum of one-half inch diameter by 24 inches long or with
other acceptable types of monuments that are in compliance with the Illinois
Professional Land Surveyor Act of 1989 Section 1270.56, Minimum Standards of
Practice, paragraph 5. The type of monuments found or set shall be noted on the
plat.
COMMENTARY:
The additional right-of-way required in this section is needed to accommodate
future highway improvements that are needed because of the cumulative traffic
generation of developments and to accommodate access related improvements. The
right-of-way widths are also needed to accommodate roadway drainage, snow
storage, utilities and facilities, and to provide for traffic and pedestrian
safety.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020; Ord. 23-289, passed 9-21-2023)
§ 56.082 MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAYS AND STREETS.
   Property owners having access to a county highway are fully responsible for
the maintenance of their driveway. This maintenance responsibility includes the
removal of snow and ice and keeping the portion of the driveway within the
county right-of-way in a safe condition for the general public. Where the owner
of a commercial or industrial property is required by the County Engineer to
construct turning lanes on the county highway, the County Engineer may in the
interest of public convenience provide maintenance and remove snow and ice on
the portions of those lanes constituting an integral part of the highway. Once
a culvert is properly installed pursuant to a permit, it becomes public
property in accordance with ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-105 of the Illinois
Highway Code and will thereafter be maintained by WCDOT.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.083 ACCESS PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   Review and issuance of each type of access permit shall be governed by
the individual processes outlined in the Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   The general administrative process applicable to all permits includes:
      (1)   Permit review is initiated with an initial submittal package which
shall include at a minimum a cover letter, application form and site plan
location. A pre-application meeting shall be required for a major access
permit. See the Technical Reference Manual for additional guidance on initial
submittal requirements.
      (2)   The owner shall sign and submit the permit application and
application fee. For all access permits, the owner shall be considered the
permittee for all provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Submittals received by the WCDOT will be reviewed in a reasonable
time period given manpower, workload, and budgeting constraints. All submittals
that require review by WCDOT departments outside of the Permitting Department
may require more time for the review to be completed by all parties.
      (4)   The Access Control Officer may require engineering studies, plans,
and other information in order to review and evaluate the owner's application.
All engineering documents shall be signed and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer in the State of Illinois. Multiple reviews may be necessary prior to
approval of the engineering plans. The WCDOT shall include guidance on
engineering plan and study requirements in the Technical Reference Manual.
      (5)   Upon approval of the final submittal and engineering documents,
receipt of required fees, guarantees, ROW dedication, and proof of insurance as
required, a permit will be issued.
      (6)   Construction must begin within the time frame specified in the
Technical Reference Manual, unless otherwise specified on the permit.
      (7)   When construction work is complete, per the approved plans, the
WCDOT shall be notified in writing to perform a final inspection.
      (8)   When construction work, inspections and punch list items are
completed, the access permit work will be accepted by the WCDOT.
      (9)   Upon acceptance of the access permit work, the permittee shall
provide as-built plans, maintenance guarantee (if required), and pay
outstanding invoices. The performance guarantee will then be released.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.084 RESIDENT ENGINEER LETTER.
   The permittee shall provide a licensed professional engineer to act as
resident engineer, as required by permit type. He or she shall be responsible
for inspections on behalf of the permittee and will be responsible for ensuring
that the permitted work is constructed in compliance with the approved
engineering plans and specifications. While the WCDOT may conduct periodic
inspections, it is not their responsibility to provide project management or
day-to-day oversight of the construction. The resident engineer information
shall be submitted to the WCDOT on the resident engineer's company letterhead
and include the engineer's name, address, telephone number, and professional
engineer's license number for the licensed professional engineer who will act
as resident engineer. A sample letter for use by resident engineers can be
found in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
UTILITY AND FACILITY PERMIT POLICIES
§ 56.100 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   In order to provide for the safe placement of utilities and facilities
within the rights-of-ways of county highways, to safeguard the motoring public,
to promote the orderly and efficient use of public rights-of-way, and to ensure
that said placement of utilities and facilities does not inhibit the county's
ability to maintain, operate, and improve the county highway system, it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the county to regulate the placement,
removal, relocation, modification, or retirement of utilities and facilities
within the rights-of-way of county highways through the rules, requirements,
and regulations established by this chapter and the specifications,
requirements and conditions contained in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.101 UTILITY OR FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for the replacement, relocation, repair,
modification or removal of any existing utility or facility and any manner or
form of work relating to the construction or placement of a new utility or
facility within the right-of-way of any county highway. For all provisions of
this chapter, a single service connection permit shall be considered a utility
or facility permit. All work associated with a utility or facility to be placed
or already existing within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be
performed at no cost to the county.
   (B)   Any public utility company, municipal corporation, or other public or
non-public corporation, association or person may request permission to locate,
place or construct upon, under, or along any highway, utilities or facilities
provided that the entity receive written consent from the WCDOT in accordance
with this chapter. The WCDOT has the right to deny, on a non-discrimination
basis, any application for the placement of utilities or facilities for any
reasonable cause or for safety concerns when such placement would, in the
opinion of the WCDOT, be detrimental to current or future needs of the county
highway system.
   (C)   A permit for work relating to a utility or facility shall be valid for
a period not to exceed 90 days from the date of issuance and all rights arising
from or created by such issued permit shall expire and terminate if the work
contemplated under the permit has not been initiated. The County Engineer, upon
written request, may extend the term of a permit for such a period of time as
the County Engineer may determine. If the utility or facility work is to be
completed as part of an access permit, the proposed utility or facility shall
be included on the engineering plans submitted for that review process, but
shall be permitted separately with a utility or facility permit.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of types of utilities can include, but are not limited to, electric
lines, telephone lines, telecommunication lines, cable television lines,
natural gas transmission lines, storm sewers, watermains, and sanitary sewer
lines. Wireless antenna installation are covered under the "Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities Ordinance".
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.102 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Highway purposes of county highways. The rights-of-way of county
highways are established for the location of highways and the highway
associated appurtenances. Utilities and facilities shall be located within such
rights-of-way in a manner that will not impede or conflict with any existing
highway or associated appurtenance or any future improvement or widening of a
highway and the construction or reconstruction of associated appurtenances. A
utility or facility is not considered a highway appurtenance.
   (B)   Easements. New utility easements shall not be allowed within the
county right-of-way.
   (C)   Relocation of existing utilities and facilities.
      (1)   Whenever a county highway pavement is widened, reconstructed,
resurfaced, or additional lanes are added and an existing utility or facility
will be under the widened pavement or traffic signal equipment, the owner of
the existing utility or facility or the permittee shall relocate, remove, or
modify the utility or facility from under the widened pavement at no cost to
the county. All utility poles within the construction limits of a roadway
widening improvement shall be relocated to the new right-of-way line. The
County Engineer shall determine the need for said relocation, removal, or
modification on a case by case basis.
      (2)   Any and all additional or extraordinary costs that may be incurred
by the county due to the presence, retirement, or proposed placement of any
utility or facility within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be borne
solely by the owner of said utility or facility. Payment to the county for said
additional or extraordinary costs shall be made as determined by the County
Engineer.
   (D)   Conflicts with existing utilities and facilities/insufficient space.
      (1)   In the event of the placement, construction, relocation, removal,
modification, retirement, enlargement, or any manner of work to be performed on
any utility or facility, existing or proposed, within the right-of-way of a
county highway there does not exist sufficient space for said proposed work,
the county is not responsible for providing additional space in any manner or
form. In the event the County Engineer determines that there exists
insufficient space within the right-of-way of a county highway, the proposed
work may not be permitted.
      (2)   In the event a conflict exists between any existing or proposed
utilities or facilities located or proposed to be located within the right-of-
way of a county highway, said conflict shall be resolved by the owners of said
utilities or facilities. The resolution of any conflict shall not result in the
county incurring any costs, either now or in the future, and shall not impede
traffic or hinder the operation of the county highway. The resolution of any
conflict must be approved by the County Engineer if the proposed resolution
involves work to be performed within the right-of-way of a county highway.
   (E)   Other agency requirements and permission. The issuance of a permit
under the provisions of this chapter does not relieve, excuse, diminish, or
negate, in any manner or form, the authority, rules, requirements or permission
that may be required by any governmental authority or person that regulates any
manner of work to be performed on any utility or facility, existing or
proposed, within the right-of-way of a county highway. Prior to or subsequent
to the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the owner of
a utility or facility may be required to submit evidence of compliance with the
rules, regulations, and specifications of any other applicable regulatory
agency or person for the work to be performed within the right-of-way of a
county highway.
   (F)   Property owner's permission. The issuance of a permit under the
provisions of this chapter does not relieve the permittee from obtaining
permission from the legal property owner to locate the utility or facility on
any county highway where the right-of-way is in the form of an easement for
public road purposes and the county does not own the right-of-way. The rules,
regulations, and specifications of such permission shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter nor supersede, diminish, alter, or in any
manner or form, interfere with use of said easement for roadway purposes, nor
shall said permission result in any costs to the county either now or in the
future. Failure to obtain permission can be just cause not to issue a permit or
to suspend or revoke an issued permit.
   (G)   Locating utilities and facilities.
      (1)   The owner of any utility or facility located within the right-of-
way of a county highway shall upon written request determine the location of
its utility or facility as required by the County Engineer to facilitate design
engineering, construction, or maintenance work to be performed on a county
highway. Such locating may include, but are not limited to, exposing the
utility or facility and/or providing distance and depth measurements.
      (2)   The locating of a utility or facility shall be performed within ten
working days of the receipt of the request of the County Engineer when
seasonally possible to do so within such timeframe and shall not result in
costs to the county due to delays in the design engineering, construction or
maintenance work contemplated by the county. This requirement to locate
utilities or facilities shall not be construed to be in conflict with damage
prevention efforts of the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavation
(J.U.L.I.E) program, but a condition of any permit to construct and/or maintain
a utility or facility within a county highway right-of-way. Failure to respond
to such locating requests shall constitute a violation of this chapter, as
detailed in §
56.033.
   (H)   Participation in the J.U.L.I.E. The owner of any utility or facility
to be located within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be a member of
J.U.L.I.E. The only allowed exceptions to J.U.L.I.E. membership are the owners
of a single service connection for water or sanitary sewer within the county
highway right-of-way.
   (I)   Maintenance of utilities and facilities.
      (1)   The owner of a utility or facility located within the right-of-way
of a county highway shall be solely responsible for the use, operation, and
maintenance of the utility or facility. All work performed on a utility or
facility located within the right-of-way of a county highway shall be performed
at no cost to the county and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   In the event a utility or facility located within a right-of-way of
a county highway becomes a hazard or potential hazard, the owner of the utility
or facility shall immediately take the necessary steps to remedy and alleviate
the hazard or potential hazard, at no cost to the county. Said remedy shall not
alter, diminish, lessen, change, or in any manner or form, limit the use of a
right-of-way for roadway purposes.
      (3)   The owner of the existing utility or facility shall obtain a permit
to perform maintenance on the utility or facility located within the right-of-
way of a county highway. Permit fees may be waived for minor maintenance work
that does not substantially impact the county highway right-of-way. The waiver
of permit and inspection fees shall be at the discretion of the County
Engineer. All applicable fees under this chapter shall be paid by the owner for
any maintenance work that involves the open cutting of the county highway
pavement.
      (4)   Major maintenance. Major maintenance is the repair or inspection of
an existing utility or facility that requires substantial disturbance of the
county highway and/or right-of-way. Major maintenance or inspection work may
require excavation and roadway lane and shoulder closures. The County Engineer
shall determine whether the work constitutes major maintenance work.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of major maintenance can include, but are not limited to, replacing a
valve on an existing water main, replacing an existing utility pole, the
installation or cut off of a single residential service which involves
earthwork, and maintenance work that requires substantial earthwork or
excavation. Any planned maintenance work that requires the open cutting of the
county highway pavement shall be considered major maintenance.
      (5)   Minor maintenance. Minor maintenance is the repair or inspection of
an existing utility or facility that requires minimal disturbance of the county
highway right-of-way. The County Engineer shall determine whether the work
constitutes minor maintenance work.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of minor maintenance may include, but are not limited to aerial work
on existing utility lines, televising or lining of an existing sewer without
disturbing pavement, and adjusting manholes without affecting county highway
pavement.
   (J)   Emergency repair work.
      (1)   Emergency repair work may be performed on a utility or facility
located within a right-of-way of a county highway prior to obtaining a permit
to perform the work necessary to remedy the emergency situation. For all
emergencies, the WCDOT shall be notified immediately during business hours and
the Will County Sheriffs Office shall be notified outside of normal business
hours. The County Engineer shall determine whether a permit is required for the
work performed. A permit is required for all pavement open cuts.
      (2)   Emergency repair work traffic control. When emergency work is
needed on the traveled portion of the roadway, immediate steps shall be taken
by the utility or facility company to provide all necessary protection for
traffic on the highway. Applicable traffic control standards in accordance with
the Technical Reference Manual shall be used at all times. The person in charge
shall notify the WCDOT of any lane closure and when the lane re-opens. Any time
a portion of the county highway requires closure outside of normal business
hours, the Will County Sheriffs Office shall be notified.
      (3)   Emergency work duration. The duration of the work under an
emergency situation by definition is considered 72 hours or less. This time
frame is meant to resolve the immediate emergency and temporary pavement may be
required as part of this job. The county highway shall be open to traffic as
soon as possible. All permanent restoration to pavement, shoulders and right-
of-way that was disturbed as the result of emergency work shall be completed
within one week of the completion of the emergency repair. Should the emergency
occur during the winter months, temporary restoration measures shall be
required until permanent restoration can be completed in the spring.
      (4)   Emergency work permit requirements. Performance of the emergency
repair work does not relieve the owner of the utility or facility of all other
applicable rules, regulations, and specifications, as set forth in this
chapter. A permit application for the emergency work shall be received by the
WCDOT no later than one week after the emergency had been identified.
   (K)   Pavement open cut requirements. Open cutting of pavements degrades the
pavement condition and creates the potential for increased future maintenance
costs. Due to this impact, open cutting of the pavement for any utility or
facility work is discouraged, and all efforts necessary shall be made by the
owner of a utility or facility to avoid open cutting of the pavement. If there
is no reasonable alternative to open-cutting, a request for open cut shall be
made in accordance with the processes and forms contained in the Technical
Reference Manual. No pavement open cuts shall be permitted between November 15
and April 15, except in the case of an emergency repair process.
   (L)   Service connections.
      (1)   The owner of a utility or facility located within the right-of-way
of a county highway shall be responsible for and repair, or cause to be
repaired, damage to any property of the county and shall restore any disturbed
county highway rights-of-way due to any service connections whether installed
by the owner, his or her authorized representative, or by others.
      (2)   Service connections for water service and sanitary sewer service
are allowed to be located within the right-of-way of the county highway
provided that the appropriate permit for said services has been issued and the
appropriate acceptance form has been signed. The WCDOT is not responsible for
reestablishing any service connections damaged by anyone performing work within
the county highway right-of-way.
   (M)   Retired utilities and facilities.
      (1)   The owner of any utility or facility shall be responsible for any
utilities and facilities remaining in the right-of-way that have been retired
or are no longer in use. This responsibility shall include the location and
removal or the cost of the removal of said utilities and/or facilities that are
in conflict with any highway improvement, construction, and/or maintenance
projects of the county and/or its agents. Should the highway pavement be
widened, the retired utility and/or facility shall be removed out and relocated
at no cost to the county. The relocated utility shall be located a minimum of
two feet beyond the proposed edge of pavement or curb and gutter and shall not
conflict with any proposed storm sewer system being built as part of the
highway improvement.
      (2)   The County Engineer may determine on a case by case basis that a
retired utility or facility may remain in place provided good and sufficient
reasons are presented to the County Engineer in writing by the owner of the
abandoned utility or facility. However, cost of said removal shall not be the
sole reason for a request to leave the retired utility or facility in place.
      (3)   Upon a determination by the County Engineer that a retired utility
or facility may remain in place, the County Engineer may set forth conditions
and requirements which shall include, but not be limited to, prompt
reimbursement of the county or its agents for costs incurred due to allowing
the retired utility or facility to remain in place or filling the retired
utility with suitable material to avoid future collapse or failures.
   (N)   Change in permittee status. The permittee shall promptly notify the
county of any actual or proposed change in status (including but not limited to
bankruptcy) or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of
the permittee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major
stockholders but also includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, group of
persons, or group of persons jointly acquiring 5% or more of the voting shares
of the permittee. Said notification shall be in writing and sent to the County
Engineer within 30 days of the change in status.
   (O)   ln addition to the rules, requirements, and regulations established by
this chapter and the specifications, requirements and conditions contained in
the Technical Reference Manual, utility requests that fall under the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act shall follow the rules, requirements, and
regulations established by the Will County Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities Ordinance approved by Resolution 18-226.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.103 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES.
   (A)   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities to be constructed along a county
highway may be located in easements outside of the right-of-way of the county
highway or may be located within the right-of-way if the local agency accepts
maintenance responsibility for the facility and sufficient area exists to meet
appropriate design standards. The county reserves the right to reject requests
for permitting of bicycle and pedestrian facilities where insufficient area
exists or where installation of such facilities would create a potential for
unsafe conditions.
   (B)   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities permitted under this chapter shall
not be maintained by the county. The permittee for such facilities must be a
municipal or local agency with sufficient financial and operational resources
to properly maintain and operate said facilities in a manner satisfactory to
the county.
   (C)   The County is not responsible (financially or otherwise) for the
design, engineering, or construction costs of bicycle or pedestrian facilities
located in or outside the county right-of-way.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
SPECIAL EVENT POLICIES
§ 56.120 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The County Engineer, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-414
et seq. as amended, may issue a permit to temporarily close any portion of a
county highway for any public purpose. Temporary closure of a highway for
purpose of special events of public interest and filming shall be authorized by
issuance of a special event permit.
   (B)   Temporary closures for emergency repairs, natural disasters, or other
emergency conditions are exempt from these requirements.
COMMENTARY:
Examples of special events can include, but are not limited to, parades,
marathons, festivals, other special events of public interest and filming for a
movie, television, commercial, or documentary.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.121 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A special event permit is required for any activity on county highway
right-of-way which impacts or has the potential to impact the traveling public.
Municipal corporations, governmental agencies, or a person or business may
apply for a special event permit. Contact with the WCDOT shall be made by the
applicant in the early stage of the event's planning process, a minimum of 30
days prior to the planned event.
   (B)   Temporary closure of a county highway classified as a designated
freeway, principal arterial, or arterial, may require additional conditions of
approval including, but not limited to, significant coordination with local and
regional emergency service agencies, preparation of a detour plan, notification
of media outlets, placement of changeable message signs on the route prior to
the closure, etc.
   (C)   Route alternatives may have to be considered by the applicant should a
portion of the county highway intended for an event be under construction at
the time of the event.
   (D)   Procedure and requirements for special event permit application are
outlined in the Technical Reference Manual.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.122 TRAFFIC CONTROL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Temporary closure of a county highway for a special event will only be
permitted if a suitable detour or alternate route exists which will not overly
delay the motoring public, as determined by the WCDOT. Traffic control
requirements are outlined in the Will County DOT Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   The permittee, not the WCDOT, shall be responsible for advance
notification of temporary closures, the detour route, traffic control,
including signage and police/sheriff presence or assistance if required. The
WCDOT has the authority to require that the permittee have police or sheriffs
presence during the highway closure.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.123 ACCESS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   Provisions must be made to allow for safe passage of emergency vehicles
through the closed portion of highway. Written approvals may be required from
emergency service providers if deemed necessary by the WCDOT.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.124 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a special event permit, the permittee shall
provide the WCDOT with acceptable proof of insurance. Insurance requirements
are outlined in the Technical Reference Manual.
   (B)   The permittee shall be responsible for cleaning and maintaining the
right-of-way of the county highway during and following the event. In the event
that the permittee fails to remove any debris, litter, signs, or other
appurtenances that were temporarily in place during the closure, upon cessation
of the temporary closure, the WCDOT reserves the right, but does not have the
duty to, perform those activities necessary to remove any debris, litter,
signs, or other appurtenances that were temporarily in place during the closure
without advance notification and bill the permittee for said costs.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.125 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The WCDOT reserves the right to require the cessation of all activity and
removal of the temporary closure if any of the requirements of this chapter or
additional regulations, requirements and conditions imposed by the permit have
not taken place or if the traffic control requirements are not in accordance
with the requirements of the permit.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 56.140 NOTIFICATION OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
   The county, all utility companies, and J.U.L.I.E. must be notified before
construction work commences within the required J.U.L.I.E. notification time
frame. It shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee to have all
underground facilities located prior to the commencement of any construction.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.141 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.
   No work requested under the provisions of this chapter shall commence until
such time as a permit is issued by WCDOT.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.142 NORMAL AND ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   All normal and routine maintenance performed by the WCDOT on county highways
shall take precedence over and supersede all construction, maintenance,
placement, removal, relocation, modification, and use of county highway rights-
of-way as governed by this chapter.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.143 MODIFICATION TO PLANS.
   Any modifications to engineering plans after WCDOT has approved them but
prior to permit issuance must be submitted and approved by the WCDOT prior to
construction.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.144 ACCESS TO HIGHWAYS WITH CURB AND GUTTER.
   (A)   Before an access-related improvement is constructed on a curbed
highway, the existing curb and gutter shall be completely removed within the
access location area. The curb-cut shall be of sufficient width to accommodate
the required access width and curb returns, as well as the full length of any
turning lane and approach treatments that are being installed.
   (B)   Depressed curb and gutter shall be reinstalled at minor access
driveways and may be required at other access types.
COMMENTARY:
Removing only the back of a curb and paving over the broken curb section is not
acceptable, since this practice results in an exposed face that is highly
susceptible to spalling or raveling. On highways with mountable curbs, it is
not acceptable to simply pave to the back of the curbing and require motorists
to drive over the curbing.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.145 WORK ZONE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Appropriate measures shall be taken by the permittee to prevent and
protect the public from any hazards or potential hazards caused by or the
result of any work permitted under this chapter.
   (B)   Traffic control and protection for the safety of the traveling public
in accordance with the Technical Reference Manual and approved engineering
plans shall be in place through the duration of the work. County highway
pavements shall not be broken, cracked, or damaged in any manner or form as a
result of the permitted work. Any dirt, mud, dust, or any form of debris shall
be removed from the highway pavement in a reasonable time frame, or upon
notification by WCDOT.
   (C)   Equipment with grouser pads, cleats, or studs shall not be operated or
allowed on any highway pavement.
   (D)   In the event the permittee violates the rules, regulations, or
specifications of this chapter, the Technical Reference Manual, or the approved
permit documents and refuses to remedy the violation, the County Engineer may,
but has no duty to, order the work to be done to correct the violation. The
permittee shall reimburse the county at a rate not to exceed 130% of the costs
incurred by the county and shall cease all work being performed until such time
as reimbursement has been made and alternate construction methods acceptable to
the County Engineer are approved.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.146 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Traffic control and protection measures are required during
construction. A traffic control plan shall be included within the engineering
plans and specifications submitted to the WCDOT. Should adequate traffic
control measures not be in place, a representative of the WCDOT has the
authority, but not the duty, to halt the construction until such time as the
traffic control measures are corrected.
   (B)   The first infraction will result in the halting of construction until
such time as traffic control measures are corrected. The second infraction will
result in the halting of construction for the remainder of that day. Traffic
control measures must be established prior to the start of the next workday.
Should there be a third infraction, the permit shall be revoked and there shall
be a meeting with the permittee, resident engineer/person in charge, and WCDOT
to discuss what measures will be taken to reinstate the permit.
   (C)   The WCDOT shall have the ability to assess a fine in accordance with §
56.033 for any infraction of traffic control requirements.
   (D)   The resident engineer/person in charge shall notify the WCDOT, of any
upcoming lane closures (48 hours prior) and immediately when the lane is
reopened to traffic. Closures of a travel lane for permitted work may be
restricted based on the time of day, the time of year, or location. Exceptions
to this policy may be granted by the WCDOT on a case by case basis through the
permit review process. Temporary closures for emergency repairs, natural
disasters, or other emergency conditions are exempt from these requirements.
   (E)   Any full closure of a county highway for any period of time shall
require approval from WCDOT. All closure and detour signs shall follow the
MUTCD and relevant IDOT standards. All closure signage must be up at least two
weeks prior to closure of the county highway. The County Engineer may waive
this requirement in case of emergency closures.
   (F)   Parking or storage of vehicles, materials, or equipment within the
county right-of-way will not be allowed unless otherwise specified in the
permit documents.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.147 RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Permittee. Regardless of contracts, agreements, or inspections
performed, the responsibility for the installed improvements required by this
chapter shall rest solely with the permittee.
   (B)   Permittee's person in charge/resident engineer.
      (1)   The permittee shall provide a person in charge of construction and
inspection of the permit work. For some access permits, the person in charge
shall be a full-time resident engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois. Said
person in charge shall have the appropriate training and experience to ensure
the quality of construction of all aspects of the project. The person in charge
shall be present at all times during critical phases of the construction and
shall transmit weekly progress reports to the WCDOT Permit Department. He or
she shall prepare all construction reports on said construction in accordance
with the Motor Fuel Tax (MFT) guidelines for such reports as required by the
Illinois Department of Transportation.
      (2)   The person in charge or their designated surveyor shall be
responsible for establishing the proper lines and grades for all earthwork,
paving, drainage facilities, and locations of all pavement markings. The person
in charge shall be responsible for all other engineering work and inspection.
At the completion of the improvements, as required by this chapter, the person
in charge shall certify in writing to the WCDOT that all work and improvements
have been completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the
Technical Reference Manual and the approved engineering plans and
specifications. The person in charge shall provide a 24-hour contact number.
      (3)   The WCDOT may at any time require a written report on inspections
made by the person in charge. Construction work shall be subject to inspection
and testing at all times by the WCDOT.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.148 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Construction of permitted work required by this chapter shall be in
accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications as set forth in this
chapter and the Technical Reference Manual.
      (2)   The construction of any improvements, utility or facility work
within the right-of-way shall not commence until a permit is issued.
      (3)   The construction of improvements or utility/facility work must
begin and end within time frames identified in the Technical Reference Manual,
or as identified on the issued permit. These time periods may be extended by
the County Engineer upon receipt of a written request detailing sufficient
cause.
   (B)   Field modifications. During the construction phase, the person in
charge shall note any conditions or unforeseen circumstances that may involve
departures from the approved engineering plans and specifications. The person
in charge must request in writing to the WCDOT the approval to depart from the
approved engineering plans and specifications. Revised plan sheets shall
accompany the written request.
   (C)   Maintenance during construction.
      (1)   Emergency action by WCDOT. If any emergency repairs or actions are
required of the WCDOT on a county highway due to construction of permitted work
as approved by this chapter, the WCDOT may perform but does not have the duty
to perform such emergency repairs or actions and charge the permittee for all
the costs associated with such work. The person in charge shall be present for
such emergency repairs and shall be responsible for any changes or
modifications necessary in the traffic control.
      (2)   Debris removal.
         (a)   The permittee shall be responsible for cleaning and maintaining
the right-of-way of the county highway. Storm sewers and drains shall be kept
free of debris, trash, and other extraneous material at all times. The pavement
surface shall be kept clean and free of mud, gravel, debris, trash, and other
extraneous material at all times. Should the permittee fail to keep the
pavement clean or the drainage functioning properly, the county shall have the
right, but not the duty, to clean the pavement and restore drainage to maintain
a safe and passable highway. The permittee shall be responsible for all costs
incurred by the county for said cleaning.
         (b)   Persistent failure by the permittee to comply with this section
will result in WCDOT revoking the permit and taking any action necessary to
keep the pavement clean and drainage functioning properly. Should the permit be
revoked, there shall be a meeting with the permittee, person in charge, and
WCDOT to discuss what measures will be taken to reinstate the permit.
      (3)   Damage to utilities and facilities. Any damage caused to any
utilities or facilities during construction shall be repaired at the
permittee's expense to the satisfaction of the authority owning such utility or
facility. The WCDOT shall be notified immediately after notification of the
owner of the utility or facility, that damage has occurred. The permittee shall
present to the WCDOT an outline of the steps to be taken to repair the utility
or facility.
      (4)   Winter maintenance.
         (a)   No construction authorized by permit issued by the county
involving the widening of a county highway will be allowed to commence after
October 1. Construction may resume when the asphalt plants open the following
spring. No construction activities will be allowed within the county highway
right-of-way during active snow or ice removal.
         (b)   Prior to the suspension of construction for the winter months,
the permittee shall contact the WCDOT. The WCDOT shall perform a field
inspection to identify any potential winter maintenance problems. The permittee
shall correct any problems identified by the WCDOT to the satisfaction of the
WCDOT. The permittee shall be solely responsible for all costs to correct any
problems identified by the WCDOT.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.149 RESTORATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Upon completion of the work permitted under this chapter, all disturbed
areas of the right-of-way shall be restored to the original condition or
better. Said restoration shall include any special landscaping or enhanced
areas that existed in the right-of-way prior to the commencement of the
permitted work. For larger projects, restoration work shall be completed as
areas are backfilled and rough graded.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.150 AS-BUILT ENGINEERING PLANS.
   As-built drawings depicting actual construction shall be required for some
permit types, as identified in the Technical Reference Manual. These drawings
shall show any deviations from the approved engineering plans referenced in the
permit. The as-built drawings shall be submitted in digital format. As-built
drawings shall be the sole and exclusive property of the WCDOT. In the absence
of as-built engineering plans of acceptable survey level detail, the county may
request locating, in accordance with §
56.102(G).
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.151 FINAL INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Upon written notification by the permittee, the resident engineer or
the person in charge that the construction has been completed, including the
submission of all required reports, the WCDOT shall perform a final inspection.
Prior to final approval and acceptance by the WCDOT, the permittee shall
correct any deficiencies noted by the WCDOT and provide one set of electronic
as-builts for the WCDOT records, if required by permit type.
   (B)   At such time as all work has been done to the complete satisfaction of
the WCDOT and the maintenance guarantee provided, the performance guarantee
shall be released.
   (C)   WCDOT may restrict final inspections for release of the performance or
maintenance guarantee between May 1 and November 1.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES,
AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
§ 56.170 REQUIRED PRIOR TO PERMIT.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit for work to occur within a county
highway right-of-way, the permittee shall provide sufficient financial
guarantees and evidence of insurance to safeguard claims against the county for
such work. Depending on the type and magnitude of the work, the financial
guarantees shall consist of both performance and maintenance guarantees.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.171 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   An acceptable performance guarantee to protect the county highway
system and ensure compliance with this chapter shall be provided prior to the
issuance of a permit as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   The performance guarantee shall be an irrevocable letter of credit for
the following permit types:
      (1)   Major access.
      (2)   Temporary accesses for major earth work activities or prior to a
permanent access.
      (3)   Minor access.
      (4)   Utility or facility permit which requires any open cut of county
highway pavement.
   (C)   The performance guarantee shall be in the form of a cash bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond for all other types of permits.
   (D)   The County Engineer shall be and is hereby authorized to act for the
county in all matters relating to performance guarantees.
   (E)   The County Engineer may accept a Letter of Agreement in lieu of a
Letter of Credit for improvements performed or sponsored by a local agency.
   (F)   In the event an applicant applies for a temporary access to be
constructed prior to execution of the permit for the permanent improvements, a
Temporary Letter of Credit must be executed prior to execution of the temporary
access permit. The amount of the Temporary Letter of Credit shall be 125% of an
estimated cost submitted to and approved by the WCDOT for the conceptual
permanent roadway improvements.
   (G)   The performance guarantee must contain the permit application number
or the project name and county highway name on the guarantee. The amount and
length of term of the performance guarantee shall be as identified in the
Technical Reference Manual, based on the permit type.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.172 IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT.
   Every irrevocable letter of credit provided pursuant to this section shall
be from a bank acceptable to the County Engineer having capital resources of at
least $50,000,000 and being insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. Each irrevocable letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide
that (i) it shall expire no earlier than 24 months after the date of issuance
and, in no event, until 60 days after written notification of such expiration
has been given by the issuing bank to the WCDOT; and (ii) it shall not require
the consent of the permittee prior to any draw on it by the WCDOT. The format
and language of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be determined by the
County Engineer as advised by the State's Attorney.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.173 CASH BOND.
   All cash bonds posted shall be made payable to the Will County Treasurer and
shall be submitted to the County Engineer. The type of cash bond provided may
be a cashier's check, bank draft, certified check, or bank money order. A
certificate of deposit is not acceptable. The County Engineer may deposit a
cash bond with the Will County Treasurer. No interest shall be paid on any such
cash bond so deposited.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.174 SURETY BOND.
   All surety bonds snail be issued by a surety or insurance company authorized
by the Illinois Department of Insurance to sell and issue sureties in the State
of Illinois. The discharge of the surety under all surety bonds shall be
conditioned upon the completion of the permitted work and restoration of the
county right-of-way to its original condition or better within the specified
time period of the permit, in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and any permit issued hereunder. Said surety bonds shall be payable to
the Will County Treasurer and shall be submitted to the County Engineer and
shall be of a term of a minimum of 24 months. The format and language of the
surety bond shall be determined by the County Engineer as advised by the
State's Attorney.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.175 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE AMOUNTS AND LENGTH OF TERM.
   (A)   The County Engineer shall establish performance guarantee policies
showing the items and costs used to determine performance guarantee amounts and
the length of the term of the performance guarantee. Such items shall reflect
the costs needed to restore the right-of-way of the county highway to its
original conditions or better. Additional costs may be added to insure
completion of the work permitted under this chapter.
   (B)   he length of the term for performance guarantees shall be the amount
of time required to complete the permitted work and restoration work plus any
additional time to ascertain any problems with the permitted work and
restoration work. In no case shall the length of the term for the performance
guarantee be less than 24 months.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.176 DEFAULT.
   If the permittee fails to perform the work with sufficient work force and
equipment or with sufficient materials to insure the completion of said work
within the specified time, or performs the work unsuitably as determined by the
County Engineer, or neglects or refuses materials or performs any such work as
shall be rejected as defective and unsuitable, or discontinues the execution of
the work, or for any other cause whatsoever does not carry on the work in an
approved manner, the County Engineer shall give notice to the permittee and the
permittee's bank or surety, if any, of such delinquency. Said notice shall
specify the corrective measures required. After said notice, the County
Engineer shall draw on the performance guarantee to have the work completed in
accordance with the terms of this chapter, the permit, and the performance
guarantee. The County Engineer shall deliver any funds drawn upon to the Will
County Treasurer and request deposit in the appropriate fund. The WCDOT may
then take over the work, including use of any or all materials or equipment on
the ground as may be suitable and acceptable and may complete the work with any
such other methods as, shall be required for the completion of the work in an
acceptable manner.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.177 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Improvements.
      (1)   A maintenance guarantee, if required by the WCDOT, shall be
submitted by the permittee to the County Engineer upon satisfactory completion
of all improvements and release of the performance guarantee. The term of the
maintenance guarantee shall be for two years following completion, approval,
and acceptance of the improvements. All failures that occur during the two-year
period shall be corrected by the permittee and restored to a satisfactory
condition, subject to the approval of the County Engineer. The amount of the
maintenance guarantee shall, at a minimum, equal 15% of the original amount of
the performance guarantee. This requirement may be waived upon review by the
County Engineer if deemed unnecessary. The County Engineer shall be, and is
hereby authorized to act for the county in all matters relating to maintenance
guarantees.
      (2)   A maintenance guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit for all minor and major accesses, including any temporary
access. All maintenance guarantees shall be payable to the Will County
Treasurer, delivered to WCDOT and originate from a bank or surety/insurance
company that satisfies the requirements of §
56.172.
   (B)   Default. If the permittee fails to restore to satisfactory condition
the pavement or other improvements, within the specified time, or shall perform
the work unsuitably as determined by the County Engineer, or for any other
cause whatsoever shall not carry on the restoration in a suitable manner, the
County Engineer shall give notice to the permittee and the permittee's bank or
surety, if any. Said notice shall specify the corrective measures involved. If
the permittee, within a period of ten days after said notice, does not proceed
in accordance therewith, the County Engineer shall draw on the maintenance
guarantee to have the work completed in accordance with this chapter, the
permit, and the terms of the maintenance guarantee. The County Engineer shall
deliver any funds drawn upon to the Will County Treasurer and request deposit
in the appropriate fund.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.178 ESCROW ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   In case future improvements to the county highway may be necessary as
the result of construction of an access-related improvement, the County
Engineer may require that funds for said future improvements be deposited with
the Will County Treasurer in escrow to pay such costs. The permittee shall be
responsible for all costs of a future improvement to a county highway as a
result of an issued access permit. The parties shall proceed as described in §
56.068(C).
   (B)   The amount to be in the escrow shall be equal to the current estimated
cost of the improvement plus 30% of the cost for the county to administer the
improvement. A cashier's check, bank draft, certified check, or bank money
order in the amount equal to 130% of the current estimate of costs of the
improvement shall be made payable to the Will County Treasurer and shall be
submitted to the County Engineer for deposit in an escrow account to be used
only for the improvement specified. A certificate of deposit shall not be
acceptable.
   (C)   If, within a period of six years from the date of the issuance of an
access permit, the funds deposited in the escrow account, as well as any
interest income earned during that time, have not been used to pay for the
specified improvement, the funds in the escrow account, plus any interest
income earned, shall be returned to the permittee and any further obligation of
the permittee for the specified improvement shall be terminated.
   (D)   he period of time, as specified herein, may be extended upon the
written approval of the County Engineer and the owner.
COMMENTARY:
An example of a future improvement requiring escrow funding could be a staged
or phased development over a period of several years. The traffic impact study
may show that a traffic signal is not currently warranted but would be
warranted as subsequent development stages or phases are completed.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 56.179 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Proof of insurance for all forms of insurance required by this chapter
shall be provided to the WCDOT prior to the issuance of a permit. This
insurance is to provide protection against all claims for damage to public or
private property, and injuries to persons, arising out of and during the
progress of the permitted work to its completion. The certificate of insurance
must include the permit number or the project name and county highway location
on the certificate. All parties working within the ROW shall be required to
provide proof of insurance.
   (B)   The County Engineer shall determine the minimum acceptable amounts for
the following types of insurance: (1) bodily injury liability and (2) property
damage liability. There shall be no restrictions on occurrence limits. The
County Engineer may, at his or her sole and exclusive discretion, upon receipt
of written application from the permittee substantiating good and reasonable
cause, allow the indemnification to be provided by someone other than the
permittee for a single family homeowner, not for profit organization, or local
agency. The Technical Reference Manual provides detailed information on these
limits and all other insurance requirements not specified in this chapter.
   (C)   The certificate(s) shall contain a provision that coverages afforded
under the policies will not be canceled or non-renewed, and that restrictive
modification cannot be added until at least 30 days after written notice has
been given to the WCDOT. A mere intent to notify the WCDOT of cancellation is
not acceptable. The permittee shall cease, or cause to be ceased, operations,
work, and construction of an improvement if the insurance is canceled or
reduced below the required minimum amount of coverage as determined by the
County Engineer.
   (D)   Insurance coverages which are to remain in force and effect after
completion of the construction will require an additional certificate(s)
evidencing continuation of such coverages.
   (E)   Such additional certificate(s) shall be submitted upon completion and
acceptance of the construction improvements and upon one year thereafter. If
any information concerning reduction of coverage is not furnished by the
insurer, it shall be furnished by the permittee with reasonable promptness in
accordance with the permittee's information and belief. Any acceptance of proof
of insurance by the WCDOT shall in no way limit or relieve the permittee of the
duties and responsibilities assumed by the owner. Acceptance of insurance
certificates not in compliance with the provisions of these requirements by
WCDOT shall not affect or constitute a waiver of these requirements.
(Ord. 20-231, passed 7-16-2020)
 
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES
      
71.   SNOW ROUTES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
74.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
75.   MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND PEDALCYCLES
      
76.   TRAFFIC AND VEHICLE REGULATIONS
      
77.   ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR REGULATION VIOLATIONS
      
78.   VEHICLE TOWING, SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES
Section
Generally
   
70.01   Construction
   
70.02   Severability
   
70.03   Definitions
   
70.04   Towing or removal of vehicles; generally
   
70.05   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
70.06   Obstructing person on highways
   
70.07   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
70.08   Depositing glass and other sharp objects on highway
   
70.09   Special vehicle movement permit for oversized loads
   
70.10   Fee
   
70.11   (Reserved)
   
70.12   Size and weight limitations
Abandonment of Vehicles
   
70.25   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited
   
70.26   Towing or removal
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERALLY
§ 70.01 CONSTRUCTION.
   This title shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the county may thereby be protected, and pursuant
to statutory authority granted in ILCS Ch. 55, Ch. 625 and Ch. 605.
(1980 Code, § 70.01) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990)
§ 70.02 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of the title.
(1980 Code, § 70.02) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990)
§ 70.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   All words and phrases used in this title, and defined in the State
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5) entitled “Illinois Vehicle Code”, created by
1969 legislation, and as amended, shall have the same meaning herein as they
have in the Act.
   (B)   For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear
of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
      AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Includes police vehicles, vehicles of the
Fire Department and ambulances.
      BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory in the county contiguous to and
including a street or highway when, within any 600 feet along the street or
highway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes,
including but not limited to hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad
stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one
side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the street or highway.
      CROSSWALK.
         (a)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the center line of the highway; and
         (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation.
      DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
      HANDICAPPED PERSON. Every natural person who is unable to walk 200 feet
or more unassisted by another person or without the aid of a walker, crutches,
braces, prosthetic device or a wheelchair or without great difficulty or
discomfort due to the following impairments: neurologic, orthopedic,
respiratory, cardiac or arthritic disorder; blindness; or the loss of function
or absence of a limb or limbs.
      HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
         (a)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION.
         (b)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an INTERSECTION.
      LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
      MERGING TRAFFIC. A maneuver executed by the drivers of the vehicles on
converging roadways to permit entry into the junction thereof, wherein the
driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his or her vehicular
speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other vehicle.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and
motorized wheelchairs. For this title, MOTOR VEHICLES are divided into two
divisions:
         (a)   FIRST DIVISION. Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons.
         (b)   SECOND DIVISION. Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying more than ten persons, those designed or used for living quarters,
those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or
cargo, and those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and
used as motor vehicles of the SECOND DIVISION.
      MOTORCYCLE. Any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
      OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, in the event
of a vehicle, is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated
in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee or, in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
      PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
      PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
      PNEUMATIC TIRE. Any tire in which compressed air is designed to support
the load.
      POLICE OFFICER. Any person lawfully authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
      PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Any way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
      RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
      RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws
governing same and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks
or the approach of a railroad train.
      RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
      RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory of the city contiguous to and including
a street or highway not comprising a business district when the property on the
street or highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved
with residence or residences and buildings in use for business.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a
lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under
the circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger
of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any roadway separately, but not to all roadways collectively.
      SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for
the exclusive use of pedestrians or the loading or unloading of passengers for
any duly enfranchised bus line and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
      SCHOOL BUS.
         (a)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (b) below,
owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:
            1.   Any public or private primary or secondary school;
            2.   Any primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
            3.   Any public, private or religious nursery school.
         (b)   This definition shall not include the following:
            1.   A bus operated by a public entity, municipal corporation or
common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of
passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is:
               a.   On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of
other fare-paying customers;
               b.   Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups
on field trips or other special trips or in connection with other special
events; or
               c.   Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers
or other educational facilities.
            2.   A motor vehicle of the First Division.
      SEMITRAILER. Any vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and being drawn by a motor vehicle
and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon
or is carried by another vehicle.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
      SOLID TIRE. Any tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
      STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
      STATE HIGHWAYS. Those highways defined by state law to be state highways.
      STOP. Complete cessation from movement.
      STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
      STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every publicly
maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
      THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular
traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-
of-way to vehicles on a through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or
yield sign, when signs are erected as provided in this title.
      TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
      TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with the manual and specifications adopted pursuant to state law,
placed or erected by authority of a body of public officials having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
      TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
      TRAILER. Any vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing
vehicle.
      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles
as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act. For the purposes of
this title, unless otherwise prescribed, a device shall be considered to be a
vehicle until a time it either comes within the definition of a junk vehicle,
as defined under this title, or a junking certificate is issued for it.
      WILL COUNTY. All territory within the geographical limits of the County
of Will and State of Illinois, which is not within the limits of any city,
incorporated town or village.
      YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY. The act of granting the privilege of the immediate
use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to
vehicles approaching from the right or left, but when the roadway is clear may
proceed into the intersection.
(1980 Code, § 70.03) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990)
§ 70.04 TOWING OR REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; GENERALLY.
   The Sheriff’s Department and all members thereof are authorized to remove
and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any
car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where the parked vehicle
creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant,
obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle, or which has
been parked in any public street or other public place for a period of more
than 24 consecutive hours, or as provided under any other county resolution or
ordinance including, but not limited to Resolution 88-10, State Commercial
Relocation of Trespassing Vehicles Law.
(1980 Code, § 70.04) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990)
§ 70.05 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk or drive onto
any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other side
of the intersection, crosswalk or railroad grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(1980 Code, § 70.05) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 OBSTRUCTING PERSON ON HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, delay or
attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person lawfully driving or
traveling along or upon any highway within this county. No person shall offer,
for barter or sale, merchandise on the highways so as to interfere with the
effective movement of traffic thereon.
(1980 Code, § 70.06) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic. No person shall leave a
door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of
time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(1980 Code, § 70.07) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 DEPOSITING GLASS AND OTHER SHARP OBJECTS ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle,
nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle upon the highway.
   (B)   Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway, any destructive, dangerous, hazardous or injurious material shall
immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from the
vehicle.
(1980 Code, § 70.08) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 SPECIAL VEHICLE MOVEMENT PERMIT FOR OVERSIZED LOADS.
   (A)   Any applicant wishing to operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified
statutory weight or size along or across any county highway may do so only
after obtaining written consent from the County Board.
   (B)   In order to facilitate this procedure, the County Board has prepared a
special vehicle movement permit form which must be used when applying for
consent.
(1980 Code, § 70.09) (Sup. Rec. Bk. p. 392, adopted 9-9-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of county to regulate size and weight, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-
316
   State regulation of size and weight, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et
seq.
§ 70.10 FEE.
   (A)   A flat fee of $10 shall be collected by the County Department of
Highways for each oversize/ overweight movement permit issued.
   (B)   The proceeds of the fee established in division (A) above shall be
used to cover the administrative cost of preparing and issuing the permit.
(1980 Code, § 70.10) (Res. 81-205, adopted 10-22-1981; Res. 89-67, adopted 4-
20-1989)
§ 70.11 (RESERVED)
§ 70.12 SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Adoption by Reference. Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(7), the county
hereby adopts 625 ILCS 5/Ch. 15, including its numbering system, concerning
size, weight and load regulations, by reference and it is incorporated as a
part of this code as if fully set out herein.
   (B)   Exceptions to state size, weight, load and permit procedures. The
following are exceptions to the state size, weight, load and permit procedures.
      (1)   Overweight permits.
         (a)   Single-trip and round-trip permits for non-divisible loads.
Permits for non-divisible overweight movements shall be based on the following
fee schedule:
 
Gross Weight (pounds) Single  Round
                      Trip*   Trip**
Up to 100,000         $50     $100
100,001 — 120,000   $75     $150
120,001 — 150,000   $100    $200
Over 150,000          $125    $250
 
*   Single Trip. One move from the point of origin to the point of destination.
Any additional stops between the point of origin and point of destination are
expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid for five days from the
requested date and time of issuance.
**   Round Trip. Two trips over the same route in opposite directions. Any
additional stops between the point of origin and point of destination are
expressly prohibited. Round trip permits are valid for ten days from the
requested date and time of issuance.
      (2)   Oversize permits.
         (a)   Single-trip permits for oversize loads. Permits for oversize
movements shall be based on the following fee schedule:
 
Dimensions          Single Trip Only
12' wide or less
13'6" high or less  $30
85' long or less
14' wide or less
15' high or less    $50
115' long or less
More than 14' wide
More than 15' high  $100
More than 115' long
 
      (3)   Limited continuous operation( LCO) permits for overweight and
oversize:
         (a)   LCO permits for sealed shipping containers shall be based on the
following fee schedule:
 
Gross Weight (pounds) Daily* Weekly* * Monthly* **
Up to 100,000         $100   $250      $500
 
*   Daily: Expires at 11:59 p.m. on the requested date and time of issuance.
**   Weekly: Valid for seven calendar days from the date and time of issuance.
***   Monthly: Valid for 30 calendar days from the date and time of issuance.
            LCO permits for sealed shipping containers are subject to maximum
weights and dimensions. Maximum weights (practical maximum weights from IDOT
Policy Manual):
            1)    Five-or-more axle tractor semitrailer combination 100,000
pounds gross; maximum of 48,000 pounds on either tandem.
            2)    Four-or-more-axle vehicle (axle spacing 23 feet or more): up
to and including a 76,000 pounds gross; maximum of 44,000 pounds on one tandem
and 44,000 pounds on the other.
            3)    Three-or-more-axle vehicle (axle spacing 18 feet or more):
maximum 68,000 pounds gross; 20,000 pounds on one axle and 48,000 pounds on the
tandem.
            4)   Two-axle vehicle: maximum 48,000 pounds, neither axle exceeds
25,000 pounds.
            Maximum dimensions: 12' wide or less, 13'6" high or less, 115' long
or less.
            LCO permits for sealed shipping containers are limited to specific
county highway routes, which can be combined in a single permit application,
and will be evaluated on an as-needed basis, as follows:
* Cluster Route North/West Limit South/East Limit
* Cluster    Route        North/West   South/East Limit
                          Limit
I-55/I-355/  Weber Rd (CH 115th St     I-55
Joliet Rd    88)
Crest Hill   Weber Rd (CH
and          88)          US 30        I-55
Romeoville
Frankfort    Laraway Rd   US 45        Center Rd
             (CH 74)
I-355        143rd St (CH IL 171       Gougar Rd
             37)
I-355        167th St (CH Gougar Rd    Prime Blvd
             75)
Mokena       191st St (CH US 45        IL 43
             84)
Mokena       80th Ave (CH 183rd St     191st St (CH 84)
             83)
New Lenox    Cherry Hill  Haven Ave    ** Mills Rd (CH 51)
             Rd (CH 55)
New Lenox    Gougar Rd    US 30        Laraway Rd (CH 74)
             (CH 52)
New Lenox    Laraway Rd   US 52        Gougar Rd (CH 52)
             (CH 74)
Romeoville   Renwick Rd   Weber Rd (CH IL 7
             (CH 36)      88)
                          Commercial
University   Manhattan-   entrance 1/
Park/Monee   Monee Rd (CH 2 mile west  IL 50
             6)           of Ridgeland
                          Ave
             Elevator Rd  ** US 52     Commercial entrance 1¼ miles east of US
Other-Joliet (CH 4)       (north-south 52
             (Offner Rd)  leg)
 
*   Freight clusters from Appendix C of the Will County Community Friendly
Freight Mobility Plan
**   Unimproved intersections for length analysis
         (b)   Limited continuous operation( LCO) for all other non-divisible
loads that are not shipping containers:
            (1)   LCO for overweight and oversize loads shall be based on the
following fee schedule:
 
Gross Weight (pounds) Quarterly* Annual*
Up to 120,000         $625       $2,500
 
*   Quarterly: Valid for 90 calendar days from the date and time of issuance.
**   Annual: Valid for one calendar year from the date and time of issuance.
         LCO permits for all other non-divisible loads that are not shipping
containers are subject to maximum weights and dimensions. Maximum weights
(practical maximum weights from IDOT Policy Manual):
         1)   Six or more-axle tractor semitrailer combination 120,000 pounds
gross; 48,000 pounds on drive tandem; 60,000 pounds on semitrailer tandem.
         2)   Five-or-more axle tractor semitrailer combination 100,000 pounds
gross; maximum of 48,000 pounds on either tandem.
         3)   Four-or-more-axle vehicle (axle spacing 23 feet or more): up to
and including 76,000 pounds gross; maximum of 44,000 pounds on one tandem and
44,000 pounds on the other.
         4)   Three-or-more-axle vehicle (axle spacing 18 feet or more):
maximum 68,000 pounds gross; 20,000 pounds on one axle and 48,000 pounds on the
tandem.
         5)   Two-axle vehicle: maximum 48,000 pounds, neither axle exceeds
25,000 pounds.
         Maximum dimensions: 12' wide or less, 13'6" high or less, 115' long or
less.
         LCO permits for non-divisible loads are effective on all county
highways.
         (2)   Limited continuous operation (LCO) for oversize-only loads shall
be based on the following fee schedule:
 
Dimensions         Quarterly* Annual**
12' wide or less
14'6" high or less $375       $1,500
115' long or less
14' wide or less
15' high or less   $625       $2,500
115' long or less
 
LCO permits for oversize loads are effective on all county highways.
         (c)   Limited continuous operation (LCO) for agricultural commodities:
            As used in this section, AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES means:
               i.    Cultivated plants or agricultural produce grown,
including, but not limited to, corn, soybeans, wheat, oats, grain sorghum,
canola, and rice;
               ii.    Livestock, including, but not limited to, hogs, equine,
sheep, and poultry;
               iii.    Ensilage; and
               iv.    Fruits and vegetables.
            (1)   The fee for a LCO for agricultural commodities permit shall
be $5 per axle.
            (2)   It shall be valid for a period not to exceed 40 days from the
date and a time of issuance.
         LCO permits for agricultural commodities are subject to the following
conditions:
         1)   The axle loads of 2-axle single vehicles registered by the
Secretary of State shall not exceed 35%, on a 3-axle or 4-axle vehicle
registered by the Secretary of State axle loads shall not exceed 20%, and on a
5-axle vehicle registered by the Secretary of State axle loads not exceed 10%
above those provided in 625 ILCS 5/15-111.
         2)   Moves may be made of a distance not to exceed 50 miles from a
field, an on-farm grain storage facility, a warehouse as defined in the Grain
Code, or a livestock management facility as defined in the Livestock Management
Facilities Act over any highway except the National System of Interstate and
Defense Highways.
         3)   The operator of the vehicle must abide by posted bridge and
posted highway weight limits.
         4)   All implements of husbandry operating under this section between
sunset and sunrise shall be equipped as prescribed in 625 ILCS 5/12-205.1.
         (d)   Limited continuous operation (LCO) for harvest emergency
permits:
            (1)   LCO for harvest emergency permits shall apply to all
registered vehicles eligible to obtain permits under 625 ILCS 5/15-301,
including vehicles used in private or for-hire movement of divisible load
agricultural commodities during the declared time period.
            (2)   There shall be no fee for a LCO for harvest emergency
permits.
            (3)   LCO for harvest emergency permits shall be issued from
September 1 through December 31.
         LCO permits for harvest emergency are subject to the following
conditions: The vehicle's axle weight and gross weight do not exceed 10% above
the maximum limits under 625 ILCS 5/15-111 and does not exceed the vehicle's
registered gross weight by 10%.
(1980 Code, § 70.12) (Res. 98-11, adopted 1-15-1998; Res. 01-531, adopted 12-
20-2001; Res. 02-289, adopted 6-20-2002; Res. 08-200, adopted 5-15-2008; Ord.
18-47, passed 2-15- 2018; Ord. 18-48, passed 2-15-2018; Ord. 19- 206, passed 8-
15-2019; Ord. 24-91, passed 4-18- 2024)   Penalty, see §
70.99
ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 70.25 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any roadway or street in
the county is unlawful.
(1980 Code, § 70.15) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.26 TOWING OR REMOVAL.
   (A)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof, on private or public
property, other than a roadway or street in the county, in view of the general
public, is unlawful, except on property of the owner or bailee of the abandoned
vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property shall
be authorized for removal, by the County Sheriff’s Department, after a waiting
period of seven days or more.
   (B)   All vehicles towed in accordance with division (A) above shall be
stored and disposed of in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-202 et seq.
(1980 Code, § 70.16) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Abandonment of vehicles. Any person who violates or aids and abets in
the violation of §§
70.25 or
70.26 shall:
      (1)   Be fined not less than $25 or more than $100;
      (2)   Be required to pay for the costs of towing and storage of the
vehicle; and/or
      (3)   Be required by the court to make a disposition on the abandoned
vehicle or part thereof.
   (B)   General regulations. Any person guilty of violating §§
70.05 through
70.08 shall be fined not more than $500 for each violation. The offenses may be
satisfied without a court appearance by a written guilty plea and payment of
fines, penalties and costs in accordance with State Supreme Court Rule 529.
(1980 Code, § 70.12)
   (C)   Size and weight limitations.
      (1)   ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-401(d).
         (a)   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 or 625 ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
Gross Overweight (pounds) Fine
Up to and including 2,000 $100
2,001 -2,500              $270
2,501 -3,000              $330
3,001 -3,500              $520
3,501 -4,000              $600
4,001 -4,500              $850
4,501-5,000               $950
5,001 or more             First 5,000 is $1,500 and $150 for each additional
                          500 pounds overweight or fraction
 
         (b)   In addition any person, firm or corporation convicted of four or
more violations of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 within any 12 month period
shall be fined an additional amount of $5,000 for the fourth and each
subsequent conviction within the 12 month period. Provided, however, that with
regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall mean a
fourth or subsequent conviction attributable to any one employee-driver.
      (2)   ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-102, 15-103 or 15-107. Whenever any
vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
15-102, 15-103 or 15-107, as enforced by the county, the owner or driver of the
vehicle shall be deemed guilty of the violation and either may be prosecuted
for the violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation
of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-102, 15-103 or 15-107 shall be fined for the
first or second conviction an amount equal to not less than $50 or more than
$500, and for the third and subsequent convictions by the same person, firm or
corporation within a period of one year after the date of the first offense,
not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
      (3)   Violations, sentence of permit moves. Whenever any vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-301 through 15-319, as enforced by this county,
by operating under a fraudulent permit or under a permit not specifically
covering the move, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed guilty of
a business offense and either the owner or the driver of the vehicle may be
prosecuted for the violation. When any person, firm or corporation is convicted
of a violation, the permit shall be null and void and the person, firm or
corporation shall be fined in an amount not less than $0.10 per pound for each
pound the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds the gross weight of the vehicles
allowable under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111. Penalties for violations of this
section shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for violation of ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 15-301(j), as enforced by the county.
      (4)   Violations; sentence of permit moves exceeding axle weights.
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-301 through 15-319,
as enforced by the county, by operating with axle weights in excess of those
authorized in the permit, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of the vehicle
may be prosecuted for the violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted
of a violation shall be fined in an amount not less than $0.02 nor more than
$0.05 per pound for each pound of excess weight on the axle or tandem axle in
excess of the weight authorized in the permit when the excess is 1,000 pounds
or less; not less than $0.05 nor more than $0.10 per pound for each pound of
excess weight when the excess exceeds 1,000 pounds and is 2,000 pounds or less;
not less than $0.10 nor more than $0.15 per pound for each pound of excess
weight when the excess exceeds 2,000 pounds and is 3,000 pounds or less; and
not less than $0.15 nor more than $0.20 per pound for each pound of excess
weight when the excess exceeds 3,000 pounds. Penalties for violations of this
section shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for violation of ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 15-301(j), as enforced by the county.
      (5)   Violations; sentence of permit moves exceeding gross weight.
Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit
issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, §§ 15-301 through 15-319, as
enforced by the county, by operating with the gross weight in excess of that
authorized in the permit, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of the vehicle
may be prosecuted for the violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted
of the violation shall be fined in an amount not less than $0.02 nor more than
$0.05 per pound for each pound of excess weight in excess of the gross weight
authorized in the permit when the excess is 1,000 pounds or less; not less than
$0.04 nor more than $0.07 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the
excess exceeds 1,000 pounds and is 2,000 pounds or less; not less than $0.07
nor more than $0.10 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds 2,000 pounds and is 3,000 pounds or less; not less than $0.10 no more
than $0.15 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds
3,000 pounds and is 4,000 pounds or less; not less than $0.15 nor more than
$0.20 per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 4,000
ponds and is 5,000 pounds or less; and not less than $0.17 nor more than $0.25
per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds 5,000 pounds.
Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any penalties
imposed for violation of ILCS Ch. 625, § 15-301(j)) as enforced by the county.
(1980 Code, § 70.12)
(Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Res. 98-11, adopted 1-15-1998; Res. 01-531,
adopted 12-20-2001; Res. 02-289, adopted 6-20-2002; Res. 08-200, adopted 5-15-
2008; Ord. 18-47, passed 2-15-2018)
CHAPTER 71: SNOW ROUTES
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   General provisions
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTED AGENT. One who acts for or in the place of another by authority
from him or her. A representative, emissary or official of a government. An
individual or firm contracted to execute orders of Township Highway
Commissioner or County Superintendent of Highways.
   HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER. Township official duly elected under township
authority and charged with the duties expressly stated in ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5,
§ 6-201.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, snowmobile, tractor-
trailer, truck- trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by
mechanical power.
   SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS. The act of removing snow within the right-of-way of
township or county authorized snow routes.
   SNOW ROUTE. Any street or road so designated and posted by the Township
Highway Commissioner or the County Superintendent of Highways as major routes
of vehicular travel.
   STREET or ROAD. All property dedicated or intended for public highway,
freeway or roadway purposes, or subject to public easements and officially
accepted by the Township Highway Commissioner or the County Superintendent of
Highways as such.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS. Duly appointed official by the County Board
whose duties include, among others, supervision of the construction or
maintenance of all county highways within the county.
(1980 Code, § 71.01) (Res. 79-180, adopted 9-26-1979)
§ 71.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Highway Commissioner of each township, and the County
Superintendent of Highways are authorized to designate streets and roads under
their respective jurisdictions as snow routes.
   (B)   Parking is prohibited on any designated snow routes during snow
removal operations where snowfall has reached an accumulation of two or more
inches in the road right-of-way.
   (C)   The Township Highway Commissioner or County Superintendent of Highways
is authorized to tow or cause to be towed to a suitable storage area, any
vehicle along a snow route which is in violation of this chapter and the
vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed.
      (1)   The owner of the impounded vehicle, under the provisions of this
chapter, shall be charged a fee in a sum sufficient to cover the charges and
expenses for towing and storage of the vehicle; the fee shall be payable to the
contracted agent and contractually agreed upon with the Township Highway
Commissioner or the County Superintendent of Highways, whichever is applicable.
      (2)   The fee may be paid prior to the release of the vehicle impounded,
or billed to the owner of the vehicle.
   (D)   When a vehicle requires towing, the Commissioner or Superintendent
shall notify the contracted agent orally, and subsequently by documentation in
triplicate, of requested action. This oral and subsequent written notification
shall also be forwarded to the County Sheriff’s Department.
      (1)   This notification shall indicate the year, make, model, color and
license registration number; and the time, date and location of removal of the
vehicle.
      (2)   The County Sheriff’s Department shall also have in its possession,
a list of the contracted towing agents and designated snow routes in the
county.
   (E)   A written agreement shall be consummated between the contracted agent
and either the Township Highway Commissioner or the County Superintendent of
Highways, whichever is applicable. This agreement must meet the approval of the
County Sheriff’s Department. With the execution and delivery of this agreement,
each of the participating agents agrees to indemnify and hold the county and
its townships harmless against any claim or claims, meritorious or otherwise,
for any loss, personal injury, death or damages that may arise in connection
with or result from the towing of vehicles during snow removal operations.
(1980 Code, § 71.02) (Res. 79-180, adopted 9-26-1979) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Load limits
   
II.   Speed limits
   
III.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. LOAD LIMITS.
   For state statute provisions governing load limits, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 15-101 et seq.
Highway or Street Max. Gross Weight (lbs.) Code Sec. or Res. No. Date
                                                                                              Code
                                                                               Max. Gross     Sec.
Highway or Street                                                              Weight (lbs.)  or    Date
                                                                                              Res.
                                                                                              No.
County Highway 2, 191 Street from the village limits of Mokena east and north  As set by      §     
to Will-Cook Co. line (section 122-lT and 122-X-lT)                            state statute  70.12
County Highway 3 (section 128-X-lT) McDonough Street                           As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 4, So. Cedar Road from the south village limits of New Lennox,  As set by      §     
south to U.S. Route 52 (section 56-lT, 56-X-lT and 56-Xl-lT)                   state statute  70.12
County Highway 5 (section 74-lT) Canton Farm Road                              As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 6,Monee-Manhattan Road from County Highway 19 east to the
village limits of Monee (section 40-lT) County Highway 7, So. Chicago Street   As set by      §     
from the south boundary road of the Joliet Arsenal south to the Florence-      state statute  70.12
Wesley townline (section 80-G2)
                                                                               A maximum
                                                                               weight limit
                                                                               of 28,000
                                                                               pounds (14
                                                                               tons) gross
                                                                               weight limit
                                                                               for single
                                                                               unit vehicles,
                                                                               30,000 pounds
County Highway 10                                                              (15 tons) for  10-   5-20-
                                                                               combination    149   2010
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               3 or 4 axles
                                                                               and 32,000
                                                                               pounds (16
                                                                               tons) for
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               5 or more
                                                                               axles
County Highway 11 (section 58-2Q) Joliet- Naperville Road                      As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 14, Plainfield/Naperville Road from County Highway 67, Boughton 8 tons         93-72 3-18-
Road north to 87th Street                                                                           1993
County Highway 17 (section 117-lT) Brown Church Road                           As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 17 from I-55 east to Baseline Road                              As set by      03-   8-21-
                                                                               statute        372   2003
                                                                               As set by
                                                                               state statute
County Highway 17, Manhattan Road from State Route 53 (So. Chicago Street)     (the former    §
westerly to Stephen Road (a pt. near the south one-fourth corner of Section    14-ton         70.12  
14, T. 34 N., R. 9 E., 3rd P.M.)                                               limitation is
                                                                               no longer in
                                                                               effect)
County Highway 19 (section 118-1T) Frankfort- Center Road                      As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 20 (section 111-1T and 111-X-1T) No. Peotone Road               As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 21, Monee-Crete Road from the east village limits of Monee east As set by      §     
to Street Bond Issue Route 1 (section 125-Q)                                   state statute  70.12
                                                                                              Hwy.
                                                                                              Res.  6-24-
County Highway 23, Goodenow-Pauling Road from State Route 50, east 6.4 miles   As set by      No.   1982;
to Goodenow                                                                    state statute  3;    5-18-
                                                                                              00-   2000
                                                                                              225
County Highway 24, East Beecher Road from Street Bond Issue Route 1 east to    As set by      §     
Indiana- Illinois line (section 42-42-1T)                                      state statute  70.12
County Highway 24, Peotone-Beecher Road from Street Bond Issue Route 49 east   As set by      §     
to the west end of the concrete pavement on County Highway 24 (section 100-Q)  state statute  70.12
County Highway 25 (section 114-1T and 116-2Q) Wilmington-Peotone Road          As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 25 (Wilmington- Peotone Road), Florence Twp. from State Route   As set by      95-57 3-16-
53 easterly, a distance of four miles to Symerton Road                         state statute        1995
                                                                               Single unit
                                                                               vehicles,
                                                                               36,000 lbs.
                                                                               (18 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               3 or 4 axles,
                                                                               42,000 lbs.
                                                                               (21 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with        2-18-
County Highway 25 (Wilmington-Peotone Road) bridge over Jordan Creek           5 or more      10-56 2010
                                                                               axles, 46,000
                                                                               lbs. (23
                                                                               tons); no
                                                                               special
                                                                               permits shall
                                                                               be issued for
                                                                               any gross
                                                                               weights in
                                                                               excess of the
                                                                               limits set
                                                                               forth above
County Highway 28, Essex Road from marked State Route 113 southerly to the     As set by      94-   6-16-
Will-Kankakee county line                                                      state statute  162   1994
County Highway 31, Soldiers’ Widows’ Home Road from U.S. Route 66 east and As set by      §     
south to U.S. Route 66 A (section 61-lT)                                       state statute  70.12
County Highway 32 (section 119-lT and 68-X- lT) Channahon-Minooka Road         As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 34, Joyce Road from U.S. Route 52 south and west to center of   As set by      §     
Section 13, T. 35 N., R. 9 E. (section 128-1T)                                 state statute  70.12
County Highway 35 (section 57-1T) Romeo Road                                   As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
County Highway 43, Wilton Center Road from Street Bond Issue Route 44 south to As set by      §     
County Highway 25 (section 123-2Q)                                             state statute  70.12
County Highway 44, Kankakee River Road from Fed. Aid Primary 77 southeasterly  As set by      §     
to Kankakee Street in Village of Wilmington                                    state statute  70.12
                                                                               As set by
                                                                               state statute
County Highway 44, River Road from State Route 53 (So. Chicago Street)         (the former 14 §     
westerly to I-55                                                               ton limitation 70.12
                                                                               is no longer
                                                                               in effect)
County Highway 47 (section 68-lT) Sauk Trail                                   As set by      §     
                                                                               state statute  70.12
                                                                               Max. gross     Hwy.
County Highway 48, Old Monee Road from Stuenkel Road northerly to the Will-    weight of      Res.  7-16-
Cook County line                                                               8,000 lbs. (4  87-78 1987
                                                                               tons)
County Highway 51 and County Highway 55, Mills-Cherry Hill Road from Fed. Aid  As set by      §     
Route 5 east and north to Washington Street (section 47-2Q)                    state statute  70.12
County Highway 52 (Cougar Road) from Maple Road south to Street Bond Issue     As set by      §     
Route 22 (section 79 and 79B)                                                  state statute  70.12
County Highway 53 (Western Avenue) from County Highway 49 south to County      As set by      §     
Highway 21 (§ 92X)                                                            state statute  70.12
                                                                               Truckloading/
                                                                               unloading
                                                                               route for
                                                                               vehicles with
County Highway 54 (Briggs Street) from U.S. Route 52 north to Elgin, Joliet    maximum gross        3-15-
and Eastern Railway Track                                                      weight of      90-57 1990
                                                                               80,000 pounds
                                                                               as defined by
                                                                               State
                                                                               Department of
                                                                               Transportation
                                                                               Single unit
                                                                               vehicles,
                                                                               30,000 lbs.
                                                                               (15 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               3 or 4 axles,
                                                                               38,000 lbs.
                                                                               (19 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with  04-   8-19-
County Highway 58 (County Line Road) bridge over Exline Slough                 5 or more      336   2004
                                                                               axles, 46,000
                                                                               lbs. (23
                                                                               tons); no
                                                                               special
                                                                               permits shall
                                                                               be issued for
                                                                               any gross
                                                                               weights in
                                                                               excess of the
                                                                               limits set
                                                                               forth above
                                                                               Single unit
                                                                               vehicles,
                                                                               22,000 lbs.
                                                                               (11 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               3 or 4 axles,
                                                                               28,000 lbs.
                                                                               (14 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with  04-   8-19-
County Highway 58 (County Line Road) bridge over Trim Creek                    5 or more      337   2004
                                                                               axles, 34,000
                                                                               lbs. (17
                                                                               tons); no
                                                                               special
                                                                               permits shall
                                                                               be issued for
                                                                               any gross
                                                                               weights in
                                                                               excess of the
                                                                               limits set
                                                                               forth above
                                                                               Single unit
                                                                               vehicles,
                                                                               22,000 lbs.
                                                                               (11 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               3 or 4 axles,
                                                                               32,000 lbs.
                                                                               (16 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with        2-18-
County Highway 58 (Will-Kankakee County Line Road) bridge over Bull Creek      5 or more      10-55 2010
                                                                               axles, 38,000
                                                                               lbs. (19
                                                                               tons); no
                                                                               special
                                                                               permits shall
                                                                               be issued for
                                                                               any gross
                                                                               weights in
                                                                               excess of the
                                                                               limits set
                                                                               forth above
County Highway 62 (Briggs Street) from U.S. Route 30 (Cass Street) northerly                  Hwy.  12-
approximately 0.76 mile to U.S. Route 6                                        14 tons        Res.  20-
                                                                                              No. 7 1984
                                                                               Single unit
                                                                               vehicles,
                                                                               38,000 lbs.
                                                                               (19 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with
                                                                               3 or 4 axles,
                                                                               46,000 lbs.
                                                                               (23 tons);
                                                                               combination
                                                                               vehicles with        2-18-
County Highway 62 (N. Briggs Street) bridge over Spring Creek                  5 or more      10-54 2010
                                                                               axles, 52,000
                                                                               lbs. (26
                                                                               tons); no
                                                                               special
                                                                               permits shall
                                                                               be issued for
                                                                               any gross
                                                                               weights in
                                                                               excess of the
                                                                               limits set
                                                                               forth above
County Highway 64, Francis Road from County Highway 52 (Cougar Road) to pt.                   §    10-
approximately 600 feet west of C.H.S. 2 (Wolf Road)                            14 tons        70.12 30-
                                                                                                    1974
County Highway 73 (Symerton Road), Florence Township from Wilmington-Peotone   As set by      95-57 3-16-
Road northerly, a distance of 1.5 miles to Commercial Street.                  state                1995
County Highway 77, Bluff Road from U.S. Route 6 east approximately 1 mile to   As set by      89-   11-
West Frontage Road of I-55                                                     state statute  301   16-
                                                                                                    1989
County Highway 84, 191 Street from County Highway State 2 (Wolf Road) east     As set by      Hwy.  11-
approximately 5 miles to Will-Cook county line, State Route 43 (Harlem Avenue) state statute  Res.  15-
                                                                                              No. 1 1984
 
(1980 Code, Ch. 72, Sch. I)
Cross-reference:
   Change of road names, see
TSO Table II
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The statutory vehicular speed limits established by ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-601, are greater than that considered reasonable and safe on the
following described highways or streets for which the county has maintenance
responsibility, and which are not under the jurisdiction of the State
Department of Public Works and Buildings. Therefore, the Board has caused an
engineering and traffic investigation upon the roadways described below to be
made.
      (1)   The belief of the Board is that the investigations confirm the
allegation that the statutory speed limits are not realistic.
      (2)   By virtue of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604, the Board determines
and declares reasonable and safe absolute maximum speed limits at the places or
along the parts of the roads described below.
   (B)   (1)   By virtue of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604, the Department is
requested to review the supporting data and findings of the engineering and
traffic investigation submitted for each proposed speed zone of the roadways
described below.
      (2)   When the Board is advised that the Department has approved the
limit for the proposed zone or zones of the roadways described below, standard
signs properly posted and giving notice thereof will be erected.
Highway or Street Limits of Zone Max. Speed Limit Sup. Rec. Bk. or Res. Date
                                                  No.
                                                                                                                            Max.
Highway or Street                             Limits of Zone                                                                Speed Sup. Rec. Bk. or Res. No.                  Date
                                                                                                                            Limit
Acorn Ridge Drive - Zone 474 (Frankfort       From Graceland Lane to Frankfort Square Road                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Anderson Road                                 From Joliet Highway to U.S. Route 30 (0.49 mile)                              mph   09-336                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                            35                                               11-
Angle Road (Wesley Township)                  From Rivals Road to Wesley Road (0.91 mile)                                   mph   98-338                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
Arlington Lane (Crete Township)               From Linden Lane to State Route 1 (0.30 mile)                                 25    99-306                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Arberry Court (Manhattan Township)            From Indian Trail to the dead end (0.08 mile)                                 mph   09-426                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Arran Drive - Zone 428 (Frankfort Township)   From Thistle Lane to Braema Lane                                              25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Arrowhead Drive (Manhattan Township)          From Schoolhouse Road to Indian Trail (0.18 mile)                             mph   09-427                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Arrowhead Road - Zone 677 (New Lenox          From Pottawatomie Lane south to US Route 30 (0.14 miles)                      25    23-308                                     9-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2023
Arsenal Road                                  From I-55 east A.T. and S.F.R.R. tracks                                       55    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, p. 210                  1973
                                                                                                                            mph
Ash Avenue - Zone 421 (Frankfort Township)    From Poplar Street to Catulpa Street                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Auburn Lane (Crete Township)                  From Melrose Lane to Linden Lane (0.23 mile)                                  25    99-309                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Auburn Lane - Zone 461 (Frankfort Township)   From Rainford Drive to the cul-de-sac                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Auburn Lane - Zone 398 (Frankfort Township)   From Rainford Drive to Pecan Place (0.20 mile)                                25    10-199                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Aveiemore Lane - Zone 485 (Frankfort          From Glenshire Drive to Inverary Drive                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Baker Road (Manhattan Township)               U.S. 52 to Eastern Avenue (0.997 mile)                                        45    91-13                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1991
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
Baker Road (Manhattan Township)               0.26 mile west of Schoolhouse Road to Scheer Road (1.25 mile)                 mph   98-337                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
Barbara Lane - Zone 449 (Frankfort Township)  From 80th Avenue to Mallory Drive                                             25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Baseline Road (Channahon Township)            From County Highway 17 (Arsenal Road) to Center Point Road                    50    04-192                                     5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Bauer Road (Custer Township)                  From Gray Road to State Route 113 (3.78 miles)                                45    99-194                                     5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Beechnut Drive - Zone 412 (Frankfort          From Birch Avenue to the dead end                                             25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Bell Road (County Highway 16)                 143rd Street to county line                                                   45    97-78                                      4-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Bellechase Drive - Zone 605 (New Lenox        From Tara Street to dead end                                                  25    22-235                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Belmont Avenue (Joliet Township)              Briggs Street to Joliet city limits                                           25    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Bemes Road (Crete Township)                   Greenwood Avenue to Stoney Island Avenue (north) 0.87 mile                    45    90-154                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Bemes Road (Crete Township)                   I-394 to Greenwood Avenue (1.12 miles)                                        35    90-154                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Bemes Road (Crete Township)                   From 3,000 feet east of Klemme Road to State Line Road (0.42 mile) (County    40    03-276                                     6-19-
                                              Board District #1)                                                            mph                                              2003
Bemes Road (Crete Township)                   Klemme Road to State Line Road (0.99 mile)                                    45    90-154                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Bemes Road (Crete Township)                   Stoney Island Avenue (north) to Klemme Road (1.32 miles)                      50    90-154                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Benton Drive (Frankfort Township)             From Harlem Avenue to Frankfort Square Road                                   25    04-18                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Betty Lane (New Lenox Township)               Christine Court to Rachel Drive (0.10 mile)                                   25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Birchwood Lane - Zone 477 (Frankfort          From North Avenue to Frankfort Square Road                                    25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Blackhawk Lane (Manhattan Township)           From Indian Trail to Old Farm Road (0.27 mile)                                mph   09-428                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Bluff Road (County Highway 77)                North of Channahon                                                            45    1968, pp. 745—746; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p.  
                                                                                                                            mph   59
Bluff Road (DuPage Township)                  Joliet Road to Will-Cook county line (1.42 miles)                             40    90-8                                       1-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Bluff Road (County Highway 77)                From 0.5 mile east of U.S. Route 6 (0.5 mile)                                 40    05-258                                     6-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2005
Bluff Road (County Highway 77)                From Frontage Road to 0.5 mile east of U.S. Route 6 (0.58 mile)               45    05-259                                     6-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2005
                                                                                                                            45                                               10-
Book Road                                     95th Street north to 87th Street                                              mph   86-139                                     16-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
Book Road (Wheatland Township)                95th Street south 0.5 mile south                                              35    87-98                                      8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Braema Lane - Zone 429 (Frankfort Township)   From Benton Drive to Edinburgh Lane                                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            45                                               10-
Brandon Road                                  Patterson Road south for 4,752 feet                                           mph   86-141                                     16-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                            35                                               10-
Brandon Road (County Highway 42)              U.S. Route 6 south to Patterson Road                                          mph   86-140                                     16-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
Brandon Road (Jackson Township)               West Manhattan Road southerly to Jackson Creek                                45    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 501               1971
                                                                                                                            mph
Brandon Road (Joliet Township)                Laraway Road to Sweitzer Road (0.99 miles)                                    50    94-16                                      1-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
Brickstone Drive - Zone 400 (Frankfort        From 84th Avenue to Timber Mill Drive (0.40 mile)                             25    10-201                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Brickstone Drive - Zone 463 (Frankfort        From 84th Avenue to Timber Mill Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Briggs Street (County Highway 54)             Mills Road (County Highway 51) north to New Lennox Road and north to          35    1970, p. 1273; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 333    
                                              Washington Street                                                             mph
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Bristol Lane (Green Garden Township)          From Kensington Lane (West) to Kensington Lane (East)                         mph   04-503                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Bruce Road (Homer Township)                   From Cedar Road east to Parker Road                                           45    88-5                                       1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
Bruce Road (Homer Township)                   Farrell Road to Cedar Road (2.58 miles)                                       45    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Bruns Road (Green Garden Township)            From 80th Avenue to Harlem Avenue (1 mile)                                    50    02-65                                      2-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Bruns Road (Green Garden Township)            From 88th Avenue to 80th Avenue (1 mile)                                      35    02-66                                      2-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Bruns Road (Green Garden Township)            From ½ mile east of U.S. Route 45 to Center Road (1.50 miles)                45    15-11                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Bruns Road (Green Garden Township)            From U.S. Route 45 to ½ mile east of U.S. Route 45 (0.50 miles)              35    15-12                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Bruns Road (Manhattan Township)               From Cedar Road to Kankakee Street (length 1.09)                              45    96-32                                      2-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
Bruns Road (Manhattan Township)               From Gougar Road to U.S. Route 52 (1.21 miles)                                40    05-330                                     7-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2005
Bruns Road (Manhattan Township)               From Kankakee Street to Schoolhouse Road (1.0 mile)                           45    05-331                                     7-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2005
Burville Road (Crete Township)                I-394 to Exchange Street (0.66 mile)                                          40    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
                                                                                                                            50                                               10-
Burville Road - Zone 550 (Crete Township)     From State Street to IL Route 394 (length 1.63)                               mph   16-302                                     20-
                                                                                                                                                                             2016
Byrum Blvd. - Zone 598 (Plainfield Township)  From Hel Mar Lane to Prieboy Avenue (0.53 miles)                              25    22-79                                      4-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2022
Calmer Drive - Zone 530 (New Lenox Township)  From Montieth Street to dead end (0.20 mile)                                  25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
S. Cambridge Drive (Crete Township)           E. Royal Ridge Drive to cul-de-sac (0.38 mile)                                25    12-156                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
Carol Road - Zone 611 (New Lenox Township)    From Spector Road to easterly dead end (0.15 miles)                           25    23-48                                      2-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
Carrie Court - Zone 437 (Frankfort Township)  From Frankfort Square Road to Frankfort Square Road                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Caton Farm Road (County Highway 5)            U.S. Route 30, west to Essington Road                                         40    1969, p. 425; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 161     
                                                                                                                            mph
Caton Farm Road (County Highway 5)            State Route 59 to Drauden Road                                                45    98-245                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1998
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
Caton Farm Road (County Highway 5)            Drauden Road to County Line Road                                              mph   98-349                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
Caton Farm Road (County Highway 5)            West Line Road west for 3,696 feet                                            mph   86-165                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
Catulpa Street - Zone 416 (Frankfort          From Willow Lane to the dead end                                              25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Cedar Glen Drive (Homer Township)             Cedar Road to dead end (0.44 mile)                                            25    94-67                                      3-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
Cedar Road                                    Chicago/Bloomington Trail to Reiter Drive                                     50    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Cedar Road                                    Division Street to State Route 7                                              50    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Cedar Road (County Highway 4)                 Joliet Road to Spencer Road                                                   35    1969, p. 227; Sup. Rec. Bk.                 
                                                                                                                            mph
                                              From 0.25 miles north of Baker Road to 0.25 miles south of Baker Road (0.50   45                                               10-
Cedar Road (County Highway 4) - Zone 595      miles)                                                                        mph   21-339                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2021
Cedar Road (County Highway 4) - Zone 548      From U.S. Route 6 to Summerfield Drive (0.43 mile)                            50    16-35                                      2-18-
(County Board District #7)                                                                                                  mph                                              2016
Cedar Road (Homer Township)                   143rd Street to Hickory Ave.                                                  40    88-21                                      2-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
Cedar/Creme Road                              State Route 7 to 143rd Street                                                 40    88-6                                       1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Chancellor Drive - Zone 571 (Homer Township)  From Gougar Road to Regents Road (0.18 mile)                                  mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Channahon-Minooka Road (County Highway 32)    From 2,851 feet north of Route 6                                              40    98-242                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1998
Channahon-Minooka Road - Zone 85 REV (County                                                                                40                                               11-
Highway 32)                                   From Will-Grundy Line to 2,717 feet east of Will-Grundy Line (0.51 miles)     mph   21-397                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2021
Chestnut Court - Zone 462 (Frankfort          From Auburn Lane to the cul-de-sac                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Chestnut Court - Zone 399 (Frankfort          From Auburn Lane to dead end (0.19 mile)                                      25    10-200                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Chicago Bloomington Trail (Jackson Township)  From Cedar Road to Bruce Road (1.23 miles)                                    45    95-56                                      3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1995
Choctaw Trail (Homer Township)                From Parker Road to Lost Boy Lane (0.072 mile)                                25    96-12                                      1-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
Christine Court (New Lenox Township)          Betty Lane to cul-du-sac (0.16 mile)                                          25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Church Road (Washington Township)             From Illinois Route 1 to one- half mile east                                  30    88-94                                      7-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
East Circle Drive - Zone 674 (New Lenox       From West Circle Drive south to US Route 30 (0.75 miles)                      25    23-308                                     9-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2023
West Circle Drive - Zone 679 (New Lenox       From East Circle Drive south to US Route 30 (0.44 miles)                      25    23-308                                     9-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2023
Cleveland Road (Frankfort Township Road)      From Wolf Road east for 0.303 miles                                           25    Hwy. Res. 85-101                           8-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
Cobble Stone Court - Zone 389 (Frankfort      From Wishing Well Drive to Windmill Drive (0.30 mile)                         25    10-190                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Codo Drive - Zone 569 (Homer Township)        From 159th Street to 163rd Street (0.49 mile)                                 mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Collin Drive - Zone 382 (Frankfort Township)  From Lakeside Drive to James Street (0.09 miles)                              25    10-183                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Conlee Drive (New Lenox Township)             Township limit to 185th Street (0.28 mile)                                    25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Cooper Street (New Lenox Township)            From Joliet Highway to U.S. Route 30 (0.49 miles)                             25    10-12                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Corning Road (Washington Township)            From State Route 1 to Cottage Grove Avenue (1.521 miles)                      45    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Countryside Lane - Zone 467 (Frankfort        From 80th Avenue to Countryside Court                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
County Highway 1 (Hadley Road)                From Televale Court to S. Brentwood Court (0.50 miles)                        40    Ord. 13-90                                 4-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2013
County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)                 From 50 feet north of Reiter Drive south for 3,850 feet                       50    Hwy. Res. 86-20                            2-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1986
County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)                 From U.S. Route 6 to 0.5 mile north                                           55    1973, p. 210; Sup. Rec. Bk. 241             
                                                                                                                            mph
                                                                                                                            45                                               10-
County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)                 From 159th Street to County Highway 75 (Division Street) (1.01 miles)         mph   06-435                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
County Highway 5 (Caton Farm Road)            From State Route 59 east to Wesline Drive                                     45    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
County Highway 5 (Caton Farm Road)            I-55 Frontage Road east to Essington Road                                     50    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 288                  1971
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 6 (Manhattan-Monee Road)       From State Route 50 west to 0.25 mile west of I-57                            45    Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 134                      3-13-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1974
County Highway 11 (Joliet/Naperville Road)    From Royce Road south to Boughton Road                                        45    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
County Highway 14 (Plainfield- Naperville     0.06 mile north of 87th Street south to 0.64 mile south of 87th Street        40    Hwy. Res. No. 4                            4-19-
Road)                                                                                                                       mph                                              1984
County Highway 14 (Plainfield- Naperville     Gateshead Drive to 95th Street (0.42 mile)                                    45    91-13                                      1-17-
Road)                                                                                                                       mph                                              1991
County Highway 16 (Bell Road)                 4,224 feet north of 159th Street to 3,237 feet north                          50    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
County Highway 16 (Bell Road)                 From State Route 7 north for 4,224 feet                                       45    Hwy. Res. 86-5                             1-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1986
County Highway 15 - Zone 168 (Bell Road)      From 143rd Street to 0.60 mile; length 0.60 mile                              50    92-8                                       1-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1992
                                                                                                                                                                             11-
                                                                                                                            40    03-513;                                    20-
County Highway 16 - Zone 298REV (Bell Road)   From 143rd Street to 3,100 feet south of 143rd Street                         mph   10-101                                     2003;
                                                                                                                                                                             4-15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2010
County Highway 16 (Bell Road)                 Will-Cook county line to 143rd Street (0.99 mile)                             50    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 16 - Zone 379 (Bell Road)      From 143rd Street to Glengary Drive (0.49 mile)                               40    10-102                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
County Highway 17 (Manhattan Road)            U.S. Route 42 to Gougar Road (0.294 mile)                                     35    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 17 (Manhattan- Arsenal Road)   From I-55 East Frontage Road to Baseline Road (2.41 miles)                    50    08-168                                     4-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2008
County Highway 19 (Center Road)               From E.J.R.R. tracks south to County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)                45    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, pp. 18—19             1973
                                                                                                                            mph
                                                                                                                                                                             5-18-
County Highway 19 (Center Road)               From Laraway Road to Steger Road (1.01 miles)                                 45    89-82; 00-286                              1989;
                                                                                                                            mph                                              7-20-
                                                                                                                                                                             2000
County Highway 20 (Joliet Road) near Peotone  From 300 feet north of Rathke Road intersection easterly to 600 feet east of  45    1970, p. 1629; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 434    
                                              Conrad Street in Peotone                                                      mph
County Highway 20 (North Peotone Road)        From 300 feet north of Rathke Road south to 600 feet east of Conrad Street    40    Hwy. Res. 4                                2-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1984
County Highway 21 (Crete-Monee Road)          From west end of County Highway 21 to 500 feet east of Willcenter Road (0.60  40    95-56                                      3-16-
                                              miles)                                                                        mph                                              1995
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
County Highway 23                             3,960 feet west of Illinois Route 1 to Nacke Road                             mph   Hwy. Res. 87-165                           19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1987
                                                                                                                            35                                               11-
County Highway 23 (Goodenow Road)             Illinois Route 1 to 2,460 feet west                                           mph   Hwy. Res. 87-164                           19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1987
County Highway 23 (Pauling Road)              U.S. Route 54 easterly to 3,200 feet east of Egyptian Trail                   45    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 142                  1971
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 24 (Indiana Avenue)            From State Route 1 east for 2,640 feet                                        40    Hwy. Res. 86-6                             1-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1986
County Highway 24 (Peotone-Beecher Road)      From State Route 50 east to Ridgeland Avenue                                  50    87-101                                     8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
County Highway 25                             From State Route 50 to Drecksler Road (County Highway 70) (0.32 mile) (County 35    03-275                                     6-19-
                                              Board District #6)                                                            mph                                              2003
County Highway 25 (Wilmington - Peotone Road) From State Route 54 west for 4,600 feet                                       45    Hwy. Res. 5                                2-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1984
County Highway 31 (Soldiers’ Widows’ Home Old Soldiers’ Widows’ Home westerly to 1,300 feet west of Linda Lane From 50    1970, p. 1703; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 455    
Road)                                         Will- Grundy                                                                  mph
County Highway 32 (Channahon- Minodra Road)   County line east for 2,717 feet                                               50    Hwy. Res.86-7                              1-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1986
County Highway 32 (Channahon- Minodra Road)   2,851 feet north of U.S. 6 (end of existing 35 mph zone) north to 9,715 feet  45    Hwy. Res. No. 3                            6-25-
                                              north of U.S. 6                                                               mph                                              1980
County Highway 32 (Minooka Road)              U.S. Route 6 northerly to 0.54 miles north of U.S. Route 6                    35    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 288                  1971
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 32 (Channahon- Minooka Road)   From Will-Grundy county line to 2,717 feet east (0.51 mile)                   45    00-167                                     4-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2000
County Highway 32 (Soldier’s Widow’s Home From 200 feet west of Linda Lane easterly for 2,600 feet (0.49 mile)          45    00-219                                     5-18-
Road)                                                                                                                       mph                                              2000
County Highway 35 (135th Street)              Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal to State Route 53 (1 mile)                    35    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 35 (135th Street)              High Road (0.13 mile east of Lemont Road) east to Smith Road                  50    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 501               1971
                                                                                                                            mph
                                                                                                                                                                             1971;
                                                                                                                            45    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 501; 00-287; 03-  7-20-
County Highway 35 (135th Street)              Smith Road east to State Route 171                                            mph   368                                        2000;
                                                                                                                                                                             8-21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2003
County Highway 36 (Renwick Road)              From State Route 59 east to U.S. Route 30                                     40    Sup. Rec. Bk.   , p. 303                6-14-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1976
County Highway 36 (Renwick Road)              From Old Renwick Trail to County Highway 88 (Weber Road) length 1.50 miles    50    09-104                                     4-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2009
County Highway 37 (143rd Street)              From Cedar Road east to Bell Road                                             45    Hwy. Res. No. 2                            5-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
County Highway 37 (143rd Street)              Bell Road to Will-Cook Road (1.01 miles)                                      40    89-203                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 37 (143rd Street)              Golden Oak Drive to Bell Road (0.51 mile)                                     35    89-203                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 37 (143rd Street)              Parker Road to Golden Oak Drive (0.48 mile)                                   40    89-203                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 38 (Marley Road)               From West Warren Drive east to 200 feet east of Leila Drive                   50    Sup. Rec. Bk.  , p. 134                  3-13-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1974
County Highway 38 (Marley Road)               From West Warren Drive east to Wolf Road                                      45    87-94                                      8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
County Highway 43 (Wilton-Center Road)        U.S. Route 52 to 2,112 feet south (0.4 mile)                                  35    90-154                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
County Highway 47 (Saak Trail)                From 4,000 feet west of Harlem Avenue west for 2,900 feet                     50    Hwy. Res. 86-21                            2-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1986
County Highway 48 (Old Monee Road)            Stuenkel Road northeasterly to Tempo Street in Park Forest                    40    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 289                  1971
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 49 (Exchange Street)           County Highway 53 (Western Avenue) to County Highway 48 (Old Monee Road)      45    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 142                  1971
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 49 (Exchange Street)           From Steger-Monee Road to Western Avenue                                      40    Hwy. Res. No. 3                            7-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
                                                                                                                            40                                               12-
County Highway 51 (Mills Road)                From Herman Lane east to County Highway 54 (Briggs Street)                    mph   Hwy. Res. 85-180                           19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1985
County Highway 51 (Mills Road)                Briggs Street to Spring Green Drive (0.78 mile)                               45    94-16                                      1-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
County Highway 52 (Cougar Road)               From U.S. Route 30 south to Penn-Central tracks                               45    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, p. 210                  1973
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 52 (Cougar Road)               From Penn-Central tracks south to New Lennox Road                             55    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, p. 210                  1973
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 52 (Cougar Road)               From State Highway Route 6 south to north edge of C.R.I. and P.R.R. tracks    45    Hwy. Res. No. 1                            4-25-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1979
                                                                                                                            50                                               10-
County Highway 52 (Gougar Road)               From W. Spencer Road to E.J. and E.R.R. tracks (0.37 mile)                    mph   07-404                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2007
County Highway 53 (Western Avenue)            County Highway 49 (Exchange Street) southerly to County Highway 21 (Monee-    50    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 142                  1971
                                              Crete Road)                                                                   mph
County Highway 53 (Western Avenue) - Zone 28  Exchange Street to Olmstead Road; length 1.25 miles                           45    92-8                                       1-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1992
County Highway 54 (Briggs Street)             From Mills Road (County Highway 51) south to U.S. Route 52                    50    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 354               1972
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 55 (Cherry Hill Road) - Zone                                                                                 45                                               10-
490                                           From Haven/New Hlenox Orad to Washington Street - 0.78 miles                  mph   Ord. 11-385                                20-
                                                                                                                                                                             2011
County Highway 56 (Black Road)                From W. Ridge Avenue west to State Route 59                                   55    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, p. 210                  1973
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 56 (Black Road)                From E.J. and E.P.R.R. tracks west to east school driveway (entrance)         40    Sup. Rec. Bk.  , p. 30                   1-26-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1977
County Highway 56 (Black Road)                From 2340 east of State Route 59 to Troy Craughwell School west entrance      40    Res. 04-191                                5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
County Highway 56 (Black Road)                From Troy Craughwell School west entrance to Essington Road (0.16 mile)       35    03-274                                     6-19-
                                              (County Board Districts 5 and 6)                                              mph                                              2003
County Highway 56 (Black Road) (Sec. 69-Q-1-  Beginning at pt. near West Ridge Avenue and extending easterly to pt. near    45    1965, p. 718; Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 19      
MFT)                                          E.J. and E.R.R. tracks (approx. 1.5 miles)                                    mph
County Highway 56 (Black Road)                From West School driveway (exit) west to 450 feet west of DuPage River Bridge 45    Sup. Rec. Bk.   , p. 30                 1-26-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1977
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
County Highway 56 (Black Road)                From 450 feet west of DuPage River Bridge west to State Route 59              mph   Hwy. Res. No. 6                            20-
                                                                                                                                                                             1984
County Highway 62 (No. Briggs Street)         0.49 mile south of Division St to Bruce Road (0.50 mile)                      50    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
County Highway 64 (Francis Road)              East end of County Highway 64 (Front Street in Mokena) west to 115th Avenue   40    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 133               1972
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 64 (Francis Road)              From 115th Avenue west to 0.1 mile west of Glennell Avenue                    45    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 133               1972
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 66 (11th Street)               From State Route 59 to Plainfield-Naperville Road                             45    96-206                                     9-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             From State Route 53 west to Schmidt Road                                      50    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 354               1972
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             State Route 53 east to 0.42 mile east of Pinecrest Road                       50    Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 382               1972
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             From State Route 53 west to 0.013 mile west of Delaware Drive                 45    Sup. Rec. Bk.  , p. 21                   1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1976
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             From Ashbury Drive east to Murphy Road                                        45    Hwy. Res. No. 6                            1-23-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1980
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             From State Route 53 east to Ashbury Avenue                                    40    Hwy. Res. No. 7                            1-23-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1980
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             State Route 53 west to Lyons Road                                             40    Hwy. Res. No. 8                            1-23-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1980
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             From 0.45 mile east of Joliet- Naperville Road east to 0.75 mile east of      50    Hwy. Res. No. 9                            1-23-
                                              Joliet-Naperville Road                                                        mph                                              1980
County Highway 67 (Boughton Road)             From 1.00 mile west of Joliet-Naperville Road to Joliet-Naperville Road       45    89-82                                      5-18-
                                              (length 1.00 mile)                                                            mph                                              1989
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)              From County Highway 52 (Gougar Road) to U.S. Route 45 (6.70 miles)            mph   09-389                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)              From Nelson Road to 1/2 mile east of Nelson Road (0.5 mile)                   mph   06-522                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                                                                                             4-17-
                                                                                                                            45    08-159;                                    2008;
County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)              From 0.55 miles east of Center Road to Harlem Avenue (2.4 miles)              mph   09-391                                     11-
                                                                                                                                                                             19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)              From State Route 52 to Center Road (9.1 miles)                                40    08-160                                     4-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2008
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)              From U.S. Route 45 to Center Road (1.31 miles)                                mph   09-390                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
County Highway 74 (Laraway Road)              From U.S. Route 52 to County Highway 52 (Gougar Road) (1.33 miles)            mph   09-388                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
County Highway 75 (Division Street)           Briggs Street (County Highway 62) east to Farrel Street                       45    Sup. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 289                  1971
                                                                                                                            mph
County Highway 75 (East Division Street)      From North Briggs Street (County Highway 62) east to Farrell Road             40    Hwy. Res. 6                                3-26-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1981
                                                                                                                            50                                               10-
County Highway 75 (Division Street)           Farrell Road to Gougar Road (1 mile)                                          mph   04-459                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
County Highway 75 (Division Street)           From Farrell Road to Gougar Road (1.0 mile)                                   45    07-373                                     9-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2007
County Highway 77 (Bluff Road)                U.S. Route 6 to 1,742 feet east                                               40    Hwy. Res. 87-128                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
County Highway 77 (Bluff Road)                1,742 feet east of U.S. Rte. 6 to 3,343 feet east                             50    Hwy. Res. 87-127                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
County Highway 77 (Bluff Road)                1,742 feet east to U.S. Rte. 6 (0.63 mile)                                    mph   93-282                                     16-
                                                                                                                                                                             1993
County Highway 83 (80th Avenue)               191st Street to 183rd Street (1.01 miles)                                     50    94-161                                     6-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
County Highway 84 (191st Street)              From 80th Avenue to Harlem Avenue (1.01 miles)                                50    89-82                                      5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 84 (191st Street)              From U.S. Route 45 to 80th Avenue (2.02 miles)                                50    89-82                                      5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
County Highway 84 (191st Street)              Wolf Road east to U.S. Route 45                                               45    Hwy. Res. No. 4                            7-25-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1979
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
County Road - Zone 596 (Florence Township)    From 216th Avenue to Indian Trail Road (2.00 miles)                           mph   21-398                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2021
Countryside Lane - Zone 404 (Frankfort        From 80th Avenue to Old Mill Road (0.13 mile)                                 25    10-205                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Crabapple Lane - Zone 414 (Frankfort          From Poplar Street to the cul-de-sac                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Cresent Place - Zone 533 (New Lenox Township) From Star Lite Drive to Washington Street (0.04 mile)                         25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Crete-Monee Road (County Highway 21)          Beginning at pt. near the C. and E.I.R.R., and extending in easterly          45    1965, p. 717; Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 19      
                                              direction to pt. near State Route 1 (approx. 0.26 mile)                       mph
Crete-Monee Road (County Highway 21)          From eastern boundary of school speed zone to State Route 1                   35    Sup. Rec. Bk.  , p. 22                   1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1976
Cynthia Lane (New Lenox Township)             Blodgett Road to Debbie Lane (0.38 mile)                                      25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Danne Road - Zone 522 (Crete Township)        From Klemme Road to State Line Road (1.00 mile)                               45    Ord. 15-148                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              15
Debbie Lane (New Lenox Township)              Leanne Lane to Rachel Drive (0.20 mile)                                       25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Delaney Road (New Lenox Township)             From west township limits to 0.5 mile east                                    35    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Delaney Road - Zone 146REV (New Lenox         From Kankakee Street to Schoolhouse Road (1.00 miles)                         35    22-120                                     5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Delaney Road (Manhattan Township)             Schoolhouse Road to Spencer Road (0.75 mile)                                  35    89-248                                     9-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
                                                                                                                            45                                               10-
Delaney Road (Manhattan Township)             U.S. Route 52 to 4,500 feet east of U.S. Route 52 (0.85 mile)                 mph   06-434                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Devonshire Lane (Green Garden Township)       From Manhattan-Monee Road to Pennington Lane (0.2 mile)                       mph   04-504                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Division Street (County Highway 75) - Zone                                                                                  45                                               10-
558                                           From Cedar Road (County Highway 4) to ½ mile west of Cedar Road (0.50 miles) mph   Ord. 18-277                                18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Dougall Road - Zone 523 (New Lenox Township)  From US Route 30 to US Route 30 (0.63 mile)                                   25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              15
Dove Lane - Zone 386 (Frankfort Township)     From Hunter Drive to Grand Prairie Lane (0.07 mile)                           25    10-187                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Dralle Road - Zone 165 (Green Garden          88th Avenue to Center Road; length 1.00 mile                                  45    92-8                                       1-16-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              1992
Driftwood Drive - Zone 475 (Frankfort         From Acorn Ridge Drive to Graceland Lane                                      25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Eagle Lake Road (Washington Township)         State Route 1 to Cottage Grove Avenue (1.76 miles)                            45    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Eastern Avenue (Manhattan Township)           Delaney Road to Baker Road (1.02 miles)                                       45    06-172                                     4-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Eastern Avenue (Manhattan Township)           From 0.50 miles south of Smith Road to 0.83 miles south of Smith Road (0.33   35    Ord. 15-99                                 4-16-
                                              miles)                                                                        mph                                              2015
Eaton Avenue (Jackson Township)               From Keith Allen Drive to State Route 53 (0.35 mile)                          25    99-22                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Edinburgh Lane - Zone 430 (Frankfort          From Braema Lane to Skye Drive                                                25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Egyptian Trail (Monee Township)               From Pauling Road to 2,112 feet south                                         35    88-63                                      5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
Elizabeth Lane (New Lenox Township)           Cynthia Lane to Rachel Drive (0.31 mile)                                      25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Elizabeth Lane - Zone 487 (Frankfort          From Glenshire Drive to Ellen Lane                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Ellen Lane - Zone 486 (Frankfort Township)    From Glenshire Drive to Elizabeth Lane                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Elm Avenue - Zone 411 (Frankfort Township)    From Beechnut Drive to Oak                                                    25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Erskine Road - Zone 526 (New Lenox Township)  From Cherry Hill Road to Pembroke Avenue (0.49 mile)                          25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Essington Road (County Highway 12, Sec. 145)  Black Road (County Highway 56) to U.S. 52                                     45    1969, p. 797; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 257     
                                                                                                                            mph
Essington Road (Plainfield Township)          From Renwick Road (County Highway 36) south for 5,073 feet                    45    Hwy. Res. No. 2                            5-7-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1984
Evan Terrace - Zone 438 (Frankfort Township)  From Frankfort Square Road to Patricia Lane                                   25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Evergreen Drive - Zone 459 (Frankfort         From Spruce Drive to Pine Hill Road                                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            45                                               10-
Exchange Street (County Highway 49)           From I-394 east for 4,980 feet                                                mph   Hwy. Res. No. 2                            18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1984
                                                                                                                            50                                               10-
Exchange Street (County Highway 49)           From 4,980 feet east of I-394 east for 5,280 feet                             mph   Hwy. Res. No. 3                            18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1984
Exchange Street (County Highway 49)           From Cottage Grove Avenue to I-394 (0.86 mile)                                50    01-205                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2001
Exchange Street (County Highway 49)           From Cottage Grove Avenue to 7,300 feet west (1.38 miles)                     45    01-204                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2001
Farmhouse Road (Frankfort Township)           From Harvest Drive (west) to Harvest Drive (east)                             25    04-22                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Farmington Lane - Zone 434 (Frankfort         From Benton Drive to New Castle Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Farrell Road (Homer Township)                 Rosalind Avenue to Bruce Road (1.01 miles)                                    40    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Fiday Road (Plainfield Township)              State Route 55 (Frontage Road) east to 1,484 feet west of Essington Road      40    Hwy. Res. No. 2                            6-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1979
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Florence Road (New Lenox Township)            From Ruth Drive to Parker Road (0.30 mile)                                    mph   09-339                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Francis Court (Plainfield Township)           S. Michael Drive to Helen Drive (0.27 mile)                                   25    06-348                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Francis Road (County Highway 64)              Cedar Road east to Edmund Street                                              40    1969, p. 422; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 161     
                                                                                                                            mph
Francis Road (County Highway 64)              Cedar Road west to Gordon Street                                              40    1969, p. 422; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 161     
                                                                                                                            mph
Francis Road (County Highway 64)              Edmonds Avenue east to 500 feet east of East Regan Road                       50    Hwy. Res. No. 3                            1-28-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1982
Francis Road (County Highway 64)              Edmond Avenue to Townline Road (2.65 miles)                                   45    91-189                                     7-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1991
Frankfort Square Road - Zone 436 (Frankfort   From 80th Avenue to St. Francis Road                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Frankfort Square Road - Zone 471 (Frankfort   From North Avenue to U.S. 30                                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Frankfort Square Road - Zone 470 (Frankfort   From St. Francis Road to North Avenue                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Fredonia Street - Zone 603 (New Lenox         From Hermitage Drive to dead end                                              25    22-235                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Glassgow Drive - Zone 431 (Frankfort          From Benton Drive to Edinburgh Lane                                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Glen Crest Lane (Homer Township)              Cedar Glen Drive to Cedar Glen Drive (0.48 mile)                              25    94-67                                      3-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
Glenshire Drive - Zone 484 (Frankfort         From Frankfort Square Road to Elizabeth Lane                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Glenwood Lane (Homer Township)                Cedar Glen Drive to Cedar Glen Road (0.26 mile)                               25    94-67                                      3-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
Golden Oak Drive (Homer Township)             143rd Street to Baywood Lane                                                  25    95-159                                     7-24-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
Golden Oak Drive (Homer Township)             143rd Street to Hiawatha Drive                                                25    95-159                                     7-24-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
Goodenow Road (Crete Township)                From Klemme Road to State Line Road (0.98 mile)                               mph   04-540                                     16-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Goodenow Road (Crete Township)                Stoney Island Avenue to I-394 (2.74 miles)                                    50    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Gougar Road (Homer Township)                  From State Route 7 to 163rd Street (0.495 mile)                               40    89-82                                      5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Gougar Road (County Highway 52)               From 0.02 mile south of Haven Avenue to 0.56 mile north of Haven Avenue       50    99-31                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Gougar Road                                   From U.S. Route 30 to 0.53 mile south of U.S. Route 50 (1.53 miles)           40    00-41                                      1-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2000
                                                                                                                            40                                               10-
Gougar Road (Manhattan Township)              From U.S. Route 52 to County Highway 17 (Manhattan Elwood Road) (0.49 mile)   mph   05-436                                     20-
                                                                                                                                                                             2005
Graceland Lane - Zone 440 (Frankfort          From Frankfort Square Road to Frankfort Square Road                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Graceland Lane - Zone 469 (Frankfort          From St. Francis Road to Frankfort Square Road                                25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Grand Prairie Lane - Zone 384 (Frankfort      From Quail Circle to Dove Lane (0.31 mile)                                    25    10-185                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Gray Lane - Zone 380 (Frankfort Township)     From Lakeside Drive to James Street (0.13 mile)                               25    10-181                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Gray Road (Custer Township)                   From County Line Road to State Route 113 (2.25 miles)                         40    99-195                                     5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Green Road (DuPage Township)                  Royce Road to Will-DuPage county line (0.57 mile)                             50    90-8                                       1-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Green Meadow Lane - Zone 390 (Frankfort       From Windmill Drive to North Avenue (0.46 mile)                               25    10-191                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Greenfield Lane - Zone 443 (Frankfort         From Kingston Drive to St. Francis Road                                       25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            35                                               12-
Haas Road (Homer Township)                    Lauffer Road to township limit (1.01 miles)                                   mph   97-293                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1997
Haley Road (Manhattan Township)               Kankakee Street to Schoolhouse Road (1.02 miles)                              35    06-173                                     4-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Harlem Avenue - Zone 572 (Monee Township)     Manhattan-Monee Road (CH 6) to Dralle Road (1.00 mile)                        50    19-9                                       1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2019
Harvest Lane (Frankfort Township)             From Wheatfield Drive (west) to Wheatfield Drive (east)                       25    04-21                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Hawthorn Lane - Zone 478 (Frankfort Township) From Woodlawn Drive to Hickory Creek Drive                                    25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Hawthorne Avenue - Zone 420 (Frankfort        From Poplar Street to Catulpa Street                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Haystack Lane - Zone 393 (Frankfort Township) From Ivy Path to Green Meadow Lane (0.10 mile)                                25    10-194                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Hazelwood Drive - Zone 606 (New Lenox         From Hermitage Drive to dead end                                              25    22-235                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Heggs Road (Wheatland Township)               Kristi Drive to Kelley Court                                                  45    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Helen Drive (Plainfield Township)             230 feet west of Francis Court to 240 feet east of S. Michael Drive (0.18     25    06-350                                     8-17-
                                              mile)                                                                         mph                                              2006
Hempstead Place (New Lenox Township)          From Washington Street to Lancaster Lane (0.11 mile)                          25    10-07                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Hermitage Drive - Zone 604 (New Lenox         From Tara Street to dead end                                                  25    22-235                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Hiawatha Drive (Homer Township)               Creekside Drive to Kickapoo Drive (0.51 mile)                                 25    90-8                                       1-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1990
Hickory Creek Drive (Frankfort Township)      From Frankfort Square Road to Harlem Avenue                                   25    04-20                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Hickory Creek Place - Zone 482 (Frankfort     From Hickory Creek Drive to the cul-de-sac                                    25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Hickory Street - Zone 409 (Frankfort          From Elm Avenue to Oak                                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
High Road                                     From State Route 171 north to 143rd Street                                    50    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, pp. 18—19             1973
                                                                                                                            mph
High Road (Lockport Township)                 Route 171 to 8,448 feet north (1.60 miles)                                    45    91-13                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1991
Highview Lane - Zone 425 (Frankfort Township) From Lakeview Terrace to Lakeside Drive                                       25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Hillside Road - Zone 406 (New Lenox Township) From Vine Street to Old Hickory Road (0.30 mile)                              mph   10-392                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2010
Holly Lane - Zone 444 (Frankfort Township)    From Kingston Drive to Greenfield Lane                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            30                                               12-
Home Avenue (Monee Twp)                       From Stuenkel Road to State Route 50 (0.42 mile)                              mph   95-288                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             1995
Houbolt Road (County Highway 3, Sec. 128)     U.S. 52 south to McDonough Street                                             40    1969, p. 797; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 257     
                                                                                                                            mph
Humbolt Drive - Zone 480 (Frankfort Township) From Woodlawn Drive to Woodlawn Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Hunter Drive - Zone 383 (Frankfort Township)  From St. Francis Road to Dove Lane (0.35 mile)                                25    10-184                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Illinois Highway (New Lenox Township)         Cedar Road to Nelson Road                                                     40    Hwy. Res. 87-123                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Indian Mound Drive - Zone 679 (New Lenox      From East Circle Drive south to West Circle Drive (0.38 miles)                25    23-308                                     9-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2023
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Indian Trail (Manhattan Township)             From Arrowhead Drive to Baker Road (0.60 mile)                                mph   09-430                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Indian Trail Road (Florence Township)         From Arsenal Road to Wilmington-Peotone Road (1.02 miles)                     40    05-404                                     9-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2005
Inverary Drive - Zone 483 (Frankfort          From Frankfort Square Road to the cul-de-sac                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Inverness Lane - Zone 433 (Frankfort          From Benton Drive to Skye Drive                                               25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Irish Lane (Custer Township)                  From Bauer Road to State Route 113 (1.68 miles)                               35    02-279                                     6-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Ivy Path - Zone 395 (Frankfort Township)      From Silo Drive to Haystack Lane (0.07 mile)                                  25    10-196                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
James Street - Zone 381 (Frankfort Township)  From Gray Lane to Collin Drive (0.07 mile)                                    25    10-182                                  6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Jamison Drive - Zone 472 (Frankfort Township) From Graceland Lane to Frankfort Square Road                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Jean Road - Zone 513 (Frankfort Township)     From Josephine Drive to Stephanie Lane (0.24 mile)                            25    15-14                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Jessica Lane - Zone 448 (Frankfort Township)  From Barbara Lane to Mallory Drive                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Joann Drive - Zone 599 (Plainfield Township)  From NE Frontage Road to Dead End (0.46 miles)                                25    22-121                                     5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2022
Joliet Highway (New Lenox Township)           From Spencer Road to Princeton Lane (0.51 miles)                              25    Ord. 12-07                                 1-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
Joliet Highway (New Lenox Township)           From Bike Trail Crossing to Bon Terre Road (0.47 miles)                       25    Ord. 12-08                                 1-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
Joliet-Naperville Road (County Highway 11)    Boughton Road (County Highway 67) south for 6,283 feet                        mph   86-166                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
Joliet-Naperville Road                        From Boughton Road south to Ingleside Drive                                   50    Hwy. Res. 5                                3-26-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1981
Joliet-Naperville Road                        From Normantown Road north to western limits of Romeoville                    35    Hwy. Res. 5                                1-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1984
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
Joliet-Naperville Road                        Will-DuPage county line south for 300 feet of Royce Road                      mph   86-164                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
Jonquil Lane - Zone 445 (Frankfort Township)  From Holly Lane to St. Francis Road                                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Josephine Drive - Zone 514 (Frankfort         From Townline Road to township/village limit (0.37 mile)                      25    15-14                                      1-15-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Kahler Road (Florence Township)               From Butcher Road to Indian Trail Road (1.55 miles)                           40    05-403                                     9-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2005
Kanakee Street (Manhattan Township)           From Manhattan-Monee Road to Gallagher Road (1.01 miles)                      45    95-83                                      4-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1995
Keith Allen Drive (Jackson Township)          From Gladys Avenue to Millsdale Road                                          25    99-21                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Kensington Lane (Green Garden Township)       From Harlem Avenue to dead end (0.65 mile)                                    mph   04-502                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Kent Avenue (Crete Township)                  From Winston Lane to State Route 1                                            25    98-215                                     8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Kingston Drive - Zone 442 (Frankfort          From Frankfort Square Road to St. Francis Road                                25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Klemme Road                                   From Exchange Street (County Highway 49) north to Richton Road                35    Hwy. Res. No. 5                            5-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
Klemme Road (Crete Township)                  Exchange Street to Bemes Road (2.01 miles)                                    45    89-248                                     9-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Klemme Road (Crete Township)                  Bemes Road to Goodenow Road (0.99 mile)                                       45    89-248                                     9-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Lakeside Drive (Frankfort Township)           From Patricia Lane to Harlem Avenue                                           25    04-16                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Lakeview Terrace - Zone 423 (Frankfort        From Old Coach Trail to Lakeside Drive                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Lakewood Falls Drive (Lockport Township)      Lake Street to Weber Road                                                     40    99-30                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Lakewood Falls Drive (Plainfield Township)    From New Butler Road to Lake Street                                           35    98-244                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1998
Lancaster Lane (New Lenox Township)           From Washington Street to Gougar Road (0.47 mile)                             25    10-08                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              0.018 mile west of Jackson Branch Drive east to 0.018 mile east of Nelson     50    Hwy. Res. No. 5                            7-25-
                                              Drive                                                                         mph                                              1979
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              0.55 miles east of Center Road (County Highway 19) to Harlem Avenue (2.45     50    20-54                                      2-20-
                                              miles)                                                                        mph                                              2020
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              Wolf Road to U.S. 45                                                          45    97-78                                      4-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              Center Road (County Highway 19) to Pfeiffer Road                              50    99-25                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              Center Road (County Highway 19) to 0.55 miles east of Center Road (County     45    20-53                                      2-20-
                                              Highway 19) (0.55 miles)                                                      mph                                              2020
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              From Nelson Road to 0.50 mile east of Nelson Road (0.50 mile)                 50    00-117                                     3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2000
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              From Center Road to 2,900 feet east (0.55 mile)                               45    01-203                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2001
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              From Center Road to 0.55 miles east of Center Road (0.55 mile)                40    02-277                                     6-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              From Gougar Road to west of Jackson Branch Drive (0.30 mile)                  50    02-278                                     6-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              Scheer Road to 116th Avenue (0.5 mile)                                        50    04-335                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              Brandon Road to State Route 53 (1 mile)                                       mph   04-541                                     16-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Laraway Road (County Highway 74)              116th Avenue to Wolf Road (0.51 mile)                                         50    06-155                                     4-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Laurel Drive - Zone 446 (Frankfort Township)  From Kingston Drive to Kingston Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Leach Drive - Zone 568 (Homer Township)       From 159th Street to 163rd Street (0.49 mile)                                 mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Leanne Lane (New Lenox Township)              Debbie Lane to Cynthia Lane (0.13 mile)                                       25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Leila Drive - Zone 515 (Frankfort Township)   From 187th Street to Stephanie Lane (0.44 mile)                               25    15-14                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Lily Cache Road (Plainfield Township)         Caton Farm Road to 6,382 feet north (1.21 miles)                              35    94-16                                      1-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
Linden Lane (Crete Township)                  From Auburn Lane to Stanton Lane (0.15 mile)                                  25    99-308                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Lockner Blvd. - Zone 597 (Plainfield          From Hel Mar Lane to Holly Lynn Lane (0.32 miles)                             25    22-78                                      4-21-
Towhship)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Lorenzo Road (County Highway 80)              Cooper Road to Kavanaugh Road (0.97 mile)                                     50    99-24                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Magnolia Avenue - Zone 422 (Frankfort         From Beechnut Drive to Cherry Street                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Magnolia Drive - Zone 453 (Frankfort          From Pine Hill Road to Laurel Drive                                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Mallory Drive - Zone 447 (Frankfort Township) From Laurel Drive to Pine Hill Road                                           25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
Manhattan-Arsenal Road (County Highway 17)    Brandon Road east for 5,016 feet                                              mph   86-144                                     20-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
Manhattan-Arsenal Road (County Highway 17)    5,016 feet east of Brandon Road to State Route 53                             mph   86-143                                     20-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
Manhattan-Arsenal Road (County Highway 17) -  From 5,016 feet east of Brandon Road to IL Route 53 (0.56 miles)              45    15-244                                     8-20-
Zone 94REV                                                                                                                  mph                                              2015
Manhattan-Monee Road                          From Central Avenue to Ridgeland Avenue                                       35    93-20                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Manhattan-Monee Road (County Highway 6, sec.  FAI 57 (Station 14025 + 00) to beginning of curve no passing zone (Station    45    1969, p. 797; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 257     
40-2Q)                                        14055 + 38)                                                                   mph
Manhattan-Monee Road (County Highway 6, sec.  Beginning of no passing zone west of curve (Station 492 + 38) to center line  40    1969, p. 797; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 257     
40-2Q)                                        of Wilson Street (Station 519 + 11)                                           mph
Manhattan-Monee Road (County Highway 6) -     From S. Willow Creek Lane to S. Ridgeland Avenue (0.62 miles)                 45    18-250                                     9-20-
Zone 557                                                                                                                    mph                                              2018
Manhattan-Monee Road (County Highway 6) -     From Ridgeland Avenue to Central Avenue (0.99 miles)                          35    23-151                                     5-18-
Zone 667                                                                                                                    mph                                              2023
Manhattan-Monee Road (County Highway 6) -     From Central Avenue to Illinois Route 50 (0.35 miles)                         45    23-151                                     5-18-
Zone 668                                                                                                                    mph                                              2023
Maple/Hickory Avenue (Homer Township)         Cedar Road to township limits                                                 30    88-22                                      2-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
Marilynn Court (New Lenox Township)           Betty Lane to cul-du-sac (0.15 mph)                                           25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Marjorie Parkway - Zone 516 (Frankfort        From 187th Street to Josephine Drive (0.21 mile)                              25    15-14                                      1-15-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Marley Road (County Highway 38, sec. 137Q)    U.S. Route 6 east to Warren Drive                                             30    1969, p. 797; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 257     
                                                                                                                            mph
Maryville Drive/Pendleton Street (Lockport    First Street East to First Street West                                        25    93-114                                     5-20-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              1993
Mathews Drive - Zone 481 (Frankfort Township) From Woodlawn Drive to Woodlawn Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Mayfair Drive - Zone 524 (New Lenox Township) From Cherry Hill Road to Dougal Road (0.20 mile)                              25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
McDonough Street (County Highway 3)           Caterpillar Drive to Houbolt Avenue                                           40    1970, p. 1356; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 359    
                                                                                                                            mph
McDonough Street (County Highway 3)           Houbolt Road to 1,435 west of Infantry Drive (0.74 mile)                      35    04-333                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
McGrath Lane (Wheatland Township)             Wagner Road to 103rd Street                                                   25    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Meadowland Drive (Homer Township)             From Mallard Lane to Will- Cook Road (0.37 mile)                              25    89-82                                      5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Melrose Lane (Crete Township)                 From Stanton Lane to Auburn Lane (0.11 mile)                                  25    99-307                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Melrose Street (New Lenox Township)           From Spencer Road to Somerset Court (0.44 mile)                               mph   09-335                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Menno Drive - Zone 610 (New Lenox Township)   From Spector Road to easterly dead end (0.17 miles)                           25    23-47                                      2-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
Mills Road (County Highway 51, Sec. 47- 3Q    From intersection of Mills Road with Herman Lane, and extending east to point 50    1965, p. 784; Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 58      
MFT)                                          at intersection of Mills Road with Cherry Hill Road (approx. 1.49 miles)      mph
Mills Road (County Highway 61, Sec. 47-3Q     From east line of U.S. Route Alternate 66 (So. Chicago Street), and extending 40    1965, pp. 783—784;                        
MFT)                                          east to intersection of Mills Road with Herman Lane (approx. 1.6 miles)       mph   Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 58
Mills Road (County Highway 51) - Zone 671     From Hermans Lane to Briggs Street (0.37 miles)                               40    23-151                                     5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
Mills Road (County Highway 51) - Zone 672     From Briggs Street to Spring Green Drive (0.78 miles)                         45    23-151                                     5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
Millsdale Road (Jackson Township)             From State Route 53 to Brandon Road (1 mile)                                  45    95-56                                      3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1995
                                                                                                                            40                                               11-
Millsdale Road (Jackson Township)             From Keith Allen Road to State Route 53 (0.25 mile)                           mph   07-455                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2007
Monee-Crete Road (County Highway 21, Sec.     Driveway east of tennis court (Station 152 + 00) to Monee Village limits      45    1969, p. 797; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 257     
125Q)                                         (Station 178 + 40)                                                            mph
Montieth Street - Zone 529 (New Lenox         From Dougal Road to Washington Street (0.10 mile)                             25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Moorefield Drive - Zone 441 (Frankfort        From Frankfort Square Road to the cul-de-sac                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Mound Road (Troy Township)                    River Road to 3,432 feet east                                                 40    Hwy. Res. 87-118                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Nelson Road (New Lenox Township)              Illinois Highway to EJ & E railroad                                           40    Hwy. Res. 87-122                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
New Budler Road (Plainfield Township)         From Taylor Road to 135th Street                                              30    01-255                                     6-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2001
New Castle Drive - Zone 435 (Frankfort        From Frankfort Square Road to the dead end                                    25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            40                                               11-
Normantown Road (Wheatland Township)          From 87th Street to 91st Street (0.59 mile)                                   mph   98-342                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
Normantown Road (Wheatland Township)          From 119th Street to U.S. Route 30 (0.75 mile)                                50    02-67                                      2-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
                                                                                                                            35                                               11-
Normantown Road (County Highway 11)           From State Route 53 west to Joliet-Naperville Road                            mph   Hwy. Res. No. 2                            17-
                                                                                                                                                                             1983
North Avenue (Frankfort Township)             From Harlem Avenue to Frankfort Square Road (0.59 mile)                       40    93-100                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
North Avenue (Frankfort Township)             From 78th Avenue to W. 84th Avenue (0.83 mile)                                40    93-100                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
North Avenue - Zone 476 (Frankfort Township)  From 78th Avenue to Harlem Avenue                                             25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Norwood Drive - Zone 455 (Frankfort Township) From Pine Hill Road to Magnolia Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011>
Oak - Zone 413 (Frankfort Township)           From Birch Avenue to Elm Avenue                                               25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Oak Street (Homer Township)                   143rd Street to 139th Street (0.497 mile)                                     35    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Oak Valley Trail (Homer Twp)                  From 259th Street to South Bell Road (0.89 mile)                              25    96-12                                      1-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
Oakdale Avenue - Zone 527 (New Lenox          From US Route 30 to Erskine Road (0.14 mile)                                  25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Old Coach Trail - Zone 424 (Frankfort         From Lakeview Terrace to Lakeside Drive                                       25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Old Farm Road (Manhattan Township)            From Baker Road to Indian Trail (0.66 mile)                                   mph   09-429                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Old Hickory Road - Zone 407 (New Lenox                                                                                      25                                               11-
Township)                                     From Vine Street to U.S. Route 30 (0.79 mile)                                 mph   10-393                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2010
Old Mill Road - Zone 401 (Frankfort Township) From Brickstone Drive to Countryside Lane (0.42 mile)                         25    10-202                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Old Mill Road - Zone 464 (Frankfort Township) From Brickstone Drive to 80th Avenue                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Old Renwick Road (Plainfield Township)        Frontage Road to Renwick Road (0.89 mile)                                     45    99-28                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Old Wolf Road (Frankfort Township)            From Cleveland Road to Wolf Road                                              30    93-100                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Orchard Drive - Zone 456 (Frankfort Township) From Pine Hill Road to Norwood Drive                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Ottawa Drive (Manhattan Township)             From Sauk Drive to dead end (0.20 mile)                                       mph   06-532                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
Parker Road (Homer Township)                  From 143rd Street to State Route 7 (2.01 miles)                               45    89-82                                      5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Parker Road (Homer Township)                  Bruce Road to 3,375 feet north                                                30    88-7                                       1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
Parker Road (Homer Township)                  3,375 feet north of Bruce Road to State Route 7                               40    88-8                                       1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1988
Parker Road (County Highway 1)                From U.S. Route 6 north to Bruce Road                                         45    Hwy. Res. No. 3                            5-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
Parker Road (County Highway 1)                From Bruce Road east to Will-Cook county line                                 45    Hwy. Res. No. 4                            5-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
Parker Road (New Lenox Township)              U.S. Route 6 south to Francis Road (County Highway 64)                        40    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Parkside Drive - Zone 403 (Frankfort          From Brickstone Drive to 80th Avenue (0.16 mile)                              25    10-204                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Parkside Drive - Zone 466 (Frankfort          From Brickstone Drive to 80th Avenue                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Patricia Lane - Zone 439 (Frankfort Township) From Lakeside Drive to Frankfort Square Road                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Patterson Road (Joliet Township)              Brandon Road to Laraway Road (1.60 miles)                                     40    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
Pauling Road (Monee Township)                 Harlem Avenue to County Highway 23 (Pauling Road)                             45    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Pauling Road (Green Garden Township)          Center Road to 88th Avenue (1 mile)                                           45    02-165                                     4-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Pauling Road (Green Garden Township)          88th Avenue to 80th Avenue (1 mile)                                           45    02-166                                     4-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Pauling Road (Green Garden Township)          80th Avenue to Harlem Avenue (1 mile)                                         45    02-167                                     4-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
Pauling Road (Green Garden Township)          From 104th Avenue to Center Road (County Highway 19) (1.01 miles)             mph   05-481                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2005
Pauling Road - Zone 594 (Green Garden                                                                                       50                                               10-
Township)                                     From U.S. Route 45 to 104th Avenue (1.00 mile)                                mph   21-338                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2021
Pauling-Goodenow Road (County Highway 23)     State Route 50 to Will Center Road (1.38 miles)                               40    02-13                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Pebble Lane - Zone 385 (Frankfort Township)   From Hunter Drive to White Fence Court (0.13 mile)                            25    10-186                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Pecan Place - Zone 397 (Frankfort Township)   From Rainford Drive to Auburn Lane (0.17 mile)                                25    10-198                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Pembroke Avenue - Zone 528 (New Lenox         From US Route 30 to Washington Street (0.24 mile)                             25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Pennington Lane (Green Garden Township)       Devonshire Lane to east end (0.26 mile)                                       mph   04-505                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Peotone-                                      From 420 feet west of center line of TR 360 to C.M. Street P. and P.R.R.           1969, p. 561; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 203     
Wilmington Road (County Highway 25)           crossing
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Peppermill Trail - Zone 567 (Homer Township)  From 163rd Street to Pantigo Lane (0.36 mile)                                 mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Pine Avenue - Zone 410 (Frankfort Township)   From Hickory Street to Oak                                                    25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Pine Grove Drive (Homer Township)             Goden Oak Drive to Mulraney Drive                                             25    95-159                                     7-24-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
Pine Hill Drive - Zone 450 (Frankfort         From 80th Avenue to Mallory Drive                                             25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Pine Hill Road (Frankfort Township)           80th Avenue to St. Francis Road                                               25    04-15                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Pioneer Place - Zone 676 (New Lenox Township) From Pottawatomie Lane east to East Circle Drive (0.16 miles)                 25    23-308                                     9-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
Plainfield-Naperville Road (County Highway                                                                                  50                                               12-
14)                                           127th Street to 0.60 miles north of 127th Street (0.60 miles)                 mph   19-366                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2019
Plum Valley Drive (Crete Twp)                 Richton Road to Old Post Road (0.62 mile)                                     25    96-12                                      1-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1996
Poplar Street - Zone 415 (Frankfort Township) From Beechnut Drive to Willow Lane                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Pottawatomie Lane - Zone 675 (New Lenox       From Indian Mound Drive east to East Circle Drive (0.34 miles)                25    23-308                                     9-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2023
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Prairie Estates Drive (Manhattan Township)    Sauk Drive to west dead end (0.24 mile)                                       mph   06-534                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
Prairie Street (New Lenox Township)           From Joliet Highway to State Highway (0.50 mile)                              25    10-09                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Prestwick Drive                               Harlem Avenue West to Prestwick Country Club                                  35    1969, p. 912; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 285     
                                                                                                                            mph
Quail Circle - Zone 387 (Frankfort Township)  From Hunter Drive to Grand Prairie Lane (0.06 mile)                           25    10-188                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Rachel Drive (New Lenox Township)             Debbie Lane to Elizabeth Lane (0.23 mile)                                     25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Rainford Drive - Zone 396 (Frankfort          From 84th Avenue to Brickstone Drive (0.29 mile)                              25    10-197                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Rainford Drive - Zone 460 (Frankfort          From 84th Avenue to Brickstone Drive                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Rathje Road (Peotone Township)                N. Peotone Road to Corning Road (0.61 mile)                                   45    92-70                                      4-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1992
Raymond Drive (Jackson Township)              Eaton Avenue to Keith Allen Drive (0.24 mile)                                 25    99-23                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Raymond Street - Zone 600 (Plainfield         From Fiday Road to Tyler Drive (0.21 miles)                                   25    22-122                                     5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Redwood Lane - Zone 418 (Frankfort Township)  From Sycamore Street to the dead end                                          25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Regan Road (New Lennox Township)              Parker Road to Francis Road                                                   35    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Regent Street (New Lenox Township)            From Spencer Road to Princeton Lane (0.52 mile)                               mph   09-334                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Regents Road - Zone 570 (Homer Township)      From 163rd Street to Chancellor Drive (0.17 mile)                             mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Renwick Road (County Highway 36)              From Gaylord Road to County Highway 88 (Webber Road) (1.09 miles)             50    06-97                                      3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Renwick Road (County Highway 36)              From County Highway 88 (Webber Road) to Borio Drive (0.38 mile)               50    06-98                                      3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Renwick Road - Zone 549 (County Highway 36)   From U.S. Route 30 to Old Renwick Trail (1.89 miles)                          50    16-96                                      4-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2016
Renwick Road (Plainfield Township) - Zone 673 From County Line Road east to the former intersection with Indian Boundary    45    23-220                                     7-19-
                                              Road. (0.85 miles)                                                            mph                                              2023
Rest Haven Subdivision (various streets)                                                                                    25                                               10-
(Wesley Township)                             Various                                                                       mph   20-363                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2020
Richton Road (Crete Township)                 Plum Valley Drive to I-394 (1.488 miles)                                      40    89-203                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Rickerman Road - Zone 560 (Homer Township)    From 144th Place to 147th Place (0.21 mile)                                   mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
                                                                                                                            45                                               10-
Ridge Road (Jackson Township)                 From Spangler Road to CH 17 (Manhattan Arsenal Road) (0.50 miles)             mph   12-323                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2012
Ridgefield Drive (Crete Township)             S. Klemme Road to 450 feet east of S. Cambridge Drive (0.20 mile)             25    12-152                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
River Road (Troy Township)                    2,819 feet south of County Farm Road to Mound Road                            35    Hwy. Res. 87-121                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
River Road (Troy Township)                    County Farm Road to 1,194 feet south                                          35    Hwy. Res. 87-120                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
River Road (Troy Township)                    Mound Road to 5,222 feet south                                                45    Hwy. Res. 87-119                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
River Road                                    From Plainfield city limits south to Frazer Road                              35    Hwy. Res. No. 2                            3-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1984
Roberts Road (New Lenox Township)             From Joliet Highway to U.S. Route 30 (0.49 mile)                              25    10-11                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
                                                                                                                            30                                               12-
Roberts Ridge Road (Monee Township)           From Egyptian Trail to Will Center Road (1.11 miles)                          mph   95-288                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             1995
Romeo-Naperville Road (County Highway 11,     From west line of U.S. Route Alternate 66, and extending northwest to         40    1966, pp. 670—671; Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p.  
sec. 58-2Q MFT)                               intersection of Romeo-Naperville with Hudson Avenue (approx. 0.90 mile)       mph   219
Romeo Road                                    Route 66A, now Route 53, to High Road, the eastern city limits of Romeoville  40    1967, p. 215; Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 292     
                                                                                                                            mph
Rose Lane - Zone 517 (Frankfort Township)     From 187th Street to Josephine Drive (0.18 mile)                              25    15-14                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Rosewood Drive (Frankfort Township)           From Evergreen Drive to Wintergreen Drive                                     25    04-19                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Rosewood Lane - Zone 408 (Frankfort Township) From Beechnut Drive to Hickory Street                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Rosewood Street (Wesley Township)             From West North Drive Elmwood Avenue (0.25 mile)                              25    07-322                                     8-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2007
Rowell Avenue                                 U.S. Route 52 to Eunice Avenue (0.48 mile)                                    40    03-77                                      2-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2003
                                                                                                                            30                                               12-
Rowell Avenue (Joliet Township)               U.S. Route 52 to Sugar Creek Drive (0.25 miles)                               mph   19-367                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             2019
S. Royal Crest Drive (Crete Township)         E. Royal Ridge Drive to Royal Crest Court (0.13 mile)                         25    12-155                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
E. Royal Ridge Drive (Crete Township)         S. Victoria Lane to 740 feet east of S. Royal Crest Drive (0.38 mile)         25    12-154                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
Royce Road (DuPage Township)                  Sewage treatment property line (township limit) to Commonwealth Edison        45    90-8                                       1-18-
                                              easement (township limit) 1.3 miles                                           mph                                              1990
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Ruth Drive (New Lenox Township)               From Florence Road to U.S. Route 6 (0.33 mile)                                mph   09-340                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Ryeland Drive - Zone 402 (Frankfort Township) From Old Mill Road to 80th Avenue (0.15 mile)                                 25    10-203                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Ryeland Drive - Zone 465 (Frankfort Township) From Old Mill Drive to 80th Avenue                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Sara Road - Zone 518 (Frankfort Township)     From 187th Street to Stephanie Lane (0.44 mile)                               25    15-14                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Sauk Drive (Manhattan Township)               From Delaney Road to dead end (0.30 mile)                                     mph   06-531                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
Schilinger Drive (Wheatland Township)         Book Road to 103rd Street                                                     25    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
                                                                                                                            40                                               11-
Schoolhouse Road (Manhattan Township)         Baker Road to 0.5 mile south of Baker Road (0.50 mile)                        mph   98-335                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
Schoolhouse Road (Manhattan Township)         Delaney Road to Baker Road (1 mile)                                           mph   98-336                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
Schoolhouse Road (New Lenox Township)         Laraway Road to Delaney Road                                                  45    Hwy. Res. 87-126                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Schoolhouse Road (New Lenox Township)         U.S. Route 30 to Laraway Road                                                 45    Hwy. Res. 87-125                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Schweitzer Road (Jackson Township)            Brandon Road to S.P.C.S.L. railroad tracks (0.27 mile)                        35    04-271                                     7-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Seil Road (Troy Township)                     I-55 Frontage Road west to Raven Road                                         35    Hwy. Res. 87-117                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Sharp Road (Jackson Township)                 Brandon Road to State Route 53                                                40    99-27                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Sharp Road (Jackson Township)                 State Route 53 to Bridge Road (0.50 mile)                                     35    08-320                                     8-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2008
Silo Drive - Zone 394 (Frankfort Township)    From Green Meadow Lane to Ivy Path (0.10 mile)                                25    10-195                                     6-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Sioux Court (Manhattan Township)              From Sauk Drive to dead end (0.16 mile)                                       mph   06-533                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             2006
Skye Drive - Zone 426 (Frankfort Township)    From Gray Lane to Edinburgh Lane                                              25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Smith Road - Zone 559 (Homer Township)        From Archer Ave./IL- 171 to 147th Place (0.16 mile)                           mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Somerset Court (New Lenox Township)           From Joliet Highway to Somerset Place (0.35 mile)                             mph   09-332                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Somerset Street (New Lenox Township)          From Somerset Place to Spencer Road (0.44 mile)                               mph   09-333                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Souk Trail (County Highway 47)                Center Road to west line of E.J. and E.R.R. right-of-way                      45    1969, p. 229; Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 119     
                                                                                                                            mph
South Bell Road (Homer Township)              Hadley Road to State Route 7 (1.35 miles)                                     45    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
South Briggs Street (County Highway 54)       Mills Road south to U.S. Route 52                                             40    Hwy. Res. No. 2                            7-23-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1980
                                                                                                                            40                                               12-
South Cedar Road (County Highway 4)           Spencer Road south for 0.80 mile                                              mph   86-163                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
South Michael Drive (Plainfield Township)     Airport Road to Helen Drive (0.44 mile)                                       25    06-347                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Spector Road - Zone 609 (New Lenox Township)  From northerly dead end to Francis Road (CH 64) for 0.20 miles.               25    23-18                                      1-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
Spencer Road (New Lenox Township)             Laraway Road to 2640 L.F. south (0.50 mile)                                   40    02-16                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
                                              From County Highway 52 (Gougar Road) to 0.5 mile east of County Highway 52    45                                               10-
Spencer Road W. (New Lenox Township)          (Gougar Road) (0.50 mile)                                                     mph   07-405                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2007
Spencer Road (New Lenox Township)             U.S. Route 30 to 4,070 feet south of Illinois Highway                         35    Hwy. Res. 87-124                           9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
Spruce Drive - Zone 458 (Frankfort Township)  From Rosewood Drive to Evergreen Drive                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
St. Francis Road (Frankfort Township)         U.S. Route 45 east to 80th Avenue                                             45    93-100                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
St. Francis Road (Frankfort Township)         80th Avenue east to Harlem Avenue                                             45    Sup. Rec. Bk.  , p. 317                  7-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1975
St. Francis Road (Frankfort Township          1,000 feet east of 80th Avenue east 3,960 feet                                40    Hwy. Res. No. 1                            3-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
St. Francis Road (Frankfort Township)         80th Avenue to Frankfort Square Road (0.52 mile)                              30    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Star Lite Drive - Zone 531 (New Lenox         From Sunset Lane to Washington Street (0.20 mile)                             25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Stanton Lane (Crete Township)                 Linden Lane to Melrose Lane (0.22 mile)                                       25    99-310                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
State Line Road (Crete Township)              Bemes Road to Exchange (1.97 miles)                                           40    99-105                                     1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
State Street (Homer Township)                 Will County line to 143rd Street (0.99 mile)                                  45    89-82                                      5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
Steger Road (Frankfort Township)              U.S. Route 45 to Center Road (1.81 miles)                                     mph   98-347                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
Steger Road (Green Garden Township            80th Avenue (north) to east township line (0.50 mile)                         mph   95-288                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             1995
Steger Road (Frankfort Township)              0.27 mile east of U.S. Route 45 to 0.40 mile west of Center Road (1.14 miles) 45    02-17                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Steger Road (Frankfort Township)              Townline Road to U.S. Route 45 (1.23 miles)                                   50    02-14                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Stephanie Lane - Zone 519 (Frankfort          From Sara Road to township/village limit (0.30 mile)                          25    15-14                                      1-15-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Sterling Drive - Zone 473 (Frankfort          From Graceland Lane to Frankfort Square Road                                  25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Stoney Island Ave (Crete Township)            Bemes Road to 9205 L.F. north (1.74 miles)                                    45    02-15                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
Stoney Island Ave (Crete Township)            Bemes Road to Goodenow Road (1 mile)                                          50    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Stoney Island Ave (Crete Township)            Goodenow Road to Offner Road (0.5 mile)                                       35    97-129                                     6-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Strip Mine Road (County Highway 29)           From State 129 to State 53 (1.55 miles)                                       50    01-254                                     6-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2001
                                                                                                                            50                                               10-
Strip Mine Road (Wilmington Township)         From S. Frontage Road to Washington Street (1.0 miles)                        mph   Ord. 13-277                                17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
Stuenkel Road (Green Garden Township)         Center Road (County Highway 19) to 88th Avenue (1.01 miles)                   mph   04-501                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
Stuenkel Road - Zone 166 (Green Garden        Center Road to 104th Street; length 1.01 mile                                 35    92-8                                       1-16-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              1992
                                                                                                                            40                                               11-
Stuenkel Road (Green Garden Township)         88th Avenue to 80th Avenue (1 mile)                                           mph   98-345                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
Stuenkel Road - Zone 608 (Green Garden        From 80th Avenue to Harlem Avenue (1.00 mile)                                 50    23-17                                      1-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2023
Suffolk Lane - Zone 525 (New Lenox Township)  From Cherry Hill Road to Dougal Road (0.42 mile)                              25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              15
Sunset Lane - Zone 532 (New Lenox Township)   From Washington Street to dead end (0.10 mile)                                25    Ord. 15-149                                5-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              15
Sweedler Road (Manhattan Township)            Cherry Hill Road to 3,000 feet east (0.57 mile)                               45    95-56                                      3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1995
Sycamore Drive - Zone 452 (Frankfort          From Thorndale Drive to Magnolia Drive                                        25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Sycamore Street - Zone 419 (Frankfort         From Willow Lane to the dead end                                              25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               12-
Tameling Drive (Homer Township)               From Smith Road to IL Route 171 (Archer Avenue) (0.40 mile)                   mph   Ord. 15-370                                17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2015
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Tammy Drive (New Lenox Township)              From Timothy Lane to Timothy Lane (0.23 mile)                                 mph   09-337                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Tara Street - Zone 602 (New Lenox Township)   From Hermitage Drive to Bellechase Drive                                      25    22-235                                     8-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2022
Tartan Road - Zone 432 (Frankfort Township)   From Benton Drive to Skye Drive                                               25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Terry Ellen Lane - Zone 573 (New Lenox        From Elm Drive to Old Cedar Road (0.27 mile)                                  25    Ord. 19-156                                6-20-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2019
Thomas Court (Plainfield Township)            S. Michael Drive to Francis Court (0.27 mile)                                 25    06-349                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2006
Thistle Lane - Zone 427 (Frankfort Township)  From Lakeside Drive to Braema Lane                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Thorndale Drive - Zone 451 (Frankfort         From Pine Hill Road to Sycamore Drive                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Thornton Street (County Highway 68)           Madison Street east to State Route 7                                          35    Hwy. Res. No. 2                            4-22-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1982
Timber Mill Drive - Zone 405 (Frankfort       From North Avenue to Harvest Drive (0.43 mile)                                25    10-206                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Timber Mill Drive - Zone 468 (Frankfort       From North Avenue to Harvest Drive                                            25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
Timothy Lane (New Lenox Township)             From Parker Road to U.S. Route 6 (0.30 mile)                                  mph   09-338                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2009
Torrence Avenue (Crete Township)              Richton Road to Steger Road (0.94 mile)                                       45    93-68                                      3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Towline Road (Frankfort Township)             187th Street to Virginia Parkway                                              25    04-14                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
S. Victoria Lane (Crete Township)             E. Ridgefield Drive to E. Royal Ridge Drive (0.19 mile)                       25    12-153                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
Virginia Lane (New Lenox Township)            From township limit to 185th Street (0.27 mile)                               25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
Virginia Parkway - Zone 520 (Frankfort        From Townline Road to Sara Road (0.09 mile)                                   25    15-14                                      1-15-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2015
Volbrecht Road (Crete Township)               Richton Road to Steger Road (0.86 mile)                                       35    99-104                                     3-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
Volbrecht Road (Crete Township)               Steger Road to Richton Road (0.86 mile)                                       45    93-114                                     5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Von Esch Road (Plainfield Township)           Caton Road to Prieboy Avenue (0.52 mile)                                      25    07-204                                     5-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2007
W. Feeney Drive - Zone 488 (Plainfield        From S. Howard Street to Lily Cache Road (0.51 mile)                          25mph 11-274                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                                                                    2011
W. Grinton Street - Zone 489 (Plainfield      From S. Howard Street to Lily Cache Road (0.42 mile)                          25    11-275                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Walnut Street - Zone 417 (Frankfort Township) From Willow Lane to the dead end                                              25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2011
Wagner Road (Wheatland Township)              Book Road to McGrath Lane                                                     25    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Weber Road (County Highway 88)                U.S. Route 30 north to 640 feet north of Canton Farm Road                     35    Hwy. Res. No. 3                            1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1985
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
Western Avenue (Washington Township)          Eagle Lake Road to Offner Road (1 mile)                                       mph   98-340                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
Westport Drive - Zone 454 (Frankfort          From W Lismore Circle to Magnolia Drive                                       25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Wheatfield Drive (Frankfort Township)         Harvest Drive (west) to Harvest Drive (east)                                  25    04-23                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
White Fence Court - Zone 388 (Frankfort       From St. Francis Road to Wishing Well Drive (0.32 mile)                       25    10-189                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Whitehall Road - Zone 601 (New Lenox          From Laraway Road to Tara Street                                              25    22-235                                     8-18-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2022
Will Road - Zone 574 (Wilmington Township)    From Blodgett Road to Willow Lane (0.58 mile)                                 45    Ord. 19-157                                6-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2019
Will Road - Zone 575 (Wilmington Township)    From Lorenzo Road to 1.0 miles north of Lorenzo Road (1.0 mile)               50    Ord. 19-158                                6-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2019
Will-Center Road (County Highway 10)          Crete-Monroe Road to 2,640 feet south (0.50 mile)                             45    92-70                                      4-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1992
Williams Street (New Lenox Township)          From Joliet Highway to U.S. Route 30 (0.49 mile)                              25    10-10                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2010
Willow Lane (Frankfort Township)              Route 45 to Catulpa Drive                                                     25    04-17                                      1-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
Wilmington-Peotone Road (County Highway 25)   State Route 50 to 420 feet west of 88th Avenue                                35    Hwy. Res. No. 3                            1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
Wilmington-Peotone Road (County Highway 25,   Pt. near C.M. Street P. and P.R.R., and extending east to pt. near U.S. Route 50    1965, p. 718; Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 19      
Sec. 114-Q MFT)                               54 (approx. 0.9 mile)                                                         mph
Windmill Drive - Zone 391 (Frankfort          From Green Meadow Lane to White Fence Court (0.12 mile)                       25    10-192                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
Windmill Drive - Zone 566 (Homer Township)    From 159th Street to Wheatstone Drive (0.32 mile)                             mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
Windsor Avenue (Crete Township)               State Route 1 to Winston Lane                                                 25    98-215                                     8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Winston Lane (Crete Township)                 Windsor Avenue to Kent Avenue                                                 25    98-215                                     8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
Wintergreen Drive - Zone 457 (Frankfort       From Rosewood Drive to Pine Hill Road                                         25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Wishing Well Drive - Zone 392 (Frankfort      From White Fence Court to Green Meadow Lane (0.12 mile)                       25    10-193                                     6-17-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2010
Wolf’s Crossing Road - Zone 593 (Wheatland                                                                                40                                               12-
Township)                                     From Soccer Drive to Normantown Road (0.65 mile)                              mph   20-491                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2020
Woodlawn Avenue (Crete Township)              Bemes Road to Goodenow Road                                                   40    09-279                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2009
Woodlawn Drive - Zone 479 (Frankfort          From Acorn Ridge Drive to Hickory Creek Drive                                 25    Ord. 11-174                                5-19-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              2011
Woodlawn Road (Crete Township)                Bemis Road to Paulus Road (County Highway 23) (1 mile)                        45    04-334                                     8-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2004
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
Yates Avenue (Washington Township)            Eagle Lake Road to Offner Road (1 mile)                                       mph   98-341                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                            45                                               11-
Yates Avenue (Washington Township)            0.59 mile south of Eagle Lake Road to Eagle Lake Road                         mph   98-348                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
80th Avenue (Frankfort Avenue)                North Avenue to St. Francis Road (0.53 mile)                                  30    99-26                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
80th Avenue (County Highway 83)               191st Street to 183rd Street                                                  45    97-78                                      4-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
80th Avenue (Frankfort Township)              St. Francis Road to Frankfort Square Road (0.90 mile)                         45    93-100                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
80th Avenue (Frankfort Township)              St. Francis Road to Pine Hill Road (0.54 mile)                                35    99-20                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
80th Avenue (Green Garden Township)           Steger Road to Stuenkel Road                                                  50    09-276                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2009
80th Avenue (Green Garden Township)           Stuenkel Road to Dralle Road                                                  50    09-277                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2009
80th Avenue (Green Garden Township)           Dralle Road to County Highway 6 (Manhattan- Monee Road)                       45    09-278                                     9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2009
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
80th Avenue (Green Garden Township)           Stuenkel Road to Steger Road (0.99 mile)                                      mph   98-343                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
88th Street                                   Plainfield-Naperville Road (County Highway 14) west 1 mile                    40    Sup. Rec. Bk. 241, p. 420                  1973
                                                                                                                            mph
88th Avenue - Zone 164 (Green Garden          Manhattan-Monee Road to Dralle Road; length 1 mile                            45    92-8                                       1-16-
Township)                                                                                                                   mph                                              1992
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
88th Avenue (Green Garden Township)           Stuenkel Road to Dralle Road (1 mile)                                         mph   04-500                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
88th Avenue (Green Garden Township)           Stuenkel Road to Steger Road (1 mile)                                         mph   98-343                                     19-
                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                            25                                               10-
93rd Avenue (Frankfort Township)              Franklin Avenue to U.S. Route 30 (.25 miles)                                  mph   Ord. 13-276                                17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2013
95th Street (Wheatland Township)              Haggs Road east to Normantown Road                                            50    87-95                                      8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
95th Street (Wheatland Township)              Naperville Road east to Township limit                                        45    87-96                                      8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
95th Street (Wheatland Township)              Normantown Road east to 248th Street                                          35    87-97                                      8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
103rd Street (Wheatland Township)             Book Road to 2,745 feet west                                                  40    87-99                                      8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
103rd Street (Wheatland Township)             State Route 59 to 6,655 feet west                                             30    87-100                                     8-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1987
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
111th Street (Wheatland Township)             State Route 59 to 3,015 feet west (0.57 mile)                                 mph   95-288                                     21-
                                                                                                                                                                             1995
114th Avenue (Frankfort Township)             197th Street to Front Street                                                  25    12-246                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
115th Avenue (Frankfort Township)             197th Street to Francis Road                                                  25    12-246                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
119th Street (Wheatland Township)             State Route 59 to 0.49 mile east (0.49 mile)                                  35    99-29                                      1-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
119th Street (Wheatland Township)             From 0.49 miles east of State Route 59 to 0.24 miles east of Book Road (0.74  50    15-13                                      1-15-
                                              miles)                                                                        mph                                              2015
127th Street (Wheatland Township)             Kendall-Will Co. Line to Heggs Road (0.39 mile)                               45    02-18                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
127th Street (Wheatland Township)             1,855 feet east of State Route 59 to 3,975 feet east of State Route 59 (0.19  45    14-118                                     5-15-
                                              miles)                                                                        mph                                              2014
127th Street (Wheatland Township)             State Route 59 to 985 feet east of State Route 59 (0.19 miles)                45    14-117                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2014
                                                                                                                            45                                               12-
135th Street (County Highway 35)              High Road east to Smith Road                                                  mph   Res. 86-167                                18-
                                                                                                                                                                             1986
135th Street (Lockport Township)              From Romeoville corporation limits to Weber Road                              50    Res. 94-105                                4-21-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1994
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
136th Avenue - Zone 561 (Homer Township)      From 144th Place to 147th Place (0.21 mile)                                   mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
139th Street (Homer Township)                 State Street to King Road (0.922 mile)                                        30    89-105                                     6-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
143rd Street (Lockport Township)              High Road to Smith Road (0.98 mile)                                           40    93-100                                     4-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1993
                                                                                                                            50                                               11-
143rd Street (Plainfield Township)            From State Route 126 to I-55 Frontage Road (1.05 miles)                       mph   05-480                                     17-
                                                                                                                                                                             2005
143rd Street (County Highway 37) - Zone 669   From Cedar Road to Parker Road (0.99 miles)                                   45    23-151                                     5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
143rd Street (County Highway 37) - Zone 670   From Parker Road to Golden Oak Drive (0.49 miles)                             40    23-151                                     5-18-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2023
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
144th Place - Zone 562 (Homer Township)       From cul-de-sac to 136th Avenue (0.40 mile)                                   mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
145th Place - Zone 563 (Homer Township)       From Smith Road to 136th Avenue (0.47 mile)                                   mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
146th Place - Zone 564 (Homer Township)       From Smith Road to 136th Avenue (0.47 mile)                                   mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
                                                                                                                            25                                               11-
147th Place - Zone 565 (Homer Township)       From Smith Road to 136th Avenue (0.47 mile)                                   mph   18-325                                     15-
                                                                                                                                                                             2018
147th Street (Homer Township)                 Creme Road to Lemont Road                                                     35    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
151st Street (Homer Township)                 Bill Road to Will-Cook Road (1.01 miles)                                      45    95-56                                      3-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1995
151st Street (Homer Township)                 Gougar Road to Cedar Road (1.479 miles)                                       45    89-203                                     8-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1989
151st Street (Homer Township)                 Parker Road to Bell Road                                                      45    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
151st Street (Homer Township)                 Bell Road to Will-Cook Road (1.01 miles)                                      40    99-192                                     5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
151st Street (Homer Township)                 0.55 mile east of Parker Road to Bell Road (0.45 mile)                        40    99-193                                     5-20-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1999
163rd Street - Zone 167 (Homer Township)      Cedar Road to 4,474 feet west; length 0.85 mile                               40    92-8                                       1-16-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1992
                                                                                                                            40                                               12-
163rd Street (Homer Township)                 Cedar Road to Evergreen Drive                                                 mph   03-568                                     18-
                                                                                                                                                                             2003
167th Street (Homer Township)                 Cedar Road to Parker Road                                                     45    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
167th Street (Homer Township)                 Parker Road to S. Bell Road                                                   40    97-101                                     5-15-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              1997
184th Place (New Lenox Township)              Parker Road to township limit (0.51 mile)                                     25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
185th Street (New Lenox Township)             Township limit to dead end (0.25 mile)                                        25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
185th Street (New Lenox Township)             Parker Road to Christine Court (0.31 mile)                                    25    Ord. 15-251                                9-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2015
191st Street (Frankfort Township)             Wolf Road to Creekside Lane                                                   25    12-246                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
192nd Street (Frankfort Township)             Wolf Road to 116th Avenue                                                     25    12-246                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
193rd Street (Frankfort Township)             Wolf Road to 116th Avenue                                                     25    12-246                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
194th Street (Frankfort Township)             Wolf Road to Yorkshire Drive                                                  25    12-246                                     7-19-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2012
248th Avenue (Wheatland Township)             2,600 linear feet north of 111st Street to 103rd Street (0.50 mile)           50    02-19                                      1-17-
                                                                                                                            mph                                              2002
 
(1980 Code, Ch. 72, Sch. II)
Cross-reference:
   Change of road names, see
TSO Table II
SCHEDULE III. TRUCK ROUTES.
   The following highways in the county highway system are designated Class II
truck routes as adopted by the State Department of Transportation:
 
Highway or Street            Limits of Route                Res. No. Date
Arsenal-Manhattan Road       From Interstate Route 55 to    89-26    2-16-1989
(County Highway 17)          Millsdale Road
Laraway Road (County Highway From Illinois Route 53 west to
74)                          Brandon Road (County Highway   89-26    2-16-1989
                             42)
143rd Street (County Highway From Illinois Route 59 west to 92-31    2-20-1992
76)                          U.S. Route 30
 
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking areas
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Parking prohibited. All parking will be prohibited on the following
described areas. Signs giving notice of no parking areas shall be erected.
Highway or Street Between Side Times Reso. No. Date
Highway or      Between         Side Times           Reso. No.      Date
Street
                Junction with
County Highway  eastern set of
6 (Manhattan-   I-57 ramps and  Both All             90-246         11-15-1990
Monee Road)     a point 1,000
                ft. east
County Highway  151st Street
16 (Bell Road)  and Woodland    Both All             —            —
                Drive
County Highway  Adjacent to the
21 (Crete-Monee Monee           Both 9:00 a.m. to 4: 95-13          1-19-1995
Road)           Elementary           00 p.m.
                school property
County Highway  Illinois Route
25 (Wilmington- 53 and a point  Both All             22-283         9-15-2022
Peotone Road)   1,675 feet to
                the east
County Highway  Patterson Road                       Hwy. Reso. No.
42 (Brandon     and Zurich Road Both All             3              9-20-1984
Road)
County Highway  Washington                           Hwy. Reso. No.
54 (South       Street and      West All             86-40          3-20-1986
Briggs Street)  Third Avenue
                Fifth Avenue
County Highway  and junction                         Hwy. Reso. No.
54 (South       with southern   East All             86-41          3-20-1986
Briggs Street)  set of I-80
                ramps
                Junction with
County Highway  southern set of
54 (South       I-80 ramps and  Both All             90-79          4-19-1990
Briggs Street)  a point 600 ft.
                south
County Highway  Copperfield
62 (North       Avenue and a    West All             06-436         10-19-2006
Briggs Street)  point 500 ft.
                to the north
                A point 600 ft.
County Highway  north of
62 (North       Rosalind Avenue Both All             —            —
Briggs Street)  & a point 300
                ft. south of
                Rosalind Avenue
County Highway  Center Road and
74 (Laraway     a point 500     Both All             95-159         7-24-1996
Road)           feet to the
                east
                Valley Drive
County Highway  and a point     Both All             89-79          5-18-1989
77 (Bluff Road) 1,200 feet to
                the east
County Highway  Division Street Both All             06-386         9-21-2006
88 (Weber Road) and Root Street
 
   (B)   Penalty. For violations of this chapter, the penalty and
administrative fees provisions of § 
74.99 shall apply.
(1980 Code, Ch. 73, Sch. I) (Ord. 19-185, passed 7-18-2019; Ord. 23-88, passed
3-16-2023)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
74.01   County parking regulations
   
74.02   Unattended motor vehicles
   
74.03   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
   
74.04   Parking in alleys; unloading and loading only
   
74.05   Stopping, standing or parking outside of business or residence district
   
74.06   Additional parking regulations
   
74.07   Passenger loading zones
   
74.08   Obstructions to traffic unlawful
   
74.09   Parking in excess of designated time limit
   
74.10   Cab stands; bus stands
   
74.11   Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for handicapped persons
   
74.12   Handicapped persons: signs and size of parking spaces
   
74.13   Handicapped persons: parking privileges; exemptions
   
74.14   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
   
74.15   Pedestrians walking on highways
   
74.16   Signs posted for limited or prohibited parking
   
74.17   Lessors or visitor vehicles; duty upon receiving notice of violation of
this chapter or local parking regulations
   
74.18   Prima facie evidence of registered owner
   
74.19   Issuance of citation
 
   
74.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see §§
70.25,
70.26
   Towing or removal of illegally parked vehicles, see §
70.04
§ 74.01 COUNTY PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The County Board shall have the authority to regulate parking on any
county-owned property.
   (B)   Parking is prohibited in county-owned or operated parking facilities
where designated as not permitting the parking of unauthorized vehicles.
   (C)   At least one sign, with a warning to the effect that cars parked in
areas designated as no- parking areas or areas in which only authorized
vehicles are allowed by signs or markings in the parking lot, shall be erected
near the entrance to each lot in such manner that motorists entering the lot to
park a motor vehicle will have to pass by the warning sign at least once before
parking their motor vehicle. Additional signs may be erected in the interior of
the facilities.
   (D)   The Sheriff’s Department, at county-owned or operated parking
facilities, is authorized to cause to be removed from the facilities by a
reputable towing service in the county, any cars parked in violation of this
section. In addition, duly authorized personnel of the county may place a
summons on vehicles for violations of this section.
   (E)   Vehicles impounded pursuant to this section shall not be released
until all charges or penalties owing to the county have been paid and the
towing service has verification of payment from the Sheriff's Department. The
towing service may levy its usual charges for towing and storage against the
impounded vehicles and may refuse to release the vehicle until payment is
received.
   (F)   Towing services requested to remove illegally parked vehicles from
county parking facilities shall take possession of the vehicles and safely keep
them until claimed by the owner or other person legally entitled to possession
of the vehicle, or until disposed of by law.
   (G)   The county shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any
action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, other legal
representative, or by any person as a result of the towing and storage of a
vehicle impounded under this section.
(1980 Code, § 74.01) (Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 74.02 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key from the ignition, and when standing upon any perceptible grade,
turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(1980 Code, § 74.02) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see §§ 70.15, 70.16
§ 74.03 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway; or
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance (when properly sign-posted); or
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
         (g)   Within any area designated for pedestrian walkways.
         (h)   In or on a fire lane as designed by official sign or pavement
marking. The term “fire lane” shall mean an area in a parking lot or facility
or on a public street or alley where no standing, idling or parking of a motor
vehicle shall be permitted at any time so firefighting equipment or emergency
rescue or paramedic vehicles may move and park freely on that area.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily, for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
         (b)   Any place where official signs prohibit parking.
      (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
      (C)   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section:
         (1)   Physicians on emergency calls; and
         (2)   Emergency vehicles.
            (a)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, when in pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title.
         (b)   The provision of division (a) above shall not relieve the driver
of an emergency vehicle from the duty to park or stand with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provision protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(1980 Code, § 74.03) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 PARKING IN ALLEYS: UNLOADING AND LOADING ONLY.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for the purpose of
loading and unloading merchandise, and then not in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property.
(1980 Code, § 74.04) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OUTSIDE OF BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.
   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park,
or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle off the roadway,
but in every event an unobstructed width of a highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view
of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
   (B)   The county with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the
maintenance of which it is responsible may place signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where
in its opinion such stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using
the highway or where the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would
unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any such
regulations adopted by the county regarding the stopping, standing, or parking
of vehicles upon any specific street, streets, or highways become effective at
the time of the erection of appropriate signs indicating such regulations. Any
such signs may be erected either by the county or by a local authority with the
approval of the county.
   (C)   This section and §§
74.03 and
74.06 shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the vehicle in such position.
(1980 Code, § 74.05) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.06 ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (B)   Except when otherwise provided by local ordinance, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or
as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with
its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (C)   Local authorities may permit angle parking on any roadway, except that
angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or state highway unless
the county has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (D)   The county with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may place
signs prohibiting, limiting, or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking
of vehicles on any highway where in its opinion such stopping, standing, or
parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement
of traffic thereon. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions indicated by such devices.
(1980 Code, § 74.06) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.07 PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to park a passenger vehicle:
   (A)   For a period of time longer than it is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, in any place designated as a loading zone and marked
as such;
   (B)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance
to any hospital or hotel at any lime;
   (C)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance
to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on a Sunday; or
   (D)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open.
(1980 Code, § 74.07) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.08 OBSTRUCTIONS TO TRAFFIC UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended upon any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel, or any approach thereto, or to leave unattended a
motor vehicle in a public street which is parked in such a manner as to cause
or constitute an obstruction to traffic.
(1980 Code, § 74.08) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.09 PARKING IN EXCESS OF DESIGNATED TIME LIMIT.
   It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of the
amount of time designated by ordinance and so posted.
(1980 Code, § 74.09) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.10 CAB STANDS; BUS STANDS.
   No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area
designated by ordinance and posted as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a
bus shall be parked in a place so designated and posted as a bus loading zone.
(1980 Code, § 74.10) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.11 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (A)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a handicapped person, as defined in §
70.03. pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, 3-616 or 11-1307.2 or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609, as evidence that the vehicle
is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking
place, including any private or public off-street parking facility,
specifically reserved, by the posting of any official sign as designated under
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301 for motor vehicles bearing such registration
plates.
   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the Police or
Sheriff's Department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or
other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for
use by the handicapped which does not display handicapped registration plates
or a special decal or device as required under this section.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section
shall be fined $250 in addition to any costs or charges connected with the
removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section.
   (D)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in division (C)
above for vehicles parked in spaces for the handicapped that do not display the
registration plates pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616; Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1301.2; and Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609.
(1980 Code, § 74.11) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 99-116, adopted 3-18-
1999; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.12 HANDICAPPED PERSONS: SIGNS AND SIZE OF PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Beginning July 1, 1988, all signs erected and used to designate the
reservation of parking facilities for a person with disabilities shall be in a
form and manner prescribed under ILCS Ch. 625 § 11-301, and all parking spaces
reserved for a person with disabilities, except those reserving on-street
parking areas, shall be at least 16 feet wide.
   (B)   Non-conforming signs in use prior to July 1, 1988 shall not constitute
a violation during their useful lives, which shall not be extended by means
other than normal maintenance.
   (C)   Beginning October 1, 1992, all parking spaces reserved for a person
with disabilities, except those reserving on-street parking areas, shall be at
least 16 feet wide. Signs shall be vertically mounted on a post or wall at
front center of the parking space, no more than five feet horizontally from the
front of the parking space and set a minimum of four feet from finished grade
to the bottom of the sign.
   (D)   Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle
parked in the space.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 74.13 HANDICAPPED PERSONS: PARKING PRIVILEGES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a handicapped
person, as defined in §
70.03, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616 or to a disabled veteran
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 or pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1301.2 or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction upon which is
displayed a registration plate or special decal or device issued by the other
jurisdiction designating that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped
person shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and exempt from
any statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking, except
limitations of one-half hour or less, on any street or highway zone, or any
parking lot or parking place which are owned, leased, or owned and leased by a
municipality or municipal parking utility. However, such vehicle shall be
subject to the laws which prohibit parking in no-stopping and no-standing zones
in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and
exits, bus stops, and loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the
motor vehicle institutes a traffic hazard, whereby such motor vehicle shall be
moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location
designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a
special decal or device specified in this section or in ILCS Ch. 625. Act 5, §
3-616 or such devices as local authorities deem proper as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, may
park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically
reserved for such vehicles by the posting of an official sign as provided under
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301. Parking privileges granted by this section are
strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates or
special decal or device were issued and to qualified operators acting under his
express direction while the disabled person is present.
   (B)   Such parking privileges granted by this section are also extended to
motor vehicles or not-for- profit organizations used for the transportation of
handicapped persons when such motor vehicles display the decal or device issued
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2.
   (C)   No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1393 or where an official sign
controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain
hours.
(1980 Code, § 74.12) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 99-116, adopted 3-18-
1999; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.14 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders him a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway except on a
sidewalk.
(1980 Code, § 74.13) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.15 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the left side of the roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the
left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(1980 Code, § 74.14) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.16 SIGNS POSTED FOR LIMITED OR PROHIBITED PARKING.
   Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions.
(1980 Code, § 74.15) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 74.17 LESSORS OR VISITOR VEHICLES; DUTY UPON RECEIVING NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF
THIS CHAPTER OR LOCAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered, pursuant to law and who
leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of
this chapter, or a parking regulation of a local authority involving such
vehicle, shall upon request provide such police officers as have authority of
the offense, and the court having jurisdiction thereof, with a written
statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of such offense and
the identifying number upon the registration plates and registration sticker or
stickers of such vehicle.
(1980 Code, § 74.16) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 74.18 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF REGISTERED OWNER.
   The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the
name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the automobile at the time of such parking.
(1980 Code, § 74.17) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 74.19 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
   (A)   Any Deputy Sheriff of this county shall conspicuously attach to any
vehicle committing or having committed a parking violation a citation on a form
as described in division (B) below, or shall hand said citation directly to the
owner or driver if he or she is present when the citation is written. Such
citation shall advise the owner or operator of the vehicle that he has violated
a provision relating to the parking provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The form of said citation shall contain space to record the make and
model of the violator's vehicle and the vehicle license plate number. The
citation shall also contain the categories of violations, which shall be:
      (1)   General parking violations (as found in §§
74.02 through
74.10). The officer shall indicate which violation is applicable to the
offending vehicle. The fine shall be $35.00, if paid within 14 days of issuance
of the citation.
      (2)   Prohibited parking, handicapped persons (as found in §
74.11). There shall be a $250 fine, in addition to any costs or charges for
removal of the vehicle, if paid within 14 days of the date of issuance of the
citation.
      (3)   Violations (as found in §§
74.14 and
74.15). The officer shall indicate which violation is applicable to the
violator. The fine shall be $50, if paid within 14 days of issuance of the
citation.
   (C)   The citation shall also contain directions as to payment of the fine
within 14 days of issuance of the citation, allowing for payment by mail or at
the Will County Sheriffs Department Office, and shall specify the fine schedule
for the offense charged. The citation shall conspicuously inform the violator
that if the fine is not paid within 14 days of issuance of the citation that
the violation shall be referred to the Administrative Adjudication process. If
the person who has received the citation wishes to contest the charges, then
they shall file the violation notice with the “Request for Hearing” portion
fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked within ten
days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon
receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
   (D)   The form shall be signed, either handwritten or electronic signature
or identification number, by the officer issuing the citation.
(1980 Code, § 74.18) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Ord. 99-116, adopted 3-18-
1999; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   Whenever any motor vehicle is found to be parked in violation of this
chapter with respect to rules prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated
area or according to a designated manner, or with respect to rules restricting
the time a vehicle may be parked in a certain location, the following
provisions for penalties, plus the administrative fee, shall apply:
   (A)   For violations of general parking violations, §§
74.02 through
74.10, and for violations of
Chapter 73, the fine for each offense shall be not less than $35 nor more than
$120; however:
      (1)   If the fine is paid within 14 days after the issuance of the
citation, the fine shall be $35.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid within 14 days after the issuance of the
citation, the violation shall be sent through the administrative adjudication
process.
   (B)   For a violation of §§
74.11, the fine shall be not less than $250, plus all administrative fees.
      (1)   If the fine is paid within 14 days of issuance of the citation, the
fine shall be $250 plus the cost of removal and storage of the vehicle.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid within 14 days after the issuance of the
citation, the violation shall be sent through the administrative adjudication
process.
   (C)   For each violation of §§
74.14 or
74.15, the fine shall not be less than $50 nor more than $100; however:
      (1)   If the fine is paid within 14 days of issuance of the citation, the
fine shall be $50.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid within 14 days of issuance of the citation,
the violation shall be sent through the administrative adjudication process.
(1980 Code, § 74.99) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990; Res. 99-116, adopted 3-18-
1999; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011; Ord. 19-185, passed 7-18-2019)
CHAPTER 75: MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND PEDALCYCLES
Section
Motorcycles
   
75.01   Riding on motorcycles
   
75.02   Seating on motorcycles
   
75.03   Handlebars
Bicycles and Pedalcycles
   
75.15   Application of rules
   
75.16   Riding on bicycles
   
75.17   Clinging to vehicles
   
75.18   Riding on motorized pedalcycles
   
75.19   Position of bicycles and motorized pedalcycles on roadways; riding on
roadways and bicycle paths
   
75.20   Riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles on roadways
   
75.21   Carrying articles
   
75.22   Inspecting bicycles
   
75.23   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
   
75.24   Lamps on motorized pedalcycles
 
   
75.99   Penalty
MOTORCYCLES
§ 75.01 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall neither carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is
designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the
operator.
(1980 Code, § 75.01) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.02 SEATING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
(1980 Code, § 75.02) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.03 HANDLEBARS.
   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher than the
height of the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by
the operator.
(1980 Code, § 75.03) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
BICYCLES AND PEDALCYCLES
§ 75.15 APPLICATION OF RULES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to do any forbidden act or fail to
perform any act required in this subchapter.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(1980 Code, § 75.15) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.16 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a backpack or sling.
(1980 Code, § 75.16) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.17 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(1980 Code, § 75.17) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.18 RIDING ON MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES.
   (A)   The operator of a motorized pedalcycle shall only ride astride the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two persons
to ride thereon at the same time, unless the motorized pedalcycle is designed
to carry two persons; any motorized pedalcycle designed for two persons must be
equipped with a passenger seat and footrests for use of a passenger.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1501 et seq., shall be
applicable to the operation of motorized pedalcycles, except for those
provisions which by their nature can have no application to motorized
pedalcycles.
(1980 Code, § 75.18) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.19 POSITION OF BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES ON ROADWAYS; RIDING ON
ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand
curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction;
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway; or
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards or substandard
width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
For purposes of this division, a SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE means a lane that is
too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to travel safely
side by side within the lane.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way
highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand
curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.
(1980 Code, § 75.19) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.20 RIDING BICYCLES OR MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES ON ROADWAYS.
   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall not
ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for
their exclusive use. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a
single lane subject to the provisions of §
75.19.
(1980 Code, § 75.20) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, §
75.99
§ 75.21 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebars at all times.
(1980 Code, § 75.21) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.22 INSPECTING BICYCLES.
   A uniformed police officer may at any time upon reasonable cause to believe
that a bicycle is unsafe or not equipped as required by law, or that its
equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, require the person riding the
bicycle to stop and submit the bicycle to an inspection and a test with
reference thereto as may be appropriate.
(1980 Code, § 75.22) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.23 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector of a type approved by the county
which shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may
be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   (C)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed
by the county, on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle
during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet and shall be essentially colorless
or red to the rear of the center or the bicycle and essentially colorless of
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle provided. The requirements of
this division may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least three-
sixteenths-inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as
possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the
bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the
front and rear tire or rim. The reflectors shall conform to specifications
prescribed by the county.
   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(1980 Code, § 75.23) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.24 LAMPS ON MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES.
   Every motorized pedalcycle, when in use at night, shall be equipped with a
lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the county which shall be visible from all distances from 100 to
600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low- powered beams of headlamps
on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
(1980 Code, § 75.24) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person guilty of violating §§
75.01 through
75.03 shall be fined not more than $500 for each violation. The offenses may be
satisfied without a court appearance by a written guilty plea and payment of
fines, penalties and costs in accordance with State Supreme Court Rule 529.
   (B)   Every person guilty of violating any section of §§
75.15 through
75.24 shall be fined not more than $500 for each violation. The offenses may be
satisfied without a court appearance by a written guilty plea and payment of
fines, penalties and costs in accordance with State Supreme Court Rule 529.
(1980 Code, § 75.99) (Res. 90-29, adopted 2-15-1990)
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLE REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
   (A)   The county hereby adopts by reference the following provisions of the
ILCS, 625, Act 5, § 1, as it exists on the effective date of this section and
as may be amended after the effective date: Chapter 1 Title and Definitions
Chapter 12 Equipment of Vehicles.
   (B)   No person shall violate any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code
adopted by reference. All citations issued for violations of the Illinois
Vehicle Code that are to be prosecuted by the County of Will or by
administrative adjudication and shall be written in the name of the County of
Will, shall refer to the numbered sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code with
using the prefix “76-” in front of the numbered section from the Illinois
Vehicle Code, and shall designate the violation as an ordinance violation on
the traffic citation, ticket, complaint, or compliance ticket.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found to be in violation of any section of this chapter shall be
fined $45, plus the administrative fee.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
CHAPTER 77: ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR REGULATION VIOLATIONS
Section
   
77.01   Purpose
   
77.02   Administrative composition
   
77.03   Procedure
   
77.04   Administrative hearing
   
77.05   Additional notices
   
77.06   Final determination of liability
   
77.07   Administrative review
   
77.08   Nonresident procedures
   
77.09   Certified report and contesting certified report
   
77.10   Immobilization/towing and impoundment
   
77.11   Judicial review
   
77.12   Debt to county
   
77.13   Judgment
 
   
77.99   Penalty
§ 77.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Scope. The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and
efficient enforcement of county vehicular standing, parking, and condition of
vehicle regulation violation(s) and other county regulation violation(s) as may
be allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication of violation(s) of
county ordinances regulating the standing, parking and condition of vehicles
within the geographic boundaries of this county and a schedule of uniform fines
and penalties and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and
penalties.
   (B)   Definition. For the purposes of this title, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   COMPLIANCE VIOLATION. A violation of a county regulation governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.02 ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking,
and compliance, regulation violation(s) shall provide for a Traffic Compliance
Administrator, Hearing Officer, Computer Operator/System coordinator and
Hearing Room Personnel (deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as
are hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Traffic Compliance Administrator. The Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s).
      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this chapter or as
may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
      (3)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.
      (4)   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s) verifying
that the final determination of standing, parking and compliance regulation
violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with this chapter and ILCS Ch.
625 Act 5, § 11-208.3.
      (5)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth, and those of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5.
      (6)   Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notices of impending
impoundment or validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension, in
an administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter hereinafter set forth.
      (7)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
      (8)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
Circuit Court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of this county in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines
or penalties and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by current
law.
      (9)   To select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and
impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, hereinafter
set forth.
   (B)   Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as
the adjudicator.
      (2)   Administer oaths.
      (3)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant papers or documentation.
      (4)   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s) as are established in §77.99.
      (5)   Make final determination of:
         (a)   Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation
(s) liability.
         (b)   Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
         (c)   Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth.
      (6)   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative
adjudication hearing(s).
   (C)   Support personnel. The system Coordinator/ Computer Operator,
administrative clerk and finance clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative
adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Input of violation notice information.
      (2)   Hearing date(s) and notice dates.
      (3)   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).
      (4)   Issue payment receipts.
      (5)   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of
liability, and notice of impending impoundment and notice of impending driver's
license suspension, as directed by the traffic compliance administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      (6)   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   (D)   Hearing room security. The hearing room security are hereby authorized
and directed to:
      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      (2)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court.
      (3)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or Traffic Compliance Administrator.
   (E)   Compensation. Compensation to be paid for each of the above stated
positions shall be as determined by the County executive and approved by the
Will County Board.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.03 PROCEDURE.
   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking,
and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with the
following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking,
and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of
impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending driver's license
suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in
accordance with the provisions set forth below:
   (A)   Violation notice. Vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) notice(s) (“violation notice”(s)) shall be issued by
the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be
served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set
forth.
   (B)   Authorization. All full time police officers, as well as other
specifically appointed individuals shall have the authority to issue violation
(s) notices.
   (C)   Detection of violations. Any individual authorized hereby to issue
violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any section of any
applicable county ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and
shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
   (D)   Violation notice. The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      (2)   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violated.
      (3)   Vehicle make and state registration number.
      (4)   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
      (5)   The handwritten or electronic signature or identification number of
the person issuing the notice.
      (6)   A section entitled “Request for Hearing” which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
         (a)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, “Request for hearing.”
         (b)   Legibly placing his or her name and current address in the place
provided.
         (c)   Legibly signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         (d)   Filing the violation notice with the “Request for Hearing”
portion fully completed; with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked
within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed
filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
      (7)   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits.
      (8)   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
      (9)   A section entitled, “Non-Resident Request for Hearing - Non-
Appearance”, which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered owner or
lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the violation notice without personally appearing by:
         (a)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, “Non-Resident Request for Hearing - Non-appearance”.
         (b)   Legibly placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.
         (c)   Legibly signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         (d)   Filing the violation notice with the "Non-Resident Request for
Hearing" portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall
be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
         (e)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice
issuance. The request shall be deemed filed, if postmarked by the due dates
herein specified.
         (f)   A clearly marked statement that execution of the nonresident
request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts contained in the
violation(s) notice(s).
   (E)   Service. Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the
person issuing such notice by:
      (1)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked vehicle; or
      (2)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present.
   (F)   Notice certified. The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular
standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) shall be
certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      (1)   Signing his or her name to the notice(s) at the time of service; or
      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his or her control.
   (G)   Record kept. The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s)
shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a record
in the ordinary course of business.
   (H)   Prima facie evidence of correctness. Any violation(s) notice(s)
issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice,
shall be prima facia correct, and shall be prima facia evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
   (I)   Admissibility. The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.04 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits:
   (A)   Right to hearing. Shall be granted to the registered owner or operator
of the cited vehicle, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 or the lessee
of the cited vehicle, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306, incorporated
herein by reference.
   (B)   Date. Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as is set
forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices
issued in accordance with this chapter. Violators shall be given no less than
three opportunities to appear, and failure to appear by the third scheduled
hearing date will result in a final determination of liability as hereinafter
set forth.
   (C)   Recorded. Shall be tape recorded.
   (D)   Decision. Shall culminate in a determination of liability or non-
liability, made by the Hearing Officer, who shall consider testimony and other
evidence without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence.
The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and
penalties in accordance with §
77.99.
   (E)   Representation by attorney. Persons appearing to contest the alleged
standing, parking, or compliance violation on its merit may be represented by
counsel at their own expense.
   (F)   Review. The final determination of any matter which may be decided by
the Hearing Officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.05 ADDITIONAL NOTICES.
   Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the “cited vehicle” to
appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon final
determination of violation liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:
   (A)   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.
   (B)   Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last
known to the lessor of the “cited vehicle” at the time of the lease.
   (C)   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   (D)   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (E)   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), additional notice(s) shall be
sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to the
following information:
         (a)   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).
         (b)   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated.
         (c)   Vehicle make and state registration.
         (d)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         (e)   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current
status, other than paid in full.
         (f)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
         (g)   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified, will result in a final determination of vehicle
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability for the
“cited” violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
         (h)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability for the
failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty
will constitute a debt due and owing the county.
      (2)   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be sent following an
appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to
appear by the violator by the third and final hearing date upon conclusion of
any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth, and the
notice shall contain but not be limited to the following information and
warnings:
         (a)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a
debt due and owing the county.
         (b)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the county within the time specified may result in the county's filing a
complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a
judgment in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, Art. § 11-208.3(f),
incorporated herein by reference.
         (c)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located
within the county may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for
ten or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations.
         (d)   A warning that the person's drivers license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking
violations under ILCS 625, Act 5, Art. § 6-306.5, incorporated herein by
reference.
      (2)   A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license
shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine
or penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violation(s):
         (a)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or
penalty owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the
county notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for
initiation of suspension proceedings under ILCS 625, Act 5, Art. § 6-306.5
incorporated herein by reference.
         (b)   The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Secretary of State.
(Ord. No. 94-16. 8-2-94)
§ 77.06 FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability shall:
   (A)   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth;
or
   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and
final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation(s) on
the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed
notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall become final:
      (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination;
or
      (2)   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.07 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a person owing an
unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and
grounds hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not
later than, 14 days from the date the determination of liability is made.
   (B)   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petition(s)
timely filed and render a decision thereon within 14 days of the date filed.
   (C)   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
      (1)   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) was issued.
      (2)   The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to the
determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.
      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (D)   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic
compliance administrator shall:
      (1)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that
the determination of liability has been set aside.
      (2)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
      (3)   Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the
notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid to the
address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability.
      (4)   Service of the notice(s) shall be complete on the date the notice
(s) is deposited in the United States mail.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.08 NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES.
   Non-residents of this county who have been served vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in accordance with
this chapter, may contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a
resident, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an
administrative hearing by:
   (A)   Completing, in full, the “Non-Resident Request for Hearing” section of
the violation notice, served upon him or her pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Legibly signing the non-resident request for hearing in the space
specified in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his or her personal
appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized
statement filed by him or her and the facts contained in the violation notice.
   (C)   Filing the violation notice with the “Request for Hearing” section
fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked within ten
days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon
receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
   (D)   Filing a notarized a statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice
issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator. The acceptance of a "Non-Resident Request for
Hearing" after the due date or with cause, at the discretion of the Traffic
Compliance Administrator, be accepted for hearing consideration and decision.
   (E)   The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is
contained in the violation notice.
   (F)   Notice of the detenuination of the hearing officer shall be served
upon the nonresident by first class mad, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
   (G)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
   (H)   All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to
nonresidents of this county.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.09 CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT.
   (A)   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the
County after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for
ten or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the traffic compliance
administrator shall make a certified report to the Secretary of State stating
that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty
due and owing the county as a result of tenor more violations of county
vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby cause the suspension of
that person's driver's license.
   (B)   The traffic compliance administrator shall take no further action
unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the county are paid or
upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified
report was in error. At such time, the traffic compliance administrator shall
submit to the Secretary of State a notification which shall result in the
halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The person named therein
shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no
charge.
   (C)   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the office of the traffic compliance
administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:
      (1)   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle so
receiving ten or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices were
issued; or
      (2)   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten or more
violations indicated on the certified report.
      (3)   The traffic compliance administrator shall render a determination
within 14 business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify the
objector of the determination.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.10 IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be
liable for ten or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s), for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be
immobilized or towed and impounded if:
      (1)   The traffic compliance administrator has determined that a person
has been determined to be liable for five or more vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines or penalties for which remain
unpaid.
      (2)   The person determined to be liable for five or more violations is
the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the county geographical
boundaries.
      (3)   A pre-towing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the
motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the county which
contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   A final determination has been made on five or more vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations, the fines and penalties
of which remain unpaid.
         (b)   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
            1.   The vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation notice number.
            2.   Date of issuance.
            3.   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
         (c)   The motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located within the
county is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines
and penalties are not paid within 14 days of the date of the notice.
         (d)   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one notice and
by filing the request for hearing with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
within, but not later than, 14 days of the date of the notice. The request for
hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator.
      (4)   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the
notice, and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
      (5)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to
contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for the unpaid
final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability
listed on the notice, on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall
the hearing be scheduled later than 60 days after the request for hearing is
filed.
      (a)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
      (b)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
      (c)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in
the United States mail.
   (B)   The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section shall have the right to a prompt administrative
hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties
for which final determination has been made.
      (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve a post-towing
notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section which notice shall contain, but not be limited to,
the following information:
         (a)   Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
         (b)   Location of vehicle.
         (c)   That the vehicle was immobilized under this section for
nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of five or more
violations of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation) for which
the registered owner has been determined liable and notified of impending
immobilization or towing and impoundment.
         (d)   Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment.
         (e)   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request
for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the
Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not later than, 14 days of the
date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator.
      (2)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next available hearing
date or sooner if scheduled by the Traffic Compliance Administrator for good
cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60 days
after the request for hearing is filed.
         (a)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
         (b)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
         (c)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed
in the United States mail.
      (3)   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative decision
within the meaning of ILCS Ch. 735 Act 5, Art. §§ 3-101 et seq., incorporated
herein by reference.
   (C)   A vehicle immobilized or impounded pursuant to this section shall be
released to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the
fines and penalties due and owing the county as specified in the notice sent in
accordance with division (A)(3), and upon payment of a fee of $50 for the
installation and removal of an immobilization device, if any, and upon payment
of towing charges and accrued daily impound charges, if any, or upon order of
the hearing officer following the hearing contesting the validity of the
impoundment.
   (D)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall appoint or retain the
services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in
accordance herewith, provided:
      (1)   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to
local and State law.
      (2)   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative decisions issued
after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and impoundment
made under this Section shall be subject to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Law as is set forth in ILCS Ch. 735 Act 5, §§ 3-101 et
seq., incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.12 DEBT TO COUNTY.
   Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under this
chapter and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt
due and owing the county and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the
applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a
standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition
of that violation.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.13 JUDGMENT.
   (A)   The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the expiration
of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for
a final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all
required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect monies from the person(s)
who has been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a
debt due and owing the county in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and ILCS Ch. 625 Act 5 §§ 11-208.3 by:
      (1)   Filing a complaint in the circuit court praying for the entry of a
judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made.
      (2)   The complaint filed by the traffic compliance administrator or
individual or agency on behalf of the County seeking entry of a judgment
against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final
determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall
have appended:
         (a)   A certified copy of the final determination of the standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s).
         (b)   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)
was issued in accordance with this chapter and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5 § 11-208.3.
      (3)   Nothing shall prevent the county from consolidating multiple final
determinations of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)
liability in an action in the circuit court against an individual.
      (4)   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments.
   (B)   Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the
person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of this chapter
by any method provided under ILCS Ch. 735 Act 5, § 2-203, incorporated by
reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total
amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed $2,500.00.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 77.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall be as
follows, plus the administrative fee:
      (1)   For violations of general parking violations, §§
74.02 -
74.10. the fine for each offense shall be not less than $35 nor more than $120;
however:
         (a)   If the fine is paid within 14 days after the issuance of the
citation, the fine shall be $35.
         (b)   If the fine is not paid within fourteen 14 days after the
issuance of the citation, the violation shall be sent through the
Administrative Adjudication process.
      (2)   For a violation of §§
74.11, the fine shall be not less than $250, plus all administrative fees.
         (a)   If the fine is paid within 14 days of issuance of the citation,
the fine shall be $250 plus the cost of removal and storage of the vehicle.
         (b)   If the fine is not paid within 14 days after the issuance of the
citation, the violation shall be sent through the Administrative Adjudication
process.
      (3)   For each violation of §§
74.13 or
74.14, the fine shall not be less than $50 nor more than $100; however:
         (a)   If the fine is paid within 14 days of issuance of the citation,
the fine shall be $50.
         (b)   If the fine is not paid within 14 days of issuance of the
citation, the violation shall be sent through the Administrative Adjudication
process.
   (B)   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied
for each violation of any applicable county ordinance.
   (C)   The county adopts by reference all current and future local standing,
parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those provisions of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes governing the standing, parking, or condition of
vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical
boundaries of the county and in those areas subject to off-street parking
agreements.
   (D)   Any fine or penalty amount imposed in accordance with the schedule in
division (A) of this section, by a hearing officer upon a determination of
liability for violation of vehicle regulations pursuant to the requirements of
§
77.04, shall include an additional administrative fee of $25 for each violation
that is upheld at a hearing.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
CHAPTER 78: VEHICLE TOWING, SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
Section
   
78.10   Adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code
   
78.15   Levy of administrative fee
   
78.20   Fee schedule
   
78.25   Release of vehicles
   
78.30   Applicability
   
78.35   Impoundment/seizure procedures
   
78.40   Notice of hearing
   
78.45   Administrative hearings
   
78.50   Enforcement of fee and appeal
   
78.55   Administrative review
   
78.60   Abandonment
   
78.65   Use of fees collected
§ 78.10 ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
   The county hereby adopts by reference the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-208.7 which authorizes the county to create ordinance procedures for the
impound and release of vehicles for stated violations in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-208.7 as it exists on the effective date of this chapter and as may be
amended after the effective date by the Illinois Legislature.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.15 LEVY OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   The registered owner, or agent(s) of the owner of a vehicle properly
impounded shall be liable to the county for payment of an administrative fee in
the amount set forth in § 78.20.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.20 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The administrative fee charged for the proper towing of vehicles within the
jurisdictional boundaries of Will County by the Will County Sheriffs Office
shall be $350 per vehicle, per tow.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.25 RELEASE OF VEHICLES.
   No towing company or tow operator shall release any vehicle subject to this
chapter to any person, unless that person can provide:
   (A)   A receipt from the county demonstrating that the administrative fee
described and levied in this chapter has been paid in full; or
   (B)   An order from the county's duly designated administrative hearing
officer certifying that the basis for the vehicle impoundment has been
overturned.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.30 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter and the fees described herein shall apply to vehicles which are
being towed as a result of one or more violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code
set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.7(b) and listed below. The fees
shall not apply if the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that
time, and proof that the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered.
   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to Section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (B)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act;
   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Section 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1
of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (F)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing;
   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license,
in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year;
   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit due to a person's age;
   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code;
   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, when so provided by local
ordinance; or
   (M)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Section 11-503 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code:
      (1)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
      (2)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.35 IMPOUNDMENT/SEIZURE PROCEDURES.
   The following procedures shall be used in assessing any fees under this
chapter:
   (A)   Whenever a sheriffs deputy has cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the county.
   (B)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the sheriffs deputy shall notify or
make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying
himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is
found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of
the fact of the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an
administrative hearing.
   (C)   The sheriffs deputy shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle
will remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing,
unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the county
a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided in § 78.20 and also pays for
all towing and storage charges. If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to
§ 78.50, the bond shall be applied to said fee. If the basis for the vehicle
impoundment is overturned by the administrative hearing officer, the bond shall
be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to
this section shall be held by the county until a hearing officer issues a
decision, or, if there is judicial review pursuant to § 78.55, until a
reviewing court issues a final decision.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.40 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The Will County Sheriff or his designee shall serve upon the registered
owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record notice of the hearing. The notice
shall:
   (A)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record either
by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's address as
registered with the Secretary of State;
   (B)   Be served upon interested parties within ten days after a vehicle is
impounded by the county; and
   (C)   Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing. An
initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45 days after the
date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.45 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   The following specific procedures shall apply to vehicle towing and
impoundment cases under this chapter:
   (A)   Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is
an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three
years;
   (B)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment;
   (C)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the county;
   (D)   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law, ILCS
Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101; and
   (E)   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the
vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.50 ENFORCEMENT OF FEE AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty,
or administrative fee imposed under this section, which remains unpaid in whole
or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law, may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   In addition, the county recognizes the authority of the Circuit Court
to equitably award an appropriate refund of fees.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.55 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   Any owner of record, lienholder or other person with a legal interest in the
motor vehicle, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the hearing
officer to the Circuit Court of Will County, Illinois, pursuant to the
Administrative Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101, et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.60 ABANDONMENT.
   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within
35 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written decision
shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
Article II of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
4-201, et seq.).
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
§ 78.65 USE OF FEES COLLECTED.
   All fees collected will be deposited into the Capital Fund, #304, and
credited to a revenue line identified for the administrative towing fee. The
fees collected will be appropriated to offset the administrative and processing
costs associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an offender,
or the removal impoundment, storage, and release of vehicles.
(Ord. 15-158, passed 5-21-2015)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES
      
91.   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
      
92.   PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY
      
93.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
94.   9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
      
95.   FIREARMS
      
96.   RIVERS
      
97.   PUBLIC SWIMMING FACILITY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Administrator for animal protection services
   
90.03   Responsibility of Administrator
   
90.04   Bite reporting and investigation
   
90.05   Confinement of biting animals
   
90.06   Dangerous and vicious dogs
   
90.07   Liability of owner of dog, cat or other animal attacking or injuring
person or animal
   
90.08   Inoculation against rabies
   
90.09   Owner duties
   
90.10   Dangerous animals
   
90.11   Removal of dead animals
   
90.12   Authority to ascertain inoculation against rabies and registration
   
90.13   Trapping wildlife
   
90.14   Domestic and companion animal running at large prohibited
   
90.15   Impounded dogs, cats and animals; notice to owner; unredeemed dogs,
cats and other animals
   
90.16   (Reserved)
   
90.17   Relinquishment of animals
   
90.18   Barking or howling dog
   
90.19   Enforcement; exemption from liability
   
90.20   Cooperation in enforcement
   
90.21   Contracts with municipalities and agreements with other partners
   
90.22   Right of entry for inspections; apprehension of dog or other animals;
refusal of owner to deliver dog or other animal
   
90.23   Cruelty to animals
   
90.24   (Reserved)
   
90.25   Police animal
   
90.26   (Reserved)
   
90.27   Fees for services pursuant to intergovernmental agreements
   
90.28   Animal Protection Services
   
90.29   Animal Protection Services fees
   
90.30   Animal Protection Services fee waiver
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. A veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois and
appointed pursuant to the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), or a non-
veterinarian may serve as Administrator. In the event the Administrator is not
a veterinarian, the Administrator shall defer to the Deputy Administrator
regarding all medical decisions.
   ANIMAL. Every living creature, domestic or wild, other than man.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Animal Control Warden.
   ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES. The county department that operates rabies
control, animal control, animal welfare enforcement and the county animal
shelter. ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES may be used interchangeably with the term
“animal control”.
   BOARD. The County Board of Will County, Illinois.
   ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES OFFICER or ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Animal Control
Warden which is any person appointed by the Administrator to perform the duties
set forth in the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) or in this chapter.
ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES OFFICER is interchangeable with “Animal Control
Warden”.
   BUSINESS DAY. Any day including holidays that the animal protection services
facility is open to the public for animal reclaims.
   CAT. Felis catus.
   COMPANION ANIMAL. An animal that is commonly considered to be, or is
considered by the owner, to be a pet. COMPANION ANIMAL includes, but is not
limited to, canines, felines, and equines.
   COMPANION ANIMAL HOARDER. A person who (i) possesses a large number of
companion animals; (ii) fails to or is unable to provide what he or she is
required to provide under Section 3 of this Act; (iii) keeps the companion
animals in a severely overcrowded environment; and (iv) displays an inability
to recognize or understand the nature of or has a reckless disregard for the
conditions under which the companion animals are living and the deleterious
impact they have on the companion animals' and owner's health and well-being.
   CONFINED. The restriction of the cat, dog or other animal at all times by
the owner in a manner that will isolate the cat, dog or other animal from the
public and other cats, dogs or other animals.
   CONTROL. Any owned animal that is either secured by a leash or lead, or
under voice control or within the premises of its owner or another person with
the consent of the person and prevented from leaving said premises by some
suitable barrier or restriction, or confined within a crate or cage, or
confined within a vehicle.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. A wild or exotic animal, not indigenous to this state, not
commonly found as a domestic animal that would create a potential risk to
public safety including but not limited to: bears, wolves, coyotes, jackal,
fox, or hybrid thereof, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, panthers,
lynx, bobcats, ocelots, any hybrid thereof or any other similar feline animal,
alligators, crocodiles, caimans, snakes and reptiles that are venomous or life-
threatening, apes, baboons, macaques, bison, and rodents weighing more than one
pound, with the exception of guinea pigs.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of
the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal or a dog that, without
justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
   DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR. The licensed veterinarian appointed by the
Administrator and approved by the County Board, who is authorized to act on
behalf of the Administrator if the Administrator is unavailable.
   DEPICTION OF ANIMAL CRUELTY. Any visual or auditory depiction, including any
photograph, motion-picture film, video recording, electronic image, or sound
recording, that would constitute a violation of 510 ILCS 70/3.01, 3.02, 3.03,
or 4.01 of the Humane Care for Animals Act or Section 26-5 or 48-1 of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
   DIFFERENTIAL. The difference in the registration fees paid for spayed,
neutered or sterilized animals and the registration fees paid for intact
animals.
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any companion or farm animal.
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within
the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a
residence, it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless
it leads directly to an enclosed pen and the door must be locked.
   FERAL CAT. A cat that (i) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an
owned or feral cat and is not socialized, (ii) is a formerly owned cat that has
been abandoned and is no longer socialized, or (iii) lives on a farm.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. Has been seized with the teeth or jaws, so that the person
or animal seized has been nipped or gripped, or has been wounded or pierced and
further includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of skin or mucous
membrane.
   HUMANELY EUTHANIZED. The painless administration of a lethal dose of an
agent or method of euthanasia as prescribed in the Report of the American
Veterinary Medical Association Panel on Euthanasia published in the Journal of
the American Veterinary Medical Association, March 1, 2001 (or any successor
version of that Report), that causes the painless death of an animal.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into the custody of the Animal Protection Services and
placed in an animal shelter or veterinary hospital/clinic in the county where
the animal is found under the control of the Animal Protection Services.
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection of a rabies vaccine approved by
the State Department of Agriculture and administered by a licensed veterinarian
in accordance with the company’s recommendations for the vaccine used.
   INTACT ANIMAL. An animal that has not been sterilized.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An agency of the state or a unit of local government
that is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain public order and
to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
   LEASH. A cord, rope strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or the animal and shall be of sufficient strength to
keep the dog or other animal under control.
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he or
she engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.
   LOW-INCOME. Those persons eligible for the Food Stamp Program or Social
Security Disability Benefits Program.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog, cat or other animal,
or who keeps or harbors a dog, cat or other animal, or who has it in his or her
care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits the animal to remain
on or about any premises occupied by him or her. OWNER does not include a feral
cat caretaker participating in a trap, spay/neuter, vaccinate for rabies, and
return program.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other legal entity, any public or private institution, the State of Illinois,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or any other
business unit.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 2-13 of the
Criminal Code of 2012.
   PHYSICAL INJURY. The impairment of physical condition.
   POLICE ANIMAL. An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or
agency in the course of the department or agency's work.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that is unsupervised and found running at
large with three or more other dogs.
   RECKLESS DOG OWNER. A person who owns a dog that while anywhere other than
upon the property of the owner, and without justification, kills another dog
that results in that dog being deemed a dangerous dog under 510 ILCS 5/15.1 of
the State Animal Control Act and who knowingly allows the dog to violate 510
ILCS 5/9 of the State Animal Control Act on two occasions within 12 months of
the incident for which the dog was deemed dangerous or is involved in another
incident that results in the dog being deemed dangerous on a second occasion
within 24 months of the original dangerous determination.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A printed form prescribed by Animal Protection
Services for the purpose of recording pertinent information as required under
this chapter.
   RETURN. “Return” in “return to field or trap, neuter, return program” means
to return the cat to field after it has been sterilized and vaccinated for
rabies.
   SEIZE. The County Animal Protection Services or any officer of the law is
authorized to enter upon public or private property; for the purpose of
impounding any dog, cat or other animal which has been found to be in violation
of this chapter.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY. A physical injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement, protracted impairment of
health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or plastic surgery.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. An animal trained in obedience and task skills to meet the
needs of a person with a disability. As defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act, service animals are dogs that are individually trained to do
work or perform tasks for people with disabilities. Only dogs may be considered
service animals. The dog must be trained to take a specific action when needed
to assist the person with a disability in accordance with the ADA. Animals
whose sole function is to provide comfort are not considered service animals.
   STRAYING. Any owned animal not on the premises of the owner or not confined
or under control as set forth in this chapter.
   VICIOUS DOG. A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a “dangerous dog” upon three separate occasions.
(1980 Code, § 90.01) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 17-231, adopted 10-19-2017; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Powers generally, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1014
   Animal Control Act definitions, see 510 ILCS 5/2.01 - /2.04a, 2.05a, 2.07,
2.11 - 2.17c, 2.18a - 2.19b, 3.5
   Humane Care for Animals Act definitions, see 510 ILCS 70/2.01, 2.01c, 2.09,
2.10, 20.1a
§ 90.02 ADMINISTRATOR FOR ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES.
   The County Executive with the advice and consent of the County Board shall
appoint an Administrator of animal protection services. A person who is not a
licensed veterinarian may be appointed Administrator provided a licensed
veterinarian is appointed as a Deputy Administrator. The appointments shall be
made as necessary to keep this position filled at all times.
(1980 Code, § 90.02) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Administrator, see 510 ILCS 5/3
§ 90.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Administrator shall enforce and abide by all sections of the State
Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) and this chapter, including the rules
and regulations relating to the Act and this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator, through sterilization,
humane education, rabies inoculation, stray control, impoundment, quarantine
and any other means deemed necessary, to control and prevent the spread of
rabies and to exercise dog and cat overpopulation control. It shall also be the
duty of the Administrator to investigate and substantiate all claims made under
510 ILCS 5/19 of the State Animal Control Act. The duty may include return,
adoption, transfer to rescues or other animal shelters, and any other means of
ensuring live outcomes of homeless dogs and cats and through sterilization,
community outreach, impoundment of pets at risk and any other humane means
deemed necessary to address strays and ensure live outcomes for dogs and cats
that are not a danger to the community or suffering irremediably. It shall be a
further duty of the Administrator to provide animal protection services to
animals within the county and oversee the operations of the county’s animal
shelter facility.
   (C)   The Administrator, Deputy Administrators and animal control officers
shall have the power of peace officers for the limited purposes of issuing and
serving citations and order for violation of this chapter and the Animal
Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq. Animal control officers may use tranquilizer
guns and equipment.
(1980 Code, § 90.03) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Duties and powers of Administrator or Deputy Administrator, see 510 ILCS 5/5
§ 90.04 BITE REPORTING AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has
been bitten by an animal shall notify the Administrator or, if the
Administrator is not a veterinarian, the Deputy Administrator within 24 hours.
   (B)   Upon receiving a bite report, the county animal control shall record
all pertinent information on a standardized form. Records should show that
after a bite report is received, it has been investigated and, if possible, the
biting animal confined and the attending physician notified of the animal’s
health. Investigation may include contact with the person bitten, or for a
minor, with their parent or guardian, attending physician, veterinarian and any
other appropriate source to coordinate information, make referral of patient
and recommended treatment.
   (C)   The county animal protection services will, upon request, take
appropriate measures to assist municipalities in the apprehension of biters.
(1980 Code, § 90.04) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Dog or other animal bites; observation of animal, see 510 ILCS 5/13
§ 90.05 CONFINEMENT OF BITING ANIMALS.
   (A)   When the Administrator receives information that any person has been
bitten by an animal the Administrator shall have the owner confine the biting
animal under observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days
beginning within 24 hours of the biting incident. All dogs and cats under
observation, owned by a resident of Will County, shall be implanted with a
microchip approved by the Administrator at the time of the first examination
unless the animal is to be euthanized. The microchip number shall be reported
to Will County Animal Protection Services within 24 hours of the first exam.
The biting animal may be confined in the house of its owner in a manner which
will prohibit it from biting any person or animal if the Administrator or other
licensed veterinarian adjudges such confinement satisfactory.
      (1)   When the biting animal is currently inoculated with rabies vaccine
the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the Will County
Animal Protection Services on the first and tenth days of the observation
period for rabies.
      (2)   When the biting animal is not currently inoculated with rabies
vaccine the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the Will
County Animal Protection Services on the first, fifth and tenth days of the
observation period for rabies.
      (3)   When the biting animal is not currently inoculated with rabies
vaccine and the owner refuses to have the animal examined by a veterinarian,
Will County Animal Protection Services shall impound the animal for a period of
ten days. If the animal is not reclaimed by the owner within five days of the
end of the observation period, the Administrator will make a determination of
placement for the animal.
   (B)   Confirmation of the health of the biting animal shall be sent by the
veterinarian to the Will County Animal Protection Services within 24 hours of
the first and final examinations. Official forms shall be provided by the
Department.
   (C)   When an animal confined for biting shows signs of rabies or acts in a
manner which would lead a person to believe that an animal may have rabies, the
owner or veterinarian shall notify the Administrator immediately by telephone
or in person of these signs. The Administrator shall immediately notify the
physician attending the bitten person or responsible health agency as soon as
he or she receives notice of such signs.
   (D)   If the animal confined is determined not to be infected with rabies at
the end of the period of confinement it shall be released from quarantine. The
animal owner shall show proof of rabies inoculation for cats and dogs and shall
pay any fee, charge or penalty including any fee for veterinary services
attributed to the bite.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to conceal the
whereabouts, euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or have
inoculated against rabies the animal known to have bitten a person until it has
been released from confinement for observation for rabies by the Administrator.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of such animal to refuse or fail to comply
with the written or printed instructions made by the Administrator. If such
instructions cannot be delivered in person they shall be mailed to the owner of
such animal by regular mail, postage prepaid. The affidavit or testimony of the
Administrator delivering or mailing such instructions is prima facie evidence
that the owner of such animal was notified of his or her responsibilities.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Dog or other animal bites; observation of animal, see 510 ILCS 5/13
§ 90.06 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   Dangerous dogs.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, DANGEROUS DOGS is as defined in §
90.01.
      (2)   The applicable sections of the Illinois Animal Control Act,
including, but not limited to, 510 ILCS 5/15.1, 15.2 and 15.3 are hereby
incorporated as currently written and as amended in the future as if set forth
fully herein relative to the regulations of dangerous dogs within the County of
Will.
      (3)   The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog by the Administrator
may appeal that decision pursuant to the provisions of 510 ILCS 5/15.3.
   (B)   Vicious dogs.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, VICIOUS DOG is defined in § 90.01.
      (2)   The applicable sections of the Illinois Animal Control Act,
including, but not limited to, 510 ILCS 5/15 and 26 are hereby incorporated as
currently written and as amended in the future if set forth fully herein
relative to the regulations of vicious dogs within the County of Will.
   (C)   Potentially dangerous dog. A dog found running at large and
unsupervised with three or more other dogs may be deemed a potentially
dangerous dog by the animal control officer or Administrator. Potentially
dangerous dogs shall be spayed or neutered and microchipped within 14 days of
reclaim. The designation of "potentially dangerous dog" shall expire 12 months
after the most recent violation of this section. Failure to comply with this
section will result in impoundment of the dog or a fine.
   (D)   Reckless dog owner.
      (1)   The Administrator, State's Attorney, Director, or any citizen may
file a complaint in circuit court to determine whether a person is a reckless
dog owner. If an owner is determined to be a reckless dog owner by clear and
convincing evidence, the court shall order the immediate impoundment and
forfeiture of all dogs the reckless dog owner has a property right in.
Forfeiture may be to any licensed shelter, rescue, or sanctuary. The court
shall further prohibit the property right ownership of a dog by the person
determined to be a reckless dog owner for a period of at least 12 months, but
not more than 36 months for the first reckless dog owner determination.
      (1-5)   A dog's history during ownership by a person found to be a
reckless dog owner shall not be considered conclusive of the dog's temperament
and qualification for adoption or transfer. The dog's temperament shall be
independently evaluated by a person qualified to conduct behavioral assessments
and, if the dog is deemed adoptable, the receiving facility shall make a
reasonable attempt to place the dog in another home, transfer the dog to
rescue, or place the dog in a sanctuary.
      (2)   A person who refuses to forfeit a dog under this section is in
violation which carries a public safety fine of $500 for each dog. The fine
shall be deposited into the Pet Population Control Fund. Each day a person
fails to comply with a forfeiture or prohibition ordered under this section
shall constitute a separate offense.
(1980 Code, § 90.06) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Vicious dog, see 510 ILCS 5/15
   Potentially dangerous dog, see 510 ILCS 5/15.4
§ 90.07 LIABILITY OF OWNER OF DOG, CAT OR OTHER ANIMAL ATTACKING OR INJURING
PERSON OR ANIMAL.
   If a dog or other animal, without provocation, attacks, attempts to attack,
or injures any person or animal who is peaceably conducting himself or herself
in any place where he or she may lawfully be, the owner of a dog or other
animal is liable for damages, to the person, for the full amount of the injury
sustained.
(1980 Code, § 90.07) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Animal attacks or injuries, see 510 ILCS 5/16
§ 90.08 INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.
   (A)   Every owner of a dog, cat or ferret four months of age or older, shall
each year cause the dog, cat or ferret to be inoculated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian. Every dog, cat, or ferret shall have a second rabies
vaccination within one year of the first. Terms of subsequent vaccine
administration and duration of immunity must be in compliance with USDA
licenses of vaccines used. This division does not apply to feral cats; however,
if a feral cat is presented to a licensed veterinarian for sterilization, the
feral cat shall be inoculated against rabies, unless the person presenting the
feral cat for care provides an inoculation certificate showing that the feral
cat has been inoculated against rabies, and the cost of the inoculation shall
be paid by the person presenting the feral cat to a licensed veterinarian for
care.
   (B)   If a licensed veterinarian determines in writing that a rabies
inoculation would compromise an animal's health, then the animal shall be
exempt from the rabies inoculation requirement, however, the owner is still
responsible for the tag fees.
   (C)   If a bite occurs from an exempt animal, the exempt animal shall be
treated as an unvaccinated animal. If the animal is exempt, the animal shall be
re-examined by a licensed veterinarian on no less than an annual basis and be
vaccinated against rabies as soon as the animal's health permits.
(1980 Code, § 90.08)
   (D)   A veterinarian immunizing a dog, cat, or ferret against rabies shall
provide the Administrator of the county in which the dog, cat, or ferret
resides with a certificate of immunization. Evidence of such rabies inoculation
shall be entered on a certificate the form of which shall be approved by the
Board and which shall contain the microchip number of the dog, cat, or ferret
if it has one and which shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian
administering the vaccine. Veterinarians who inoculate a dog, cat or ferret for
rabies shall procure from the County Animal Protection Services numbered tags,
one to be issued with each inoculation certificate. A veterinarian who
inoculates a feral cat shall issue an inoculation certificate to the person who
presented the feral cat for veterinary care. Feral cats are not required to
have a rabies tag. Only one dog, cat or ferret shall be included on each
certificate.
(1980 Code, § 90.09)
   (E)   Every owner of a dog, cat or ferret four months of age or older shall
provide the dog, cat or ferret with a collar or harness and attach thereto the
official county rabies tag which shall be worn by the dog, cat or ferret at all
times. Feral cats are exempt.
(1980 Code, § 90.11) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006)
   (F)   New residents from outside the county owning or keeping a dog, cat or
ferret four months of age or older, shall register the dog, cat or ferret at
the county animal control facility, within 30 days after establishing residence
in the county. If not done, the pet owner may be issued citations for failure
to comply.
      (1)   The fee for such tag set out in §
90.29.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Rabies inoculation, see 510 ILCS 5/8
§ 90.09 OWNER DUTIES.
   (A)   Each owner shall provide for each of his or her animals:
      (1)   Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
         (a)   No person shall allow an animal to remain outside continuously
for more than 30 minutes without access to adequate shelter and potable water.
At the discretion of the Director, an exception may be granted when an adult is
present on the premises.
         (b)   Companion animals must be brought into a temperature controlled
structure when the temperature is at or below 10° Fahrenheit or at or above 85°
Fahrenheit, or when a heat advisory, wind chill warning, or tornado warning has
been issued by local, state, or national authority, except when the animal is
in visual range of a competent adult who is outside with the animal;
      (3)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
      (4)   Humane care and treatment.
   (B)   To lawfully tether a dog outdoors, an owner must ensure that the dog:
      (1)   Does not suffer from a condition that is known by that person, to
be exacerbated by tethering;
      (2)   Is tethered in a manner that will prevent it from becoming
entangled with other tethered dogs;
      (3)   Is not tethered with a lead that:
         (a)   Exceeds one-eighth of the dog’s body weight; or
         (b)   Is a tow chain or a log chain;
      (4)   Is tethered with a lead that measures, when rounded to the nearest
whole foot, at least ten feet in length;
      (5)   Is tethered with a properly fitted harness or collar other than the
lead or a pinch prong, or choke-type collar; and
      (6)   Is not tethered in a manner that will allow it to reach within the
property of another person, a public walkway, or a road.
   (C)   Prohibited tethering. 
      (1)   No person shall: Tether an animal to a motorized vehicle such as an
automobile, truck, or motorcycle;
      (2)   Tether an intact animal for any period of time;
      (3)   Tether an animal between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (4)   Tether or confine an animal in or about an unoccupied structure or
property for any purpose unless the animal is continuously monitored by an
adult who is physically on site throughout the period of tethering or
confinement;
      (5)   Tether an animal under six months of age;
      (6)   Tether more than three animals simultaneously at the same location.
   (D)   Division (B) and (C) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit:
      (1)   A person from walking a dog with a handheld leash;
      (2)   Conduct that is directly related to the cultivation of agricultural
products, including shepherding or herding cattle or livestock, if the
restraint is reasonably necessary for the safety of the dog;
      (3)   The tethering of a dog while at an organized and lawful animal
function, such as hunting, obedience training, performance and conformance
events, or law enforcement training, or while in the pursuit of working or
competing in those endeavors; or
      (4)   A dog restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping
or recreational area as defined by a federal, state, or local authority or
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor within the county a dangerous
animal.
   (B)   Any animal, snake, reptile, lizard, rodent or other creature defined
as a dangerous animal is declared a public nuisance, and such animal may be
impounded by the Administrator, his or her designee, or an animal control
officer. If such animal cannot be relocated safely to an entity licensed to
handle the dangerous animal in the sole discretion of the Administrator, the
Administrator may order the humane euthanasia of such animal.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to properly zoned, licensed and
constructed zoos, animal shelters, veterinary hospitals, federally licensed
exhibits, circuses, animal refuges, scientific or research laboratories of
educational or other licensed institutions, or other enterprise.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   Every property owner must remove, or cause the removal of, any animal which
has died on their property no later than 48 hours after the animal has died.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 AUTHORITY TO ASCERTAIN INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES AND REGISTRATION.
   The county Animal Protection Services is hereby authorized to ascertain by
observation and by inquiry of the animal owner if the dog, cat or ferret is
inoculated against rabies and has a rabies tag for the county in which they
reside.
(1980 Code, § 90.12) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Duties and powers of Administrator or Deputy Administrator, see 510 ILCS 5/5
§ 90.13 TRAPPING WILDLIFE.
   Trapping wildlife without an active license from the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources is prohibited. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use
of traps designed to kill rodents such as mice and rats when used for their
intended purposes.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 DOMESTIC AND COMPANION ANIMAL RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall permit at any time their domestic and companion animal
to run uncontrolled. Feral cats are exempt.
   (B)   Any domestic and companion animal found running at large in violation
hereof may be apprehended and impounded in the manner provided in this chapter.
   (C)   A dog that is actively engaged in a legal hunting activity, including
training, is not considered to be running at large if the dog is on land that
is open to hunting or on land which the person has obtained permission to hunt
or train a dog. A dog that is in a dog-friendly area or dog park is not
considered to be running at large if the dog is monitored or supervised by a
person.
(1980 Code, § 90.14) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 01-339, adopted 8-16-
2001; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18- 2024) Penalty,
see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Dog running at large, see 510 ILCS 5/9
§ 90.15 IMPOUNDED DOGS CATS AND ANIMALS; NOTICE TO OWNER; UNREDEEMED DOGS, CATS
AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   When dogs, cats, or other animals are apprehended and impounded, they
must be scanned for the presence of a microchip and examined for other
currently acceptable methods of identification, including, but not limited to,
identification tags, tattoos, and rabies license tags. The examination for
identification shall be done within 24 hours after the intake of each dog, cat,
or other animals.
   (B)   The Administrator shall make every reasonable attempt to contact the
owner, agent, or caretaker as soon as possible. The Administrator shall give
notice of not less than seven business days to the owner, agent, or caretaker
prior to adoption, transfer, or humane euthanasia of the animal. Such notice
shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner, agent, or caretaker.
Testimony of the Administrator, or his or her authorized agent, who mails such
notice shall be evidence of the receipt of such notice by the owner, agent, or
caretaker of the animal. A mailed notice shall remain the primary means of
owner, agent, or caretaker contact; however, the Administrator shall also
attempt to contact the owner, agent, or caretaker by any other contact
information, such as by telephone or email address, provided by the microchip
or other method of identification found on the dog, cat, or other animal. If
the dog, cat, or other animal has been microchipped and the primary contact
listed by the chip manufacturer cannot be located or refuses to reclaim the
dog, cat, or other animal, an attempt shall be made to contact any secondary
contacts listed by the chip manufacturer prior to adoption, transfer, or humane
euthanasia.
   (C)   Prior to being made available for adoption, transferring the dog, cat,
or other animal to another humane shelter, pet store, rescue group, or humanely
euthanizing, the dog, cat, or other animal shall be scanned again for the
presence of a microchip and examined for other means of identification. If a
second scan provides the same identifying information as the initial intake
scan and the owner, agent, or caretaker has not been located or refuses to
reclaim the dog, cat, or other animal, the animal control facility may proceed
with the adoption, transfer, or humane euthanasia.
   (D)   A cat or dog may be transferred to another animal welfare organization
prior to seven business days if the animal is transferred with life-saving
purpose for the animal's survival. The cat or dog will be scanned a second time
for the presence of a microchip and examined for other means of identification
prior to the transfer. If a second scan provides the same identifying
information as the initial intake scan and the owner, agent, or caretaker has
not been located or refuses to reclaim the cat or dog, the Director may proceed
with the transfer. The Administrator may make an immediate determination of
placement for any impounded animals besides cats and dogs.
   (E)   In case the owner, agent, or caretaker of any impounded dog, cat, or
other animal desires to make redemption thereof, he or she may do so by doing
the following:
      (1)   Presenting proof of current rabies inoculation and registration, if
applicable.
      (2)   Paying for the rabies inoculation and registration, if applicable.
      (3)   Paying for the board of the dog, cat, or other animal for the
period it was impounded.
      (4)   Paying into the Animal Control Fund an additional impoundment fee
as prescribed by the Board as a penalty for the first offense and for each
subsequent offense.
      (5)   Paying a $25 public safety fine to be deposited into the county
Animal Control Fund; the fine shall be waived if it is the dog's or cat's first
impoundment and the owner, agent, or caretaker has the animal spayed or
neutered within 14 days.
      (6)   Paying for microchipping and registration if not already done, if
applicable.
   (F)   The payments required for redemption under this section shall be in
addition to any other penalties invoked under this chapter.
   (G)   If an impounded dog, cat or other animal has bitten a person, the
impoundment period shall be ten days unless a reduced period is authorized by
the Administrator as provided by this chapter.
   (H)   Animals suffering because of severe physical disability may be
humanely euthanized at the discretion of the Administrator.
(1980 Code, § 90.15) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment; redemption, see 510 ILCS 5/10
   Animal placement, see 510 ILCS 5/11
§ 90.16 RESERVED.
§ 90.17 RELINQUISHMENT OF ANIMALS.
   Any owner of one or more animals may relinquish them to the County Animal
Protection Services at the discretion of the Administrator. A fee may be
established for the relinquishment by the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 90.17) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 90.18 BARKING OR HOWLING DOG.
   (A)   No owner shall allow a dog to bark, howl or whine in an excessive
continuous or untimely manner.
   (B)   It is unlawful for an owned dog to make excessive noise in violation
of this section within the county. An owned animal cannot make excessive noise
outside for more than 15 consecutive minutes between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
and for no more than ten consecutive minutes between 10:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m.
   (C)   A complaint under this section must meet one of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Complaint made by one person, which is accompanied by audio or
video recordings depicting excessive noise in excess of the time limit;
      (2)   Complaints made by two or more persons, residing in different
households, regarding the same dog during the same time frame; or
      (3)   Complaint made by one person, but corroborated by animal control or
law enforcement officer who heard the excessive noise during the time limits
herein.
   (D)   The violation shall constitute a public nuisance. Licensed kennel
operators, pounds, animal shelters, pet shop operators and dog dealers as
defined in the State Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq.) are exempt
from this section.
(1980 Code, § 90.18) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on power of municipality, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 90.19 ENFORCEMENT; EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY.
   The County Animal Protection Services, its agents, or other persons
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall not be held liable
for the injury, death or disease which may occur to any dog, cat or other
animal as a consequence of the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
pursuant to the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act
(745 ILCS 10/1 et seq.).
(1980 Code, § 90.19) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 90.20 COOPERATION IN ENFORCEMENT.
   The Sheriff and his or her deputies, municipal wardens or the local law
enforcement agency shall cooperate with the County Animal Protection Services
in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 90.20) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 90.21 CONTRACTS WITH MUNICIPALITIES AND AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER PARTNERS.
   (A)   The County Animal Protection Services with the approval of the County
Board may enter into contracts with municipalities or veterinarians to
effectuate this chapter. These contracts shall define the Animal Protection
Services’ role within the municipality and assign a fee to the municipality for
the services provided by the County Animal Protection Services.
   (B)   The County Animal Protection Services, with the approval of the County
Board may also enter into agreements with veterinarians, animal shelters,
animal welfare organizations or other partners to effectuate this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 90.21) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Limitations of power of municipality, see 510 ILCS 5/24
§ 90.22 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS; APPREHENSION OF DOG OR OTHER ANIMALS;
REFUSAL OF OWNER TO DELIVER DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL.
   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and making
inspections hereunder, the Administrator, or his or her authorized
representative, or any officer of the law may enter upon private premises,
provided that the entry shall not be made into any building that is a person’s
residence, to apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous or vicious
dog or other animal, or a dog or other animal thought to be infected with
rabies. If, after request therefor, the owner of the dog or other animal shall
refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to the officer, the owner shall be in
violation of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 90.22) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Inspections, see 510 ILCS 5/17
§ 90.23 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall be permitted to keep animals in violation of the
Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act or the Illinois Animal Welfare Act.
   (B)   No person or owner may beat, cruelly treat, torment, starve, overwork
or otherwise abuse any animal.
   (C)   No owner may abandon any animal where it may become public charge or
may suffer injury, hunger or exposure.
   (D)   No owner of a dog or cat that is a companion animal may expose the dog
or cat in a manner that places the dog or cat in a life-threatening situation
for a prolonged period of time in extreme heat or cold conditions that:
      (1)   Results in injury to or death of the animal; or
      (2)   Results in hypothermia, hyperthermia, frostbite, or similar
conditions as diagnosed by the doctor of veterinary medicine.
   (E)   Confinement in a motor vehicle. No owner or person shall confine any
animal in a motor vehicle in a manner that places it in a life or health
threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or
cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from heat or cold. In
order to protect the health and safety of the animal, an animal control officer
or law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that this section
is being violated shall have authority to enter the motor vehicle by any
reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or person.
   (F)   Aggravated cruelty.
      (1)   No person may intentionally commit an act that causes a companion
animal to suffer serious injury or death. Aggravated cruelty does not include
euthanasia of a companion animal through recognized methods approved by the
Department of Agriculture unless prohibited under division (F)(2) of this
section
      (2)   No individual, except a licensed veterinarian as exempted under 510
ILCS 70/3.09, may knowingly or intentionally euthanize or authorize the
euthanasia of a companion animal by use of carbon monoxide.
      (3)   A person convicted of violating 510 ILCS 70/3.02 is guilty of a
Class 4 felony. A second or subsequent violation is a Class 3 felony. In
addition to any other penalty provided by law, upon conviction for violating
this section, the court may order the convicted person to undergo a
psychological or psychiatric evaluation and to undergo any treatment at the
convicted person's expense that the court determines to be appropriate after
due consideration of the evaluation. If the convicted person is a juvenile or a
companion animal hoarder, the court must order the convicted person to undergo
a psychological or psychiatric evaluation and to undergo treatment that the
court determines to be appropriate after due consideration of the evaluation.
   (G)   Animal torture.
      (1)   A person commits animal torture when that person without legal
justification knowingly or intentionally tortures an animal. For purposes of
this section, and subject to division (B) of this section, TORTURE means
infliction of or subjection to extreme physical pain, motivated by an intent to
increase or prolong the pain, suffering, or agony of the animal.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, ANIMAL TORTURE does not include
any death, harm, or injury caused to any animal by any of the following
activities:
         (a)   Any hunting, fishing, trapping, or other activity allowed under
the Wildlife Code, the Wildlife Habitat Management Areas Act, or the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code;
         (b)   Any alteration or destruction of any animal done by any person
or unit of government pursuant to statute, ordinance, court order, or the
direction of a licensed veterinarian;
         (c)   Any alteration or destruction of any animal by any person for
any legitimate purpose, including, but not limited to: castration, culling,
declawing, defanging, ear cropping, euthanasia, gelding, grooming, neutering,
polling, shearing, shoeing, slaughtering, spaying, tail docking, and
vivisection; and
         (d)   Any other activity that may be lawfully done to an animal.
      (3)   A person convicted of violating this section is guilty of a Class 3
felony. As a condition of the sentence imposed under this section, the court
shall order the offender to undergo a psychological or psychiatric evaluation
and to undergo treatment that the court determines to be appropriate after due
consideration of the evaluation.
   (H)   Depiction of animal cruelty.
      (1)   No person may knowingly create, sell, market, offer to market or
sell, or possess a depiction of animal cruelty. No person may place that
depiction in commerce for commercial gain or entertainment. This section does
not apply when the depiction has religious, political, scientific, educational,
law enforcement or humane investigator training, journalistic, artistic, or
historical value; or involves rodeos, sanctioned livestock events, or normal
husbandry practices. The creation, sale, marketing, offering to sell or market,
or possession of the depiction of animal cruelty is illegal regardless of
whether the maiming, mutilation, torture, wounding, abuse, killing, or any
other conduct took place in this state.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating this section is guilty of a Class
A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation is a Class 4 felony. In
addition to any other penalty provided by law, upon conviction for violating
this section, the court may order the convicted person to undergo a
psychological or psychiatric evaluation and to undergo any treatment at the
convicted person's expense that the court determines to be appropriate after
due consideration of the evaluation. If the convicted person is a juvenile, the
court shall order the convicted person to undergo a psychological or
psychiatric evaluation and to undergo treatment that the court determines to be
appropriate after due consideration of the evaluation.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an animal from being impounded
in an emergency situation.
   (J)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from
taking temporary custody of a dog or cat that is a companion animal that is
exposed in a manner that places the dog or cat in a life-threatening situation
for a prolonged period of time in extreme heat or cold conditions that may
result in injury or death of the dog or cat or may result in hypothermia,
hyperthermia, frostbite, or similar condition. Upon taking temporary custody of
the dog or cat under this division (J), the law enforcement officer shall
attempt to contact the owner of the dog or cat and shall seek emergency
veterinary care for the animal as soon as available. The law enforcement
officer shall leave information of the location of the dog or cat if the owner
cannot be reached. The owner of the dog or cat is responsible for any costs of
providing care to the dog or cat.
   (K)   Upon receiving a complaint of suspected violation of this section, any
law enforcement official, including the Administrator, Deputy Administrator or
animal control officer, may, for the purpose of investigating the allegations
of the complaint, enter during normal business hours, upon any premises where
the animal or animals described in the complaint are housed or kept, provided
entry shall not be made into any building which is a person’s residence, except
by search warrant or court order. Institutions operating under federal license
to conduct laboratory experimentation, utilizing animals for research or
medical purposes are, however, exempt from the provision of this section.
State’s attorneys and law enforcement officials shall provide assistance as may
be required in the conduct of investigations.
   (L)   If an investigation under this section discloses that a violation of
this chapter has been committed, the County Animal Protection Services may
furnish the violator, if known, with a notice of violation, and state what
action is necessary to come into compliance with this section. If the animal is
in such a condition that no remedy or corrective action by the owner is
possible, or if the violator fails or refuses to take corrective action, the
County Animal Protection Services may immediately impound the animal. The
notice of impoundment shall include the following:
      (1)   An animal report number;
      (2)   Listing of deficiencies noted;
      (3)   An accurate description of the animal or animals involved;
      (4)   Date on which the animal or animals were impounded;
      (5)   Signature of the county animal control representative; and
      (6)   A statement that “The violator may request a hearing to appeal the
impoundment. A person desiring a hearing shall contact the County Animal
Protection Services within seven days from the date of impoundment” and the
County Animal Protection Services will hold an administrative hearing within
seven days after receiving a request to appeal the impoundment. If the hearing
cannot be held prior to the expiration of the seven-day impoundment period, the
County Animal Protection Services cannot sell, offer for adoption, or dispose
of the animal or animals until a final decision is rendered and all of the
appeal processes have been expired. If a hearing is requested by any owner of
impounded animals, the Hearing Officer shall, after hearing the testimony of
all interested parties, render a decision within five business days regarding
the disposition of the impounded animals. This decision by the Hearing Officer
shall have no effect on the criminal charges that may be filed with the
appropriate authorities.
   (M)   Any expense incurred in impoundment must be paid before the animal is
released from the County Animal Protection Services.
(1980 Code, § 90.23) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Humane Care for Animals Act, see 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.
   Aggravated cruelty, see 510 ILCS 70/3.02
   Animal torture, see 510 ILCS 70/3.03
   Depiction of animal cruelty, see 510 ILCS 70/3.03-1
§ 90.24 RESERVED.
§ 90.25 POLICE ANIMAL.
   (A)   Teasing, striking or tampering with police animals, service animals,
accelerant detection dogs, or search and rescue dogs prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously taunt, torment, tease,
beat, strike or administer or subject any desensitizing drugs, chemicals or
substance to any animal used by a law enforcement officer in the performance of
his or her functions or duties, or when placed in confinement off duty, any
service animal, any search or rescue dog, any police, service, or search and
rescue animal in training, or any accelerant detection canine used by a fire
officer for arson investigations in the performance of his or her functions or
while off duty. It is unlawful for any person to interfere or meddle with any
animal used by a law enforcement department or agency or any handler thereof in
the performance of the functions or duties of the department or agency, any
service animal, any search and rescue dog, any law enforcement, service, or
search and rescue animal in training, or any accelerant detection canine used
by a fire officer for arson investigations in the performance of his or her
functions or while off duty.
   (B)   Injuring or killing police animals, service animals, accelerant
detection dogs, or search and rescue dogs prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to willfully or maliciously torture, mutilate, injure, disable,
poison, or kill any animal used by a law enforcement department or agency in
the performance of the functions or duties of the department or agency or when
placed in confinement off duty, any service animal, any search and rescue dog,
any law enforcement, service, or search and rescue animal in training, or any
accelerant detection canine used by a fire officer for arson investigations in
the performance of his or her functions or while off duty. However, a police
officer or veterinarian may perform euthanasia in emergency situations when
delay would cause the animal undue suffering and pain.
   (C)   Violation of division (A) of this section. Any person convicted of
violating division (A) of this section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (D)   Violation of division (B) of this section. Any person convicted of
violating division (B) of this section is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor where
the animal is not killed or totally disabled, but if the animal is killed or
totally disabled the person shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony.
(1980 Code, § 90.25) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024) Penalty, see § 90.99
Statutory reference:
   Humane Care for Animals Act, see 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.
   Teasing, striking or tampering with police animals, service animals,
accelerant detection dogs, or search and rescue dogs prohibited, see 510 ILCS
70/4.03
   Injuring or killing police animals, service animals, accelerant detection
dogs, or search and rescue dogs prohibited, see 510 ILCS 70/4.04
§ 90.26 RESERVED
§ 90.27 FEES FOR SERVICES PURSUANT TO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS.
   Fees for services pursuant to intergovernmental agreements shall be set
pursuant to those agreements.
(1980 Code, § 90.27) (Ord. 07-0291, adopted 7-1-2007; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
§ 90.28 ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES.
   The Will County Animal Protection Services is created to provide impoundment
functions for rabies examinations, a shelter for seized, stray, homeless,
abandoned or unwanted animals, adoption of animals and other statutory duties
relating to the health, safety and welfare of animals in Will County.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of pound or animal control facility, see 510 ILCS 5/2.18
§ 90.29 ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES FEES.
   The following fees are established for services relating to the operation of
the animal protection services which shall be deposited into the animal control
fund:
    RABIES REGISTRATION FEES
                                           RABIES REGISTRATION FEES
                                        $15 for spayed, neutered or sterilized
One year tag                            animals;
                                        $40 for intact animals.
                                        $35 for spayed, neutered or sterilized
Three year tag                          animals;
                                        $90 for intact animals.
Replacement tag                         $10
                                          ADOPTION FEES
Kitten (under 6 months old)             $125
Two kittens                             $200
Cat (6 months to 6 years old)           $75
Bonded pair of cats                     $100
Senior cat (7 years old or older)       $50
Bonded pair of senior cats              $50
Puppy (under 6 months old)              $200
Dog (6 months to 6 years old)           $150
Bonded pair of dogs                     $150
Senior dog (7 years old or older)       $100
Bonded pair of senior dogs              $100
Ferrett, rabbit, parrot                 $50
Guinea pig, rat, cockatiel, medium bird $25
Hamster, gerbil, mouse, small bird      $15
Other non-listed animal                 $25
Veterans                                $0.00 pursuant to 225 ILCS 605/3.3
                                          MICROCHIPPING FEES
Implanting microchip                    $10
Microchip registration fee              $10
Animals of senior citizens (60 and      waived
older)
Animals for first responders, military, waived
and veterans
                                          RABIES OBSERVATION FEES
Two veterinary examinations             $100 per exam
10 day quarantine - cat                 $20 per day
10 day quarantine - dog                 $30 per day
Specimen submission for testing         actual cost of testing
                                          RECLAIM FEES
First reclaim                           $75
Second reclaim                          $100
Third reclaim                           $150 plus sterilization fee per 510
                                        ILCS 5/9
Fourth or subsequent reclaim            $250
Boarding fee per day                    $15
Mandatory microchip if not chipped      see microchip fees
After hours pick up by officer fee      $50
                                          RELINQUISHMENT FEES
Spayed/neutered cat or dog - county     $50
resident
Intact cat or dog - county resident     $75
Spayed/neutered cat or dog - non-county $100
resident
Intact cat or dog - non-county resident $200
Litters including nursing mother        $50
Other small pets - county resident      $20
Other small pets - non-county resident  $50
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 90.30 ANIMAL PROTECTION SERVICES FEE WAIVER.
   Since the population of the Animal Protection Services involves living
beings, it may be necessary to waive or reduce fees in appropriate cases to
ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the animals housed therein. The
Administrator is authorized to waive or reduce fees in appropriate
circumstances as the Administrator finds necessary to ensure the health,
safety, and welfare of the animals.
(Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
 
Code Sections 1st offense 2nd offense 3rd offense
90.10,
90.23,        $500        $1,000      $1,500
90.25
90.04,
90.05,
90.06,        $250        $500        $1,000
90.09,
90.22
90.08,
90.11,
90.13,        $100        $150        $300
90.14,
90.18
 
   (A)   Each day a person fails to comply constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   If the owner of a dog subject to enclosure neglects to do the
following, then the owner shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor:
      (1)   Fails to maintain or keep the dog in an enclosure;
      (2)   The dog inflicts great bodily harm, permanent disfigurement, or
permanent physical disability upon any other person or causes the death of
another person; and
      (3)   The attack is unprovoked in a place where the person is peaceably
conducting himself or herself and where the person may lawfully be.
   (C)   Unless the owner knowingly allowed the dog to run at large or failed
to take steps to keep the dog in an enclosure, then the owner shall be guilty
of Class 4 felony.
   (D)   The penalty in this division shall be in addition to any other
criminal or civil sanction provided by law.
   (E)   The owner of the animal must, in addition to payment of the fine,
present evidence that the animal has been inoculated against rabies, as
specified in this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 90.99) (Res. 99-61, adopted 2-18-1999; Res. 06-122, adopted 3-16-
2006; Am. Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011; Ord. 24-19, passed 1-18-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
CHAPTER 91: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
Section
   
91.01   Dedication of park land or cash contribution required
   
91.02   Criteria for park land dedication
   
91.03   Criteria for cash contribution
   
91.04   Criteria for dedication and cash contribution
   
91.05   Credit for private open space
   
91.06   Density formula
   
91.07   Reservation of additional land
   
91.08   Combining with adjoining development
   
91.09   Improved sites
   
91.10   Shape, topography and grading
Cross-reference:
   Natural and cultural resources, see §
154.085
   Public swimming facility and bathing beach, see
Ch. 97
§ 91.01 DEDICATION OF PARK LAND OR CASH CONTRIBUTION REQUIRED.
   As a condition of approval of a final plat of a residential subdivision, or
of a final plat of other residential development, each subdivider or developer
will be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes to serve
the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or make a
cash contribution in lieu of an actual land dedication, or both, at the option
of the county, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 91.01) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.02 CRITERIA FOR PARK LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   Amount of land required. The ultimate population density to be
generated by a subdivision or development shall bear directly on the amount of
land required to be dedicated for park and recreation sites. The acreage of
land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the total
population of the development times the number of required acres per 1,000
population.
      (1)   The total requirement shall be five and one-half acres of park or
recreational land, or cash in lieu of land, per 1,000 of ultimate population.
      (2)   Table I shall be a guideline for park and recreational land
distribution.
Table I
Types of Recreation Areas Size Range Min. Acres 1,000 People
Table I
Types of Recreation Areas          Size Range            Min. Acres 1,000
                                                         People
(a)   Play lot                  Min. 8,000 square     N/A
                                   feet
(b)   School park (neighborhood Min. park of 5 acres  1.25
playground)
(c)   Neighborhood park         Min. 3-1/2 acres      1.0
(d)   District-wide park        Min. 4 acres up to 30 1.25
                                   acres
(e)   Community-wide recreation Min. 12 acres up to   2.0
                                   30 acres
TOTAL 5.5 acres per 1,000 people
Example:   Development of 100 detached single-family three bedroom homes with
3.446 people per household (source: Table II)
Total ultimate population = number of lots x ultimate population for detached
single-family three bedroom homes
= 100 x 3.446 = 344.6
Total population x The required acreage = Total acres required
for 1,000 population
344.6 x 5.5 acres = 1.9
1,000
 
   (B)   Location and ownership. Comprehensive park ordinance plans,
appropriate standards adopted by the affected park district, and adopted
municipal and county plans shall be used as a guideline in locating a site.
      (1)   Where an elementary school site of not less than five acres exists,
it shall be a guideline to dedicate a part or all of the park land adjoining
the school site.
      (2)   A central location which will serve equally the entire development
is most desirable. In a large development, these sites can be located
throughout the development according to established standards for park area
distances from residential areas.
      (3)   Each park site should have at least a 66- foot frontage on
dedicated public roads.
      (4)   Full fee simple title to the dedicated park land shall be held by
one of the following, as listed in order of preference:
         (a)   Local park district or Park Commissioner;
         (b)    Forest Preserve District;
         (c)    Township or municipality;
         (d)   School district; and
         (e)   Only when any portion of the land donation falls within the
forest preserve’s acquisition plan can the Forest Preserve District have the
option to accept fee simple title to the land, should the local park district
refuse first option.
      (5)   When necessary, operation and maintenance may be done by a
homeowner’s association with the execution of the appropriate legal documents.
      (6)   It is the intent of the county to acquire land donations instead of
cash donations.
   (C)   Time of conveyance of payment. Prior to, or at the time the Plat
Officer signs the final plat the developer must dedicate the total amount of
park land as required in §
91.01. The developer must submit a bond to the county stating that the
developer shall maintain the property to be donated until all improvements in
the subdivision are built. The accepting body, as determined upon final plat
approval, shall inspect the land to be dedicated and shall receive title to the
land upon written approval of all improvements determined under §
91.07 and after the site has been returned to its natural state.
(1980 Code, § 91.02) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.03 CRITERIA FOR CASH CONTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Cash contribution required. Where the development is small and the
resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land is
geologically and topographically inappropriate for park and recreational
purposes as determined by the County Zoning, Subdivision and Planning
Committee, the county shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication required.
   (B)   Use of cash contributions. The cash contributions will be available to
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or
development or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation
land needs, with the exception of operational expenses.
   (C)   Time of conveyance of payment. The total cash contribution shall be
determined prior to the time of final plat approval. At this time, the
developer shall, as security of payment, provide the county with a letter of
credit in the full amount of the cash contribution from an acceptable local
banking institution. The total cash contribution shall be made prior to the
time when either two-thirds of the lots are sold by the developer, or the
letter of credit expires.
      (1)   The letter of credit shall expressly provide that it may be drawn
against by the county at any time the developer fails to make the required
payments at the appropriate time.
      (2)   The developer shall make the cash contribution required directly to
the body as determined at the time of final plat approval. The collector shall
issue a receipt as evidence of payment.
      (3)   Where a local park district does not exist in the area of the
development or a park district exists but does not intend to encompass the area
at a future date, the following bodies shall have the first option in the order
listed to secure the required contribution in an interest-bearing account:
         (a)    Township or municipality; or
         (b)   School district.
      (4)   The accepting body shall hold the donation in a separate account
specifically for the purchase and building of park or recreation sites of
direct benefit to that development. Each accepting body shall show, on a yearly
basis, the status of all cash donations by submitting a bank statement to the
County Treasurer for public record.
      (5)   If in the event that none of the aforementioned bodies anticipate
future establishment or operation of parks or similar types of recreation sites
in the areas of the subdivision, the funds will be held in a special interest-
bearing account by the County Treasurer. This account shall be drawn upon only
for park application purposes within the township of the developer’s
subdivision. The county and township must each sign a release of any funds from
this account.
      (6)   All interest accrued shall be distributed with the original payment
to the public body owning the required park or recreation site.
   (D)   Fair market value. The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be
based on the fair market value of the acres of fully improved residential land
in the area after development. The determination of fair market value shall be
made as of the date of submittal for final plat approval and shall be valid for
a period of 90 days. Because of the diversity of lands within the county, a
single determination of fair market value is not possible. The fair market
value for any particular parcel shall be recommended by the County Supervisor
of Assessments Officer after consultation with the appropriate Township
Assessor. This valuation recommended by the Supervisor of Assessments shall be
used unless the affected subdivider, developer or public body files a written
objection thereto with the Land Use and Zoning Committee not more than 30 days
after the County Supervisor of Assessments Officer has determined the fair
market value. In the event of any objection, the subdivider, developer or
public body shall submit a written appraisal showing the fair market value of
the improved residential land in the area of development, and other evidence.
The Land Use and Zoning Committee shall obtain testimony regarding the fair
market value and prepare a recommendation for the County Board. Testimony by
the Township Assessor may be used to support the determination of the
Supervisor of Assessments or an objection thereto. Final determination of the
fair market value per acre of the improved land shall be made by the County
Board based on the recommendation of the Land Use and Zoning Committee from
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources as
submitted to the Land Use and Zoning Committee by affected parties.
   (E)   Refund. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park or
recreation sites is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten
years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded with all interest accrued
to the lot owner or owners of those lots for which the contribution was made.
The owner or owners are determined at the time the date of refund is
established.
(1980 Code, § 91.03) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979; Res. 89-166, adopted 7-20-
1989)
§ 91.04 CRITERIA FOR DEDICATION AND CASH CONTRIBUTION.
   There will be situations in subdivisions or developments when a combination
of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise under the following circumstances.
   (A)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location
for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling within
the park location shall be dedicated as a site, and a cash contribution in lieu
thereof shall be made.
   (B)   A major part of the local park or recreation site has already been
acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to
complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and
a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall also be required.
(1980 Code, § 91.04) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.05 CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for
recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect or reducing the demand for
local public recreational services. Depending on the size of development, a
portion of the park and recreation areas in subdivisions or developments may,
at the option of the Zoning, Subdivision and Planning Committee of the County
Board, be provided in the form of private open space in lieu of dedicated
public open space. The extent shall be determined by the Zoning, Subdivision
and Planning Committee based on the type of recreational needs of the projected
residents and in conformance to the total park and recreational land
requirements for the general area pursuant to §
91.01.
   (B)   In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks
will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his or
her obligation.
      (1)   Detailed plans of the areas, including specifications of facilities
to be installed, must be approved by the Zoning, Subdivision and Planning
Committee, and before any credit is given for private recreational areas, the
subdivider or developer must establish a permanent system of maintenance with
the execution of the appropriate legal documents.
      (2)   When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it
will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication that would have
been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then
subtract the credit to be given.
(1980 Code, § 91.05) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.06 DENSITY FORMULA.
   (A)   The Table of Estimated Ultimate Population, as amended by the State
School Consulting Service, is generally indicative of current and short range
projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in
calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash
contributions in lieu thereof, unless a written objection is filed by the
subdivider or developer.
   (B)   In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to
the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population, he or she shall submit his or her
own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be
generated from the subdivision or development.
      (1)   In that event, final determination of the density formula to be
used in the calculations shall be made by the Zoning, Subdivision and Planning
Committee of the County Board based upon the demographic information submitted
by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to
the Committee by park districts or others.
      (2)   It is recognized that population density, age distribution and
local conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof is subject to
periodic review and amendment if necessary.
Table II: Table of Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit Children per
Unit
                             Junior               High
        Pre-      Elementary High      Total      School              Total Per
Type of School 0- Grades K-5 Grades 6- Grades K-  Grades 9- Adults 18 Dwelling
Unit    4 Years   5-10 Years 8         8          12        Years +   Unit
                             11-13     5-13 Years 14-17
                             Years                Years
Table II: Table of Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit Children per
Unit
                              Junior    Total     High
           Pre-    Elementary High      Grades K- School              Total Per
Type of    School  Grades K-5 Grades 6- 8         Grades 9- Adults 18 Dwelling
Unit       0-      5-10 Years 8         5-13      12        Years +   Unit
           4 Years            11-13     Years     14-17
                              Years               Years
Detached Single-Family
2 Bedroom  0.113   0.136      0.048     0.184     0.020     1.700     2.017
3 Bedroom  0.292   0.369      0.173     0.542     0.184     1.881     2.889
4 Bedroom  0.418   0.530      0.298     0.828     0.360     2.158     3.764
5 Bedroom  0.283   0.345      0.248     0.593     0.300     2.594     3.770
Attached Single-Family
1 Bedroom  0.000   0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     1.193     1.193
2 Bedroom  0.064   0.088      0.048     0.136     0.038     1.752     1.990
3 Bedroom  0.212   0.234      0.058     0.292     0.059     1.829     2.392
4 Bedroom  0.323   0.322      0.154     0.476     0.173     2.173     3.145
Apartments
Efficiency 0.000   0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     1.294     1.294
1 Bedroom  0.000   0.002      0.001     0.003     0.001     1.754     1.758
2 Bedroom  0.047   0.086      0.042     0.128     0.046     1.693     1.914
3 Bedroom  0.052   0.234      0.123     0.357     0.118     2.526     3.053
Note:
There are only three significant categories provided in this chart. Because of
the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family dwelling units,
only one category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus, only one
category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of
detached and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be
necessary.
 
(1980 Code, § 91.06) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.07 RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.
   Where the comprehensive plan or the standards of the county call for a
larger amount of park and recreational land in a particular subdivision or
planned unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land
needed beyond the developer’s contribution shall be reserved and designated for
subsequent purchase by the county or other public body designated by the
county, provided within one year from the approval of the final plat, the
designated public body signs a contract to purchase the land or files a
condemnation suit in pursuit thereof.
(1980 Code, § 91.07) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.08 COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT.
   Where the subdivision or development is less than 40 acres, public open
space which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with
dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation
areas without hardship on a particular developer.
(1980 Code, § 91.08) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.09 IMPROVED SITES.
   All sites shall be dedicated with access to full service of electricity,
gas, water, sewer, streets, storm drainage and curbs and gutters as applicable
and in conformance with the location of the site or acceptable provision made
therefore.
(1980 Code, § 91.09) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
§ 91.10 SHAPE, TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING.
   (A)   The shape, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surrounding must be suitable for its intended purpose. The bulk of the
intensive park or recreation area should have a width/ depth ratio of one to
two and one-half, unless otherwise accepted by the Zoning, Subdivision and
Planning Committee of the County Board.
   (B)   As a general rule, at least 50% of the donated land shall be buildable
for permanent structures as determined through the appropriate topographical
studies and soil tests.
   (C)   All land required for dedication for park purposes shall be in
addition to those required by other county regulations.
(1980 Code, § 91.10) (Res. 79-60, adopted 4-25-1979)
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY
Section
   
92.01   Permit required
   
92.02   Rules governing fireworks display
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in
advance of the date of the display and action shall be taken on the application
within 48 hours after the application is made. No permit is transferable.
   (B)   Permits may be granted to any group of three or more adult individuals
applying therefore.
   (C)   Applications for permits are to be submitted to the County Sheriff for
his or her approval or disapproval.
   (D)   Each permittee shall sign an agreement holding the county and its
agents and employees harmless for any damages or liability, including, but not
limited to legal fees, for injury to persons or property resulting from the
display of fireworks and accompanying arrangements at the site.
(1980 Code, § 92.01) (Res. 79-118, adopted 6-20-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Permits required for public fireworks display, see ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, §
2.1
§ 92.02 RULES GOVERNING FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
   (A)   The person in charge of a public fireworks display shall have a copy
of the permit in his or her possession.
   (B)   Due to the hazardous nature of materials involved, no fireworks shall
be stored on location prior to set up and show time unless storage is isolated
a minimum of 500 feet from any structure and activity, and under close security
and guard.
   (C)   Persons setting up and shooting the fireworks displays shall be
licensed and professional shooters.
      (1)   Sufficient security shall be provided to keep all persons except
company employees at least 500 feet from the display area during set up and
firing.
      (2)   A manned fire truck shall be standing by on the site during firing.
      (3)   Immediately following the show the grounds and area shall be
inspected and policed to recover dangerous or unfired debris.
      (4)   The following morning the area shall be inspected and policed again
to discover and remove any and all dangerous debris.
      (5)   The company and permittee shall provide a certificate of insurance,
showing sufficient liability insurance to cover any and all accidents
occurring.
   (D)   The company shall take all precautions possible to prevent all
accidents, loss of life and damaged property. Any accident is to be reported to
the Fire Chief and office of the State Fire Marshal immediately.
(1980 Code, § 92.02) (Res. 79-118, adopted 6-20-1979) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(1980 Code, § 92.99)
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for State Fireworks Act, see S.H.A. Ch. 127-1/2, § 131.1
CHAPTER 93: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
General Nuisances
   
93.001   Authority
   
93.002   Purpose
   
93.003   Definitions
   
93.004   General public nuisances
   
93.005   Dumping garbage upon real property
   
93.006   Unplugged well
   
93.007   Enforcement
   
93.008   Remedies
   
93.009   Severability
Nuisance Fires
   
93.020   Authority
   
93.021   Purpose
   
93.022   Permit required
   
93.023   Location of fires
   
93.024   Recreation fires
   
93.025   Fires to be attended
   
93.026   Exceptions
   
93.027   Neighboring structure
   
93.028   Waste material
   
93.029   Enforcement
Alarm Systems
   
93.040   Authority
   
93.041   Purpose
   
93.042   Definitions
   
93.043   Public nuisance
   
93.044   Response to false alarms
   
93.045   Automatic direct dialers (A.D.D.s)
   
93.046   Direct line alarm system permit
   
93.047   Outside audible alarms
   
93.048   Alarm companies
   
93.049   Liability of county limited
   
93.050   Operation and maintenance
   
93.051   Responsibility to answer alarm
   
93.052   Payments
Litter Control
   
93.060   Authority
   
93.061   Definitions
   
93.062   Dumping, depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
93.063   Dumping, depositing from motor vehicles
   
93.064   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
93.065   Abandonment of motor vehicle; presumption
Noise
   
93.080   Authority
   
93.081   Purpose
   
93.082   Public nuisance
   
93.083   Definitions
   
93.084   Measurement procedures
   
93.085   Enforcement
   
93.086   Remedies
   
93.087   Power and duties of the State Attorney’s office
Vibration
   
93.100   Authority
   
93.101   Purpose
   
93.102   Public nuisance
   
93.103   Definitions
   
93.104   Instrumentations
   
93.105   Maximum permitted vibration levels
   
93.106   Enforcement
   
93.107   Remedies
   
93.108   Power and duties of the State Attorney’s office
 
   
93.999   Penalty
GENERAL NUISANCES
§ 93.001 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§§ 47 et seq. and ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1092.
(1980 Code, § 93.001) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to define and abate public nuisances, which
are a detriment to the people of the county and to property values in the
county. The nuisances defined herein are detrimental to safety, health and
public welfare and are adverse to the conservation of property values.
(1980 Code, § 93.002) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Vehicles located on public or private property which are
allowed to remain on public property, or on private property without the
consent of the owner, for a period of more than 24 hours.
   DEBRIS. Includes but is not limited to broken bits and pieces of stone,
rocks, wood, glass and other materials, rubbish and litter.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. It shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations.
   JUNK. Includes, but is not limited to, discarded paper, appliances, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, plastics, metals, machinery, pieces of glass, crockery
and other discarded manufactured items.
   VEHICLE. Automobiles, trucks, buses and similar vehicles designed for
operation on public highways.
(1980 Code, § 93.003) (Res. 80-129, passed 7-23-1980; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.004 GENERAL PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   It is a public nuisance:
   (A)   To cause or allow the carcass of an animal or offal, filth or a
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others;
   (B)   To throw or deposit offal or other offensive matter or the carcass of
a dead animal in a water course, lake, pond, spring, well or common sewer,
street or public highway;
   (C)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of a spring,
river, stream, pond or lake to the injury or prejudice of others;
   (D)   To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of a
navigable river or waters;
   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying places;
   (F)   To carry on the business of manufacturing gunpowder, nitroglycerine or
other highly explosive substances or mixing or grinding the materials for those
substances, in a building within 330 feet of a valuable building erected at the
time the business is commenced;
   (G)   To establish powder magazines near incorporated towns, at a point
different from that appointed according to law by the corporate authorities of
the town, or within 825 feet of an occupied dwelling house;
   (H)   To erect, continue or use a building or other place for the exercise
of a trade, employment or manufacture that occasions noxious exhalations,
offensive smells or otherwise is offensive or dangerous to the health of
individuals or of the public;
   (I)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the wares or
occupation on or affixing them to fences or other private property, or on rocks
or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the
highway or other public place, without permission of the proper authorities;
   (J)   To permit a well drilled for oil, gas, saltwater disposal or any other
purpose in connection with the production of oil and gas to remain unplugged
after the well is no longer used for the purpose for which it was drilled;
   (K)   To construct or operate a salt water pit or oil field refuse pit,
commonly called a “burnout pit”, so that salt water, brine or oil field refuse
or other waste liquids may escape from the pit in a manner except by the
evaporation of the saltwater or brine or by the burning of the oil field waste
or refuse;
   (L)   To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery and materials to remain
around an oil or gas well, or to fail to fill holes, cellars, slush pits and
other excavations made in connection with the well or to restore the surface of
the lands surrounding the well to its condition before the drilling of the
well, upon abandonment of the oil or gas well;
   (M)   To permit salt water, oil, gas or other wastes from a well drilled for
oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to the surface, into a mine or coal
seam, into an underground fresh water supply or from one underground stratum to
another;
   (N)   To harass, intimidate or threaten a person who is about to sell or
lease or has sold or leased a residence of other real property or is about to
buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real property, when
the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person’s attempt to sell,
buy or lease a residence or other real property, or refers to a person’s sale,
purchase or lease of a residence or other real property;
   (O)   To store, dump or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse, garbage,
trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage cans or other containers in
a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents, nuisance birds or
other animal pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health of
individuals or the public;
   (P)   To create a condition, through the improper maintenance of a swimming
pool or wading pool or by causing an action that alters the condition of a
natural body of water, so that it harbors mosquitoes, flies or other animal
pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health of individuals
or the public;
   (Q)   To operate a tanning facility without a valid permit under the Tanning
Facility Permit Act, being ILCS Ch. 210, Act 145 §§ 1 et seq.;
   (R)   To keep an inoperable or abandoned motor vehicle on public or private
property, outside of an enclosed building, for more than seven days after
receiving written notice from the county sent by certified mail, or after
receiving a non-traffic complaint ticket issued by an authorized officer of the
County Land Use Department or the Sheriff’s office. This does not apply to any
motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, to operable
historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises
of a place of business that is legally zoned and is engaged in the wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles; or
   (S)   To store outside of an enclosed building one or more abandoned or
inoperable vehicles or parts thereof, any machinery or equipment not in
operable condition, or any junk or debris, except on property in a zone in
which a junkyard is permitted under the zoning code of the county, and which
meets the standards for a junkyard set forth in the zoning code.
(1980 Code, § 93.004) (Res. 80-129, passed 7-23-1980; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.005 DUMPING GARBAGE UPON REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to dump, deposit or place garbage,
rubbish, trash or refuse upon real property not owned by that person without
the consent of the owner or person in possession of the real property.
   (B)   A person who violates this section is liable to the owner or person in
possession of the real property on which the garbage, rubbish, trash or refuse
is dumped, deposited or placed for the reasonable costs incurred by the owner
or person in possession for cleaning up and properly disposing of the garbage,
rubbish, trash or refuse, and for reasonable attorneys fees.
   (C)   A person violating this section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A
second conviction or an offense committed after the first conviction is a Class
A misdemeanor. A third is a Class 4 felony. Personal property used by a person
in violation of this section shall on the third or subsequent conviction of the
person be forfeited to the county where the violation occurred and disposed of
at a public sale. Before the forfeiture, the court shall conduct a hearing to
determine whether property is subject to forfeiture under this section. At the
forfeiture hearing, the state has the burden of establishing by a preponderance
of the evidence that property is subject to forfeiture under this section.
(1980 Code, § 93.005) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.006 UNPLUGGED WELL.
   (A)   The County Health Department regulates the covering or sealing of
wells and cisterns with regulations detailed in Chapter 53 of this Code. These
regulations are based on ILCS Ch. 415, Act 35, §§ 1 et seq., and ILCS Ch. 415,
Act 30, §§ 1 et seq. incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   It is a Class A misdemeanor for a person to permit a water well,
located on property owned by him or her, to be in an unplugged condition at any
time after the abandonment of the well for obtaining water.
   (C)   No well is in an unplugged condition, however, that is plugged in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural
Resources issued under ILCS Ch. 225, Act 725, §§ 1a et seq. This section does
not apply to a well drilled or used for observation or any other purpose in
connection with the development or operation of a gas storage project.
(1980 Code, § 93.006) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Administrator of the Building Code and the Zoning Code of the
county is designated as the enforcing officer of this subchapter. The Health
Authority of the county shall also enforce this subchapter insofar as health
hazards are involved. The Sheriff’s office of the county shall enforce this
subchapter insofar as the removal of any inoperable vehicle or parts thereof
and insofar as abandoned vehicles are involved.
   (B)   The Sheriff’s office is authorized to remove any inoperable motor
vehicle or parts thereof, after seven days from the issuance of the county
notice stating that the person is to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle or
parts thereof under his or her control.
   (C)   Any authorized employees of these departments shall have the authority
to issue removal notices to any person violating the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1980 Code, § 93.008) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.008 REMEDIES.
   (A)   The owner of any junk or other material or items declared to be a
nuisance in §
93.004, or any person owning, leasing, occupying or having control of property
on which a nuisance exists shall be issued a violation notice or non-traffic
ticket by an authorized officer of the Building Code and Zoning Administration,
Health Authority or Sheriff’s office and be given a reasonable time, but no
less than 48 hours, to correct the violation.
   (B)   Furthermore, if the owner fails to correct the violation within 48
hours, the county, through its properly designated officers, shall have the
right to secure a court order to enter on the property and correct the
violation, and shall have a lien against the property for the reasonable cost
of correction.
(1980 Code, § 93.009) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.009 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter, or the application of the provision to any
person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to that end the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be severable.
(1980 Code, § 93.010) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
NUISANCE FIRES
§ 93.020 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by ILCS Ch. 55, Act
5, § 5-1052.
(1980 Code, § 93.015) (Res 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Ord. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999; Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.021 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define and abate public nuisances which
are a detriment to the people of the county. The nuisance defined herein is
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. (1980 Code, § 93.016)
(Res. 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999; Ord. 09-245,
passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.022 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Waste materials of any nature shall not be disposed of by burning on the
premises or in the immediate vicinity without having obtained a permit from the
state or the State E.P.A.
(1980 Code, § 93.017) (Res. 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999; Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.023 LOCATION OF FIRES.
   (A)   Fires shall be located not less than 50 feet, unless otherwise
specifically provided for herein, from any neighboring structure, with adequate
provision made to prevent spreading of the fire. Legitimate recreation fires
shall be located not less than 50 feet from any neighboring structure.
   (B)   Burning in right-of-way is strictly prohibited.
   (C)   Fires contained in a “patio wood-burning unit”, being a chimnea, patio
warmer or other portable wood burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or
heating shall be at least 15 feet from any neighboring structure.
(1980 Code, § 93.018) (Res. 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999; Res. 00-469, passed 11-16-2000; Res. 02-78, passed 2-21-2002; Ord. 09-
245, passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.024 RECREATION FIRES.
   Recreation fires, being fires used to entertain or cook, may burn sticks,
limbs, logs, charcoal, cooking or camping fuel only. Recreation fires may not
exceed an area dimension of six feet by six feet. In conformance with §
93.022 above, waste materials, including, but not limited to garbage, trash,
refuse, lumber, building materials or tires shall not be burned in recreation
fires.
(1980 Code, § 93.0185) (Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.025 FIRES TO BE ATTENDED.
   All fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire
is extinguished. This person shall have a hose connected to a water supply or
other fire extinguishing equipment ready for use. This person shall be
responsible for notifying the local Fire Department before starting the fire.
(1980 Code, § 93.019) (Res. 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999; Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.026 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Section
93.022 does not apply to the burning of dry leaves, branches or bushes
originating on owner’s property.
   (B)   Section
93.022 also does not apply to controlled burns for agricultural purposes,
habitat reclamation or firefighter training.
(1980 Code, § 93.020) (Res. 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999; Res. 00-469, passed 11-16-2000; Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.027 NEIGHBORING STRUCTURE.
   Neighboring structure means any and all buildings of adjacent land owner(s),
whether structured on a foundation or mobile, including but not limited to
houses, garages, sheds, pole barns.
(1980 Code, § 93.021) (Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.028 WASTE MATERIAL.
   Waste material means all substances liquid, semi-solid or solid other than
leaves, sticks, logs, branches and bushes originating on the owner’s property,
charcoal and cooking or camping fuel.
(1980 Code, § 93.022) (Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009)
§ 93.029 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Sheriff’s office of the county and other applicable enforcement
departments shall enforce this subchapter.
(1980 Code, § 93.023) (Res, 85-179, passed 12-19-1985; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999; Ord. 09-245, passed 8-20-2009)
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 93.040 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by ILCS Ch. 720, Act
5, § 47-5.
(1980 Code, § 93.035) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.041 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define and abate public nuisances,
which are a detriment to the safety and public welfare of the people of the
county. The nuisances herein defined are declared to be detrimental to the
safety and public welfare of the people of the county.
(1980 Code, § 93.036) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.042 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any device, the purpose of which is to detect the occurrence
of any emergency, and is designed to transmit an audible, visual, or other
signal indicating the occurrence of the emergency.
   ALARM USER. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure,
facility, or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM. Any alarm system which, upon being activated,
automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded message or code signal
indicating a need for emergency response.
   CONTACT PERSON. A person who is notified when an alarm is activated who may
or may not be a key holder. The CONTACT PERSON should have knowledge of the
owner's whereabouts, or be able to provide information needed during an
emergency.
   DIRECT LINE ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm device running directly from a specific
location to the Sheriffs, Police, or Fire Departments, and connected by leased
telephone lines.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system which elicits a response form
the Sheriffs Department or any Fire Department response where the Sheriffs
Department also responds, when the situation requiring such a response does not
in fact exist.
      (1)   FALSE ALARM. Shall not include alarms activated by:
         (a)   Criminal activity or unauthorized entry;
         (b)   Earthquake;
         (c)   Hurricane or tornado winds causing structural damage to the
protected premises;
         (d)   Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural
drainage;
         (e)   Lightning bolt causing physical damage to the protected
premises;
         (f)   Fire causing damage to the protected premises verified by the
Fire Department;
         (g)   Telephone line malfunction.
      (2)   If the alarm, when communicated to the Sheriffs Department before
an officer is dispatched to investigate, is clearly identified to the
department as resulting from authorized entry, authorized system test, or other
noncriminal cause, it shall not be considered a false alarm.
      (3)   If Sheriff units responding to an alarm and checking the protected
premises according to standard department operating procedures do not discover
any evidence of unauthorized entry or criminal activity, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the alarm is false. Entries on the Sheriffs
Department's complaint offense card shall be prime facie evidence of the facts
stated there with regard to alarms and responses.
   KEY HOLDER. A person authorized by the alarm user to have access to the
protected premises and alarm system by use of a key or combination to provide
emergency entrance to the premises and to silence audible alarms.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person who contacts for or receives service or maintenance
with respect to an alarm system from an alarm business.
(1980 Code, § 93.037) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210. passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.043 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A false alarm as defined in §
93.042 is declared a public nuisance.
(1980 Code, § 93.038) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210. passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.044 RESPONSE TO FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Whenever an alarm system is activated, thereby requiring an emergency
response to the location by the Sheriff’s Department or the Fire Department
where a member of the Sheriffs Department also responds, the deputy on the
scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the
system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact bona
fide.
   (B)   If the deputy or Fire Chief at the scene of the activated alarm system
determines the alarm to be false, the deputy shall make a report of the false
alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered to the holder of
the alarm system advising the holder of the false alarm.
(1980 Code, § 93.039) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.045 AUTOMATIC DIRECT DIALERS (A.D.D.'S).
   Any automatic dialing telephone alarm installed and operative on the
effective date hereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful
for any person or business to program any device (automatic dialing systems)
utilized to transmit an intrusion or a signaling of an alarm system to any
police emergency line (911) or to any telephone line utilized by the Will
County Sheriff’s Office. For each occurrence, a false alarm fee of $50 may be
assessed against the holder of an alarm system for utilizing an A.D.D. device.
(1980 Code, § 93.040) (Res, 86-51, passed 5-15-1986; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.046 DIRECT LINE ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any direct line alarm system without first
obtaining a permit required by this section.
   (B)   Any user who obtains authority from the Sheriff or his designee to use
a direct line alarm system may contract with any alarm system service of its
choice for the installation, maintenance, and servicing of the alarm system to
be installed, provided the subscriber has obtained a permit as required by this
section.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be filed with the Sheriff or his
designee on forms supplied by the Sheriffs Department and accompanied by a fee
of $300 for the first year and $180 per year thereafter. The fee shall be
payable once a year and is nonrefundable.
   (D)   The application shall state the name, address, and telephone number of
the applicant's property to be serviced, as well as a description of the system
and the location wherein it is proposed to be installed. The application shall
also contain the name, address, and telephone number of a representative of the
installer who can be contacted at any time by the department in case of
emergency.
   (E)    The Sheriff or his or her designee shall approve the application if
he finds that:
      (1)   The use of the alarm system in question will not interfere with the
orderly conduct of county business;
      (2)   The alarm equipment supplier installing the system maintains a
service organization capable of promptly and effectively repairing,
maintaining, and otherwise servicing the alarm system sold or leased by him.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the above, the Sheriff may impose reasonable
conditions on the issuance and exercise of permits relating to the ability of
the department to respond to such alarms based upon the location of the alarm
system and access thereto.
   (G)   The users of the direct line alarm systems are subject to the
provisions of this subchapter in regards to false alarms.
(1980 Code, § 93.041) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.047 OUTSIDE AUDIBLE ALARMS.
   All outside audible alarms on burglar alarm systems are required to be of
the resetting type, capable of being deactivated by a key holder. Owners of
outside audible burglar alarms that ring for more than 15 minutes are subject
not only to a false alarm violation charge, but may also face criminal charges
under ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1, for provoking a breach of the peace. A false
alarm fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) may be assessed against the holder of an
alarm system for the holder's failure to silence an activated alarm within 15
minutes. Commercial fire alarm systems are not required to have a time out
feature on the outside audible alarms. Users of commercial fire alarm systems
shall be required to post names and telephone numbers of emergency response key
holders in a conspicuous location.
(1980 Code, § 93.042) (Res 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.048 ALARM COMPANIES.
   All alarm companies doing business in the county must be licensed by the
state, and the license shall appear on the user permit or information card.
(1980 Code, § 93.043) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210. passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.049 LIABILITY OF COUNTY LIMITED.
   The county shall take every reasonable precaution to ensure that alarm
signals and prerecorded alarm messages received by the Sheriffs Department are
given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the
county shall not be liable for any defects in operation of any alarm type of
system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm, nor for the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the
installation and operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals and
prerecorded alarm messages, or the relaying of such signals and messages. This
subchapter shall not create any legal duty obligating the county to accept the
installation of a remote annunciator on the premises of the Sheriffs
Department, continue the connection of any alarm system to the Sheriffs
Department, or respond or accord any priority to an alarm from an activated
alarm system.
(1980 Code, § 93.045) (Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-86; Am. Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-99; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.050 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches; and
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative
to respond to the alarm system's location within one hour when notified by the
county to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system to provide access to the
premises or to provide security for the premises, and not manually activate an
alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system
was intended to report.
   (B)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated .
   (C)   An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm business inspect
his alarm system after two false alarm dispatches in a one-year period. After
three false alarm dispatches in a one-year period the alarm user must have a
properly licensed alarm business modify the alarm system to be more false-alarm
resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.051 RESPONSIBILITY TO ANSWER ALARM.
   When an alarm has been activated at a business or private residence and the
Sheriffs Department, or other police jurisdiction, responds, the owner or his
representative shall be present at such location after being requested to do so
by a representative of the Sheriffs Department or alarm equipment supplier
responsible for making such notification. Response will be as soon as possible
but shall not exceed one hour from time of request. A false alarm fee of $50
may be assessed against the holder of an alarm system for the holder's failure
to respond to the protected premises within one hour of the activation of a
remote alarm system after being requested to do so by a representative of the
Sheriffs department or alarm equipment supplier responsible for making such
notification.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 93.052 PAYMENTS.
   Individuals and businesses will have 30 days to pay an invoice generated as
the result of a false alarm. Invoices not paid within 30 days are subject to a
$25.00 additional late fee for each outstanding invoice. Invoices not paid
within 60 days, including any late fees or penalties will be referred to the
courts or adjudication hearing process.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
LITTER CONTROL
§ 93.060 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by ILCS Ch. 415, Act
105, §§ 1 et seq.
(1980 Code, § 93.054) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substances or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass,
metal, plastic or other paper containers or other packaging construction
materials; abandoned vehicles (as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-100),
motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or
offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any person or create
a traffic hazard; potentially infectious medical waste as defined in ILCS Ch.
415, Act 5, § 3.84; or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature,
which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. The meaning ascribed to that term in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-146.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate or any other legal
entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns.
(1980 Code, § 93.055) (Res. 92-248, passed 11-19-1992; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999)
§ 93.062 DUMPING, DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit
the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter
upon any public or private property in unincorporated areas of the county, or
upon or into any river, lake, pond or other stream or body of water in
unincorporated areas of the county, except when:
   (A)   The property has been designated by the state or any of its agencies,
or the county, for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on
that property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
Pollution Control Board;
   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by
the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property
or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession,
or the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant and does
not create a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance or a fire
hazard;
   (D)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; or
   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes or properly disposes of the
litter when the emergency no longer exists.
(1980 Code, § 93.056) (Res. 92-248, passed 11-19-1992; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.063 DUMPING, DEPOSITING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or
body of water in unincorporated areas of the county, except as permitted under
§
93.062.
   (B)   Nor shall any person transport by any means garbage or refuse from any
dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site to and deposit the
material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed
along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
(1980 Code, § 93.057) (Res. 92-248, passed 11-19-1992; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.064 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the
person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in a manner as to constitute
a public nuisance, or in a manner that the litter may be blown or otherwise
carried by the natural elements onto the property of another person.
(1980 Code, § 93.058) (Res. 92-248, passed 11-19-1992; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.065 ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE; PRESUMPTION.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a motor vehicle on any highway or any public
property of which he or she is not the owner or tenant in lawful possession in
unincorporated areas of the county.
   (B)   The person to whom the certificate of title to the vehicle last was
issued by the Secretary of State is presumed to be the person to have abandoned
the vehicle, but the presumption may be rebutted.
(1980 Code, § 93.059) (Res. 92-248, passed 11-19-1992; Res. 99-210, passed 5-
20-1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
NOISE
§ 93.080 AUTHORITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter are enacted pursuant to authority given by
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 47-5.
(1980 Code, § 93.070) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.081 PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this subchapter are enacted to define and abate noise as a
public nuisance. Noise as defined herein as a public nuisance is detrimental to
safety health and public welfare of the people of this county and should be
enjoined as necessary to protect the public.
(1980 Code, § 93.071) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.082 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared that any person or business entity who engages
in any act which causes to be emitted a loud, unreasonable or unnecessary noise
which injures or endangers or diminishes the health, peace, safety or welfare
of others is a nuisance for which legal remedies shall be available.
   (B)   It is further declared that no person or business entity shall cause
or allow the emission of sound beyond the boundaries of his or her property as
prohibited by the provisions of 35 Ill. Admin. Code, Ch. 1, §§ 900.1 et seq.,
as presently enacted or subsequently amended, shall be deemed a public nuisance
from which legal remedies shall be available.
(1980 Code, § 93.072) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.083 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of 35 Ill. Adm. Code, titled “Environmental Protection”,
subtitle H, titled “Noise”, Ch. 1, titled “Pollution Control Board”, as
presently promulgated or hereinafter promulgated, are adopted and incorporated
as if fully rewritten herein.
(1980 Code, § 93.073) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.084 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES.
   The measurement procedures of 35 Ill. Adm. Code, titled “Environmental
Protection”, subtitle H, titled “Noise”, Ch. 1, titled “Pollution Control
Board”, Part 901, titled “Sound Emission Standards and Limitations for Property
Line-Noise-Sources”, as presently promulgated or hereinafter promulgated are
adopted and incorporated as if fully rewritten herein.
(1980 Code, § 93.074) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.085 ENFORCEMENT.
   The responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be with the County Sheriff’s Police. The County Sheriff shall have the
responsibility to enforce §
93.082(A). The enforcement of §
93.082(B) shall be with either the County Sheriff or the Administrator of the
Building and Zoning Code who is hereby designated as the enforcing officer. Any
employee of the departments shall have the authority for enforcement authorized
by the Sheriff or the Administrator.
(1980 Code, § 93.075) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.086 REMEDIES.
   Any person owning, leasing or possessing of the subject property on which a
nuisance, as defined by this subchapter, exists is subject as follows:
   (A)   May be issued a non-traffic complaint ticket by an authorized person
in his or her official capacity. Each day the violation occurs is to be
considered a separate violation; and
   (B)   May be subject to injunctive relief brought by the county through its
proper representative and be subject to the assessments of costs and fees
associated with the litigation.
(1980 Code, § 93.076) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.087 POWER AND DUTIES OF THE STATE ATTORNEY’S OFFICE.
   The State Attorney’s office shall act as an attorney for the county and
shall have the following authority:
   (A)   Prosecute any violations of this subchapter in the circuit court of
the county; and
   (B)   Seek injunctive relief against any person owning, leasing or
possessing subject property in the Circuit Court of the county.
(1980 Code, § 93.077) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
VIBRATION
§ 93.100 AUTHORITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter are enacted pursuant to authority given by
ILCS Ch. 720 Act 5, § 47-5.
(1980 Code, § 93.090) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.101 PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this subchapter are enacted to define and abate excessive
vibrations as a public nuisance. Excessive vibrations as defined herein are a
public nuisance and are detrimental to the safety, health and public welfare of
the people of the county and should be enjoined as necessary to protect the
public.
(1980 Code, § 93.091) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.102 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It is declared that no person or business entity shall cause or allow the
emission of excessive vibrations beyond the boundaries of his or her property
as prohibited by the provisions of this subchapter.
(1980 Code, § 93.092) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.103 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMPLITUDE. The maximum displacement of the earth from the normal rest
position. Displacement is usually reported as inches or miles.
   DISCRETE IMPULSES. A ground transmitted vibration stemming from a source
where specific pulses do not exceed 60 per minute (or one per second).
   FREQUENCY. The number of times that a displacement completely repeats itself
in one second of time. Frequency may be designated in cycles per second (cps)
or Hertz.
   IMPACT. An earthborn vibration generally produced by two or more objects
striking each other so as to cause separate and distinct pulses.
   NIGHTTIME HOURS. The hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. local time.
   PARTICLE VELOCITY. A characteristic of vibration that depends on both
displacement and frequency. If not directly measured, it can be computed by
multiplying the frequency by the amplitude times the factor 6.28. The particle
velocity will be in inches per second, when the frequency is expressed in
cycles per second and the amplitude in inches.
   SEISMOGRAPH. An instrument which measures vibration characteristics
simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular planes. The SEISMOGRAPH may
measure displacement and frequency, particle velocity or acceleration.
   STEADY STATE. A vibration which is continuous, as from a fan compressor or
motor.
   VIBRATION. A reciprocating motion transmitted through the earth, both in
horizontal and vertical planes.
(1980 Code, § 93.093) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.104 INSTRUMENTATIONS.
   Ground-transmitted vibration shall be measured with a seismograph or
complement of instruments capable of recording vibration displacement, particle
velocity or acceleration and frequency simultaneously in three mutual
perpendicular directions.
(1980 Code, § 93.094) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.105 MAXIMUM PERMITTED VIBRATION LEVELS.
   (A)   Table 1 designates the applicable lines of Table 2 that apply on or
beyond adjacent lot lines within the zone, and on or beyond appropriate
district boundaries. Vibration shall not exceed the maximum permitted particle
velocities in Table 2. Where more than one set of vibration levels apply, the
most restrictive shall govern. Readings may be made at points of maximum
vibration intensity.
   (B)   (1)   Districts shall be defined as in the County Zoning Ordinance as
it is presently enacted or hereinafter modified as follows:
         (a)   R - Residential E1-2, RI-6;
         (b)   C - Commercial C1-6; and
         (c)   I - Industrial I1-3.
 
Table 1
Applicable Lines of Table 2
Emitting to Lot Line Adjacent District Boundaries
From                          R C I-1 I-2, 3
C           X                 X �X   X
I-1         Z                 X Y – –
I-2, 3      –               X Y Z   –
 
      (2)   The maximum permitted peak particle velocities that correspond to
the above designations are as follows:
 
Table 2
Steady-State Vibration Limits
Peak Particle Velocity (inches per second)
Vibration Limit Daytime Nighttime
X               0.03    0.01
Y               0.06    0.06
Z               0.26    0.20
 
   (C)   The maximum particle velocity shall be in the maximum vector sum of
three mutually perpendicular components recorded simultaneously. Particle
velocity may also be expressed as 6.28 times the displacement in inches
multiplied by the frequency in Hertz (cycles per second).
   (D)   For purposes of this section, steady-state vibrations are vibrations
which are continuous. Vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 60 per
minute shall be considered impact vibrations.
(1980 Code, § 93.095) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.106 ENFORCEMENT.
   The enforcement of these provisions shall be with either the County Sheriff
or the Administrator of the Building and Zoning Code who is hereby designated
as the enforcing officer. Any employee of the Department shall have the
authority for enforcement if authorized by the Sheriff or Administrator.
(1980 Code, § 93.096) (Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999)
§ 93.107 REMEDIES.
   Any person owning, leasing or possessing of the subject property on which a
nuisance as defined by this subchapter exists is subject as follows:
   (A)   May be issued a non-traffic complaint ticket by an authorized person
in his or her official capacity. Each day the violation occurs is to be
considered a separate violation; and
   (B)   May be subject to injunctive relief brought by the county through its
proper representative and be subject to the assessments of costs and fees
associated with the litigation.
(1980 Code, § 93.097) (Res. 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.108 POWER AND DUTIES OF THE STATE ATTORNEY’S OFFICE.
   The State Attorney’s office shall act as an attorney for the county and
shall have the following authority:
   (A)   Prosecute any violations of this subchapter in the Circuit Court of
the county; and
   (B)   Seek injunctive relief against any person owning, leasing or
possessing subject property in the Circuit Court of the county.
(1980 Code, § 93.098) (Res 94-229, passed 1-19-1995; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-
1999)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   General public nuisances. Whoever causes, erects or continues a
nuisance described in §
93.004, for the first offense, is guilty of a petty offense, unless stated
otherwise, and shall be fined $100. A subsequent offense is guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor. Every nuisance described in this subchapter, when a conviction for
that nuisance is had, may, by order of the court before which the conviction is
had, be abated by the Sheriff or other proper officer, at the expense of the
defendant. It is not a defense to a proceeding under this section that the
nuisance is erected or continued by virtue or permission of a law of this
county or state. Each day upon which a violation exists shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(1980 Code, § 93.007)
   (C)   Nuisance fires. Any person found to be in violation of any part of §§
93.020 through
93.029 shall be fined $50 for the first offense, $150 for the second offense
and $500 for the third and subsequent offenses, plus court costs.
(1980 Code, § 93.999)
   (D)   Alarm systems; §§ 93.040 through 93.049.
      (1)   Fire alarm systems. No owner of property protected by an alarm
system shall permit, allow, or suffer the alarm system to communicate or
transmit a false alarm. For the first two false alarms within a 44 12-month
period, there shall be no fee; however, a warning in writing may be given. For
the third false alarm within a 12-month period, the owner of the protected
premises shall pay a fine of $25; for the fourth false alarm within a 12-month
period, the owner of the protected premises shall pay a fine of $50; for each
and every false alarm beyond four within a 12-month period, the owner of the
protected premises shall pay a fine of $ 100. Each and every violation of this
subchapter is a petty offense punishable by the fine structure set forth
previously. Under the direct line alarm system, the Sheriff reserves the right
under the agreement to disconnect the subscriber from the system in the event
of continuous false alarms.
      (2)   Burglar alarm systems. No owner of property protected by a burglar
alarm system shall permit, allow, or suffer the alarm system to communicate or
transmit a false alarm. For the first two false alarms within a 12-month
period, there shall be no fee; however, a warning in writing will be given. For
the third false alarm within a 12-month period, the owner of the protected
premises shall pay a fine of $25. For the forth false alarm within a 12-month
period, the owner of the protected premises shall pay a fine of $50. For the
(5) fifth false alarm within a 12-month period, the owner of the protected
premises shall pay a fine of $75. For the sixth false alarm and every false
alarm beyond six within a 12-month period, the owner of the protected premises
shall pay a fine of $125. Each and every violation of this subchapter is a
petty offense punishable by the fine structure set forth previously. Under the
direct line alarm system, the Sheriff reserves the right under the lease
agreement to disconnect the subscriber from the system in the event of
continuous false alarms.
      (3)   Exceptions. The Sheriff or his or her designee shall be empowered
to revise the complaint offense card and remove the false alarm report for
reasonable cause. New and revamped alarm systems subject to prior notice from
the alarm company shall be granted a 30-day grace period.
(1980 Code, § 93.044)
   (E)   Litter control. Persons who violate §§
93.062 through
93.065 are subject to penalties set out in this section.
      (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§
93.062 through
93.065 is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A second conviction for an offense
committed after the first conviction is a Class A misdemeanor. A third or
subsequent violation committed after a second conviction is a Class 4 felony.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this section, the court may
order that the person convicted of a violation remove and properly dispose of
the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise the removal and disposal
and may tax the costs of the supervision as costs against the person so
convicted.
      (3)   The penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities
otherwise imposed or conferred by law.
(1980 Code, § 93.060)
   (F)   Noise.
      (1)   A violation of §
93.082(A) is a petty offense for which the violator shall pay a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $100, and the court costs of prosecution.
   (C)   A violation of §
93.082(B) is a petty offense for which the violator shall pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500, and the court costs of prosecution.
(1980 Code, § 93.999)
(Res. 86-51, passed 5-15-1986; Res. 99-210, passed 5-20-1999; Ord. 09-245,
passed 8-20-2009; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
CHAPTER 94: 9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Section
   
94.01   Imposition of monthly surcharge
   
94.02   County Treasurer as depository
Cross-reference:
   9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System Board, §§
34.105 through
34.113
§ 94.01 IMPOSITION OF MONTHLY SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the enabling authority set forth in ILCS Ch. 50, Act 750,
and the result of a county-wide referendum held on November 7, 1989, a monthly
surcharge is imposed upon all billed subscribers of network connection provided
by telecommunications carriers engaged in the business of transmitting messages
by means of electricity originating within the corporate limits of Will County,
and those portions of Will County municipalities partially located in Will
County, Cook, DuPage, Kankakee, Grundy or Kendall Counties, as approved by
intergovernmental agreements, except Naperville, Park Forest and Bolingbrook,
based upon Naperville, Park Forest and Bolingbrook having previously approved a
surcharge under the Emergency Telephone System Act and not having specifically
requested the county to impose an additional surcharge pursuant to § 44 (d) of
the Act.
   (B)   The surcharge is imposed at a rate of $0.75 per month per network
connection. The telecommunication carrier collecting the surcharge shall also
be entitled to deduct 3% of the gross amount of the surcharge collected to
reimburse the telecommunications carrier for the expense of accounting and
collecting the surcharge.
   (C)   The amount of the surcharge collected by the telecommunications
carrier shall be paid to the Treasurer of Will County, Emergency Telephone
Systems Board, 302 North Chicago Street, Joliet, Illinois, 60432, in that
official’s capacity as ex officio treasurer of the County Emergency Telephone
Systems Board not later than 30 days after the surcharge is collected, net of
any network or other 9-1-1 or sophisticated 9-1-1 system charges then due the
particular telecommunications carrier, as shown on an itemized bill, to be held
and distributed by the aforesaid County Treasurer according to law.
   (D)   For the purposes of computing the surcharge imposed by this section,
the network connections to which the surcharge shall apply shall be those in-
service network connections, other than those network connections assigned to
all police and fire agencies emergency numbers including any seven digit
numbers as well as all 9-1-1 circuits, where the subscriber’s service address
for each network connection or connections are located within the corporate
limits of the county, and those municipalities partially located within Will
County and Cook, DuPage, Kankakee, Grundy or Kendall Counties approved by
intergovernmental agreements, except Naperville, Park Forest and Bolingbrook,
Illinois. The term SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the subscriber’s
primary use of the network connection or connections.
   (E)   Unless the provisions of this section specifically otherwise state,
all terms used in this section shall be defined in the manner set forth in the
Emergency Telephone System Act (S.H.A. Ch. 134, Par. 45.3 et seq.), or other
law to which reference is made by provisions of the Act.
(1980 Code, § 94.01) (Res. 90-11, adopted 1-18-1990; Res. 90-12, adopted 1-18-
1990)
§ 94.02 COUNTY TREASURER AS DEPOSITORY.
   The County Board hereby designates the County Treasurer as a depository in
which the moneys received for the 9-1-1 surcharge may be deposited.
(1980 Code, § 94.02) (Res. 89-73, adopted 4-19-1990)
CHAPTER 95: FIREARMS
Section
   
95.01   Purpose of chapter
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Authority
   
95.04   Scope of chapter
   
95.05   Exemptions
   
95.06   Enforcement
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1117, for the
purpose of:
   (A)   Promotion of public health, safety and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the county; and
   (B)   Avoidance of hazard and injury to persons.
(1980 Code, § 95.01) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREARMS. Any weapon which is designed to or may readily be converted to
expel any projectile by the action of an explosive; or the frame or receiver of
any weapon.
   RAILROAD CORRIDOR. Any area within 100 yards on either side of a railroad
track or within the fenced railroad right-of-way, whichever is greater, and the
railroad track is being used for rail transportation and not abandoned.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any area that is within 300 yards of at least three single
or multi-family residential structures.
   UNINCORPORATED AREA. The area within the county boundaries not within the
boundaries of any municipality.
(1980 Code, § 95.02) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992; Res. 94-134, adopted 5-19-
1994)
§ 95.03 AUTHORITY.
   In order to ensure the above purposes, the county has, pursuant to ILCS Ch.
55, Act 5, § 5-1117, the power to regulate or prohibit the discharge of
firearms within residential areas in the unincorporated county.
(1980 Code, § 95.03) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 95.04 SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within
any residential area or railroad corridor in the unincorporated county. This
provision does not apply to incorporated areas of the county. Discharge of
firearms in incorporated areas of the county is regulated by the rules and
ordinances of the particular municipality.
(1980 Code, § 95.04) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992; Res. 94-134, adopted 5-19-
1994) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The discharge of a firearm for the lawful defense of persons or property or
in the course of making a lawful arrest when force is justified under Article 7
of the Criminal Code of 1961, shall be exempt from this chapter as well as
those exemptions provided by state statute.
(1980 Code, § 95.05) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992; Res. 94-134, adopted 5-19-
1994)
§ 95.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The County Sheriff’s office shall enforce this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 95.06) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this
chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine of $500 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each and every time a violation of this
chapter occurs.
(1980 Code, § 95.99) (Ord. 92-206, passed 9-17-1992)
CHAPTER 96: RIVERS
Section
   
96.01   No wake area
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 NO WAKE AREA.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor powered watercraft in and upon the
public waters of the Kankakee River in the county, specifically channels of
water in the subdivision of Phelan Acres legally described as follows:
      Units 1-147, both inclusive, in Phelan Acres Condominium, as delineated
on the Plat of Survey recorded September 8, 1981, as Document No. R81-2224 of
the following described parcel of real estate: That part of the Southwest
Quarter of Section 6, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the Third Principal
Meridian; lying North of the Northerly bank of the Kankakee River, which survey
is Exhibit A to the Declaration of Condominium Ownership recorded in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds of Will County, together with each of the undivided
percentage interests in Common Elements as found in the Declaration, as amended
from time to time all in the county; as to create a wake great enough to
disturb a boat at rest, but under no circumstances shall a boat underway exceed
five mph while in the posted “No Wake” area.
   (B)   The Department of Conservation or the County Sheriff’s Department is
hereby authorized to post the area from May 1 through October 31 for the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., with buoys and/or appropriate signs paid for by the
Phelan Acres Association which shall meet the specifications as prescribed by
the United States Coast Guard or the State Department of Conservation, and to
maintain the signs and/or buoys.
(1980 Code, § 96.01) (Res. 95-87, adopted 4-20-1995) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who operates any motor-powered watercraft in and upon the public
waters of the Kankakee River in violation of the terms of this section, commits
the offense of “Illegal Wake in Posted Area”, and upon conviction of the
offense shall be guilty of a petty offense, provided, however that this section
does not apply in the case of an emergency, or to patrol or rescue craft.
(1980 Code, § 96.01) (Res. 95-87, adopted 4-20-1995)
CHAPTER 97: PUBLIC SWIMMING FACILITY
Section
   
97.01   Purpose
   
97.02   Adoption of state law by reference
   
97.03   Definitions
   
97.04   Permit and licensing provisions
   
97.05   Inspections
   
97.06   Current rules
   
97.07   Repeal and date of effect
   
97.08   Conflict of provisions, effect on partial invalidity
   97.09   Injunctions
 
   
97.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Fee Schedule
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Playgrounds, see
Ch. 91
§ 97.01 PURPOSE.
   The Will County Health Department (the Health Authority) through an
agreement with the Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH) maintains and
operates a public swimming facility program for the IDPH and is evaluated as
required by the IDPH to determine compliance with the Illinois Swimming
Facility Act, 210 ILCS 125. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to
establish a schedule of fees to be charged to offset the cost of operating the
program, to regulate the licensing and inspections of such facilities, and to
provide for the incorporation by reference the standards of the Illinois
Department of Public Health as set forth in its Rules entitled "Illinois
Swimming Facility Code" issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health and
may be hereinafter amended or revised.
(1980 Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.02 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
   The Illinois Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health:
Swimming Facility Act 210 ILCS 125/1-32 and the "Illinois Swimming Facility
Code" and any subsequent revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference.
(1980 Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. That person or persons designated by the Will County Board
of Health to enforce this chapter.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Any hazard to public health when the evidence is
sufficient to show that a condition or practice, posing or contributing to a
significant threat of danger to health or safety, create a public health
situation.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the health authority to operate a swimming
facility to the specifications and requirements of the Illinois Swimming
Facility Act, 210 ILCS 12.
   PERSON. An individual, or a firm, partnership, company corporation, trustee,
association or public or private entity.
   SWIMMING FACILITY. A swimming pool, spa, public bathing beach, water slide,
lazy river or other similar aquatic feature as defined in the Illinois Swimming
Facility Act, 210 ILCS 125.
(Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.04 PERMIT AND LICENSING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Permit for new construction or major alteration. No public swimming
facility shall be constructed, developed, installed, or altered in a major
manner until plans, specifications, and other information relative to such
swimming facility and appurtenant facilities as may be requested by IDPH are
submitted to and reviewed by IDPH and found to comply with minimum sanitary and
safety requirements and design criteria, and until a permit for the
construction or development is issued by IDPH.
   (B)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public
swimming facility within Will County in the State of Illinois, who does not
possess a valid permit for new construction or major alteration issued to them
by the IDPH per 210 ILCS 125/4 of the Illinois Swimming Facility Act or a valid
annual license issued by the Will County Health Department.
      (1)   New construction or major alteration.
         (a)   A facility must obtain a permit from the IDPH prior to the
construction of a new swimming facility. In addition, a facility must obtain a
permit from the IDPH prior to the construction of any major alteration of an
existing swimming facility.
         (b)   Any facility that has constructed a new swimming facility or
major alteration of a swimming facility must pass all inspections by the IDPH
prior to opening said swimming facility.
         (c)   Prior to approval of an initial application for license, the
facility must be inspected by IDPH to determine compliance with the
requirements of the IDPH and in accordance with the previously permitted plans.
         (d)   Once all IDPH inspections have been passed, a facility must
obtain a license from the Will County Health Department in order to open to the
public. A license shall be valid for one year from May 1st through April 30th
of the following year and must be renewed annually.
         (e)   Licenses must be displayed in a conspicuous place for public
view, within or on the premises of each swimming facility.
         (f)   A license is not transferrable to a new owner of a swimming
facility.
      (2)   Existing swimming facilities.
         (a)   All existing swimming facilities require a license in order to
open to the public.
         (b)   A license shall be valid for one year from May 1st through April
30th of the following year and must be renewed annually.
         (c)   Licenses must be displayed in a conspicuous place for public
view, within or on the premises of each swimming facility.
         (d)   A license is not transferrable to a new owner of a swimming
facility.
   (C)   Annual licensure fee. The annual licensure fees to be charged by the
Health Authority in pursuance of its authority to license and inspect,
regulate, and supervise public swimming facilities are indicated in Appendix A
at the end of this chapter. The annual licensure fee shall be due no later than
April 30th. All licensure fees shall be made payable to the Will County Health
Department and this fee shall not be refundable.
   (D)   Exemptions. The requirements of this chapter and the applicable fees
shall apply to all public swimming facilities in Will County.
(1980 Code, § 97.03) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.05 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspection frequency. An annual licensing inspection of a public
swimming facility shall be performed at a minimum as required by the agreement
between the Health Authority and the IDPH to maintain and operate the program.
Additional inspections of the facilities shall be performed as often as
necessary to ensure health, safety and welfare of the People of Will County and
to ensure compliance with the swimming facility requirements from the Illinois
Swimming Facility Act, 210 ILCS 125/1-32 and the Illinois Swimming Facility
Code and any subsequent revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference as §
97.02.
   (B)   Access. Representatives of the Health Authority, after proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter any public swimming facility at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance
with this chapter. The representatives shall be permitted to examine the
records of the facility to obtain information on the facility's daily
maintenance and operation and collect samples and other materials as necessary
for proper implementation of this chapter.
   (C)   Report of inspections. Whenever an inspection of a public swimming
facility is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form
used by the Health Authority. The inspection report form shall summarize the
requirements of this chapter. Inspectional remarks shall reference by item
number the violation and the correction to be made. A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the
facility at the conclusion of the inspection or electronically transmitted in a
timely manner. Alternate inspection forms and reports may be used provided they
assure adherence to proper operation and sanitation principles. All completed
inspection reports are public documents that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
   (D)   Correction of violations. The completed inspection report form shall
include written notice of the violations in accordance with 210 ILCS 125/15.1
Swimming Facility Act.
      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as but not limited to
immediate danger to health or safety, unsatisfactory bacteriological results or
inoperable recirculation pumps/filters at the facility or any other condition
as stated in Section 820.330 and Subpart E Section 820.400 Minimum Sanitary
Requirements for Bathing Beaches of the Illinois Swimming Facility Code, the
operations shall immediately cease. Operations shall not resume until
authorized by the Health Authority. A re-inspection shall be conducted to
verify that the imminent health hazard no longer exists. A reinspection fee
shall be charged and is included in Appendix A. Re-inspection fees are non-
refundable.
      (2)   At time of issuance of notice of any violation, the Health
Authority shall request corrections as required by Illinois Swimming Facility
Act, 210 ILCS 125/15.1 - Violations at Facility.
      (3)   Failure to comply will be handled as required by Illinois Swimming
Facility Act and the Illinois Swimming Facility Code or this Will County
chapter.
   (E)   Enforcement. At the discretion of the Health Authority, an informal
conference can be used to achieve compliance with this chapter. A conference
fee shall be charged and is included in Appendix A. Conference fees are non-
refundable. If the conference is unsuccessful in achieving compliance with this
chapter, the Health Department may refer the violation to the States Attorney's
Office for prosecution.
(1980 Code, § 97.04) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 18-95, adopted 4-19-2018; Ord.
24-100, passed 4-18-2024) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 CURRENT RULES.
   This chapter shall be regulated by the Health Authority in accordance with
the current Illinois Swimming Facility Act and Code as established by the IDPH,
and any subsequent revisions. Copies of said Code shall be on file in the
County Clerk's Office and the offices of the Health Authority.
(1980 Code, § 97.05) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-236, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.07 REPEAL AND DATE OF EFFECT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effective immediately following its
adoption and publication as provided for by law and in accordance with the law,
and at that time all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed.
(1980 Code, § 97.06) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-
20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.08 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS, EFFECT ON PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   (A)   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any building, fire, safety, health ordinance or
other code, existing on effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and a protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
   (B)   (1)   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
invalidation shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which
shall remain in full force and effect.
      (2)   To this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to
be joint and severable.
(1980 Code, § 97.07) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-
20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.09 INJUNCTIONS.
   In addition to other remedies provided for in this chapter the Health
Authority may bring an action for injunction to restrain such violations, or to
enjoin the operation of any such establishment. All moneys collected from fines
under this chapter shall be deposited to the Will County Health Department. N
(1980 Code, § 97.08) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or refuses to comply
with any lawful order or requirement of the Health Authority duly made in
writing as provided herein shall, upon finding of guilty, be subject to a fine
of up to $500 for each and every violation; and each day after the original
notice of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(1980 Code, § 97.99) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted 10-
18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
APPENDIX A: FEE SCHEDULE
Service Fee
Service                               Fee
   Swimming Facility                
Swimming facility licensure fee*      $300
Additional feature(s) licensure fee   $75
Swimming facility sample analysis fee $20
Swimming facility re-inspection fee   $50
Swimming facility conference fee      $150
   Bathing Beach
Bathing beach licensure fee           $250
Bathing beach sample analysis fee     $20
Bathing beach re-inspection fee       $50
Bathing beach conference fee          $150
*   Where there is more than one feature at the same location and under the
same ownership, an additional flat fee of $75 shall be charged.
   All fees shall be made payable to the Will County Health Department and
these fees shall not be refundable.
 
(1980 Code, Ch. 97, App.) (Ord. 09-290, adopted 9-17-2009; Ord. 12-326, adopted
10-18-2012; Ord. 15-232, adopted 8-20-2015; Ord. 18-95, adopted 4-19-2018; Ord.
24-100, passed 4-18-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   BUSINESS TAXATION
      
112.   MOTOR RACES; STUNT EVENTS
      
113.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
114.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SANITATION
      
115.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
116.   RAFFLE AND POKER RUN REGULATIONS
      
117.   BID CONTRACTORS
      
118.   BATH HOUSES AND MASSAGE PARLORS
      
119.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
      
120.   SALE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS
      
121.   VIDEO GAMING
      
122.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Construction
   
110.001   Construction
   
110.002   Severability
   
110.003   Words and phrases defined
Licenses
   
110.015   License required; regulations
   
110.016   Application for license
   
110.017   Ineligible applicants
   
110.018   License application process; notice; exception
   
110.019   Prerequisites for issuance
   
110.020   License classifications
   
110.021   Special licenses
   
110.022   License fees
   
110.023   Number of licenses
   
110.024   License renewals
   
110.025   Term of licenses
   
110.026   Location restrictions
   
110.027   Immediate revocation
Changes in License Interest or Premises
   
110.040   Change or expansion of premises; permit
   
110.041   Change of license class
   
110.042   Transfer of license
   
110.043   Death of licensee; termination of partnership or corporation
   
110.044   Changes in interest; partnerships and corporations
Hours of Posting of License
   
110.055   Hours of operation
   
110.056   Posting of license
   
110.057   Persons on premises after hours
Minors
   
110.070   Sale to minors prohibited
   
110.071   Entry on premises
   
110.072   Warning sign
   
110.073   Proof of age
   
110.074   Accountability for consumption, dispensing and/or possession of
alcohol
   
110.075   Beer/beverages/snack carts on a golf course
Conduct on Premises
   
110.090   Intoxicated persons
   
110.091   Disorderly persons
   
110.092   Dancing
   
110.093   Discrimination
   
110.094   Violations of county, state or federal laws
   
110.095   Nudity
   
110.096   Soliciting drinks
   
110.097   Consumption of alcoholic beverages
   
110.098   Licensee to aid in enforcement
   
110.099   Lingerie shows prohibited
   
110.100   Standards of operation
   
110.101   Physical violence involving weapons
Physical Condition of Premises
   
110.115   Sanitation
   
110.116   Lighting; view
   
110.117   Outside viewing
   
110.118   Gas stations
   
110.119   Telephones
   
110.120   Reporting offenses
   
110.121   Accountability of licensee for offense
   
110.122   Accountability of employee for offense
   
110.123   Physical condition of premises
   
110.124   Doors to be unlocked
Local Liquor Control Commissioner and Local Liquor Commission
   
110.135   County Executive to be Commissioner
   
110.136   Compensation
   
110.137   Deputies; number; appointment; compensation
   
110.138   Deputy to be sworn
   
110.139   Powers of Sheriff’s deputies
   
110.140   Record of licenses; copies; notice of issuance or revocation
   
110.141   Powers and duties of Commissioner
   
110.142   Power and duties of State’s Attorney
Hearing Procedures
   
110.155   Type of notice required
   
110.156   Hearings
   
110.157   Appeal on the record
 
   
110.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic liquors generally, see 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
   Beer, see 235 ILCS 5/1-3.04
   Hotels, see 235 ILCS 5/1-3.25
   Local Liquor Control Commission, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
   Retail sales, see 235 ILCS 5/1-3.18
CONSTRUCTION
§ 110.001 CONSTRUCTION.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the county may thereby be protected, and, to the
end that temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors may be encouraged
and fostered by judicious and careful regulation and control of the sale and
distribution of alcoholic liquors.
(1980 Code, § 110.001) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/1-2
§ 110.002 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 110.002) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
§ 110.003 WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED.
   All words and phrases used in this chapter, and defined in the State Liquor
Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., entitled Liquor Control Act of 1934, shall
have the same meaning herein as they have in the Act.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR or ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes the four varieties of
liquor defined as alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol, nor to
any liquid or solid containing .5% or less of alcohol by volume. Nor shall the
provisions of this chapter apply to flavoring extracts, concentrates, syrups or
medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary or toilet preparations or food
products unfit for beverage purposes, but the provisions of this chapter shall
not be construed to exclude alcoholic liquors used in the manufacture,
preparation or compounding of the products. None of the provisions of this
chapter shall apply to wine intended for use and used by any church or
religious organization for sacramental purposes.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common objective other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, and having the following
characteristics:
      (1)   Kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of
annual dues;
      (2)   Owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building of an
extent and character suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable
use and accommodation of its members and their guests;
      (3)   Provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space
and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for
cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests;
      (4)   The club files with the Liquor Commission at the time of its
application for a license under this chapter, two copies of a list of names and
residences of its members, and similarly files, within ten days of the election
of any additional member, his or her name and address;
      (5)   Its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting; and
      (6)   No member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation,
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or to
the members of the club or to its guests introduced by members beyond the
amount of salary fixed and voted upon at any annual meeting by the members or
by its board of directors of other governing body out of the general revenue of
the club.
   COMMISSIONER. The County Executive shall be the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, and shall act in and for that area in the county which is not
within the limits of any city, incorporated town or village.
   ENTERTAINMENT. The offering or permitting of any amusement, including live
musical performances, vaudeville, acting, dancing or contests. ENTERTAINMENT
shall not be construed to include radio, television, electronic reproduction of
music or coin-operated game machines.
   HOTEL. Any public area held out to the public as a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered for consideration, whether on a transient or
permanent basis.
   LICENSEE. The person or persons named in the retail liquor license and shall
include all officers, partners, agents or employees.
   LINGERIE SHOWS. A public display, show or event at which person or persons
wear men’s or women’s undergarments, swimsuits or sleepwear, including but not
limited to bras, panties, underwear, slips, negligees, teddies, thong
undergarments or g- strings whether for sale, raffle, display or gift.
Effective August 19, 2004, any LINGERIE SHOW at a licensed liquor facility
shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 119 of this Code.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container of whatsoever kind used, corked or capped,
sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquor.
   PREMISES. The area under the control of the licensee and used in the
conducting of business for which the license to serve alcoholic beverages is
being issued. The areas include but not restricted to are: that area described
in the application where alcohol is served, parking lots, beer gardens and
those areas internally connected thereto by a doorway which areas are
integrally related to the operation of the licensed establishment.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, the space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE or TO SELL.
      (1)   Any transfer or exchange in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for direct or indirect consideration, and including all sales made by any
person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and
includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts:
         (a)   The selling of alcoholic liquor;
         (b)   The giving away of alcoholic liquor; or
         (c)   The dispensing of alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter, however, shall prevent the possession and
transportation of alcoholic liquor by the possessor for the personal use of the
possessor, his or her family and guests, so long as otherwise in compliance
with ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 2-1, as amended from time to time.
   SAMPLING OR TASTING. Event at which wine and/or beer is dispensed in glasses
which have a capacity of not more than two ounces for the distribution of wine
and four ounces for the distribution of beer.
   WINE. An alcoholic drink produced by the fermenting grapes, fruits, berries,
flowers or vegetables with water and sugar.
(1980 Code, § 110.003) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 94-50, adopted 5-19-1994; Res. 00-133, adopted 3-16-2000; Res.
03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 19-71, passed
3-21-2019; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18- 2022)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of codes and public records by reference, see 55 ILCS 5/5-6002
   Alcohol liquor defined, see 235 ILCS 5/1- 3.05
   Local Liquor Control Commission, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
   Restaurant defined, see 235 ILCS 5/1- 3.23
   Sale defined, see 235 ILCS 5/1-3.22
LICENSES
§ 110.015 LICENSE REQUIRED; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or permit the sale, use or consumption of any
alcoholic liquors in the county in that territory subject to the control of the
County Liquor Commissioner without first having obtained a license to sell
liquors in each location, place or premises wherein it is proposed by a
prospective licensee to sell liquors.
   (B)   Restaurants, dining rooms, cabarets, night clubs, dance halls and
places in which entertainment is provided or food served and which are not part
of a premises licensed hereunder, are prohibited from allowing patrons to bring
upon the premises alcoholic beverages to be there served or consumed by the
patrons.
   (C)   Where two or more locations, places or premises are under the same
roof, or, are located at one street address, a separate license shall be
obtained for each location, place or premises, unless all rooms in which it is
intended to serve alcoholic liquors are directly connected or are adjacent to,
and accessible to each other without leaving the building. Each licensee shall
define with certainty the room or rooms in which liquor is to be sold.
   (D)   No person licensed to sell liquor under any license issued by the
Liquor Commissioner shall be permitted to sell, give away or otherwise dispose
of alcoholic liquor at any place other than the place specifically described in
his or her license whether the place is in the same building or not, provided
that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent any hotel
operator or motel operator licensed under this chapter from serving alcoholic
liquor to registered guests of the hotel or motel in any room or part of the
hotel or motel. However, liquor so served shall be kept in and served from a
licensed location, place or room in the hotel or motel. The foregoing
provisions shall apply only to hotels and motels conducted and maintained as
such.
(1980 Code, § 110.015) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-
16-1995; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.016 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a license other than a Class T, G, GC or SE hereunder
shall be made to the Liquor Control Commissioner of the county in writing,
under oath, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by the duly
authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, and shall include the
following information and statements.
      (1)   The name, age, date of birth, last three residence addresses and
Social Security number of the applicant. In the case of a partnership, the
application must contain the names, ages and last three residence addresses and
Social Security number of each partner.
      (2)   If a corporate license is sought, the application must contain the
name of the corporation, the date of incorporation, the articles of
incorporation, and the names, addresses and Social Security numbers of all
officers and directors. If a majority of the stock of the corporation is owned
by one person, or his or her nominee, the name, address and Social Security
number of each person shall be set forth in the application.
      (3)   In the case of an individual, the application must contain his or
her place of birth, and if the applicant is a naturalized citizen, then the
date and place of naturalization must be shown.
      (4)   The capital investment which the applicant intends to make in the
business of selling liquor at retail upon receipt of a license.
      (5)   The location, address and legal description of the premises to be
licensed. If the premises are leased, the applicant shall attach a copy of the
lease to the license application.
      (6)   A statement whether applicant has made any other application in the
state for a liquor license and what disposition, if any, was made of the
application; and a statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
laws of the state or the United States, and that the applicant will not violate
any of the ordinances of the county.
      (7)   A statement whether or not applicant was ever convicted of a felony
or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has a conviction, a statement of the
nature of the crime, the date and place of conviction, and the sentence
imposed.
      (8)   The applicant, any general manager, and in the case of a
corporation, all officers and persons owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of the corporate applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Sheriff of
the county; all applicants shall obtain a signed affidavit from the Sheriff,
clearing all persons who are required to be fingerprinted under this section.
For purposes of obtaining fingerprints under this section, a fee to cover the
costs incurred in the fingerprinting process shall be collected; the
appropriate fee shall then be forwarded with the fingerprints to the Department
of State Police. An application shall not be considered complete until all
required affidavits are received.
      (9)   The applicant, or applicants, shall obtain a letter of approval
from both the Health Department and the Building and Zoning Department of the
county, and shall file the approval in the office of the County Liquor
Commissioner with any application for a license.
      (10)   Each applicant must publish a “notice of intent” to obtain a
county liquor license. The notice shall be published once in a paper of general
circulation, serving the area of the proposed licensed establishment, and
approved by the County Liquor Commissioner. The notice shall be in the form
presented by the county. Any application for license shall not be complete
until a certificate of publication has been filed with the County Liquor
Commissioner.
      (11)   (a)   All applicants must state on their application whether or
not they have ever been arrested for any drug offense. If they have, they must
fill in the result of the arrest and the charges for the arrest.
         (b)   All applicants must state whether or not they have been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor.
         (c)   The applicant must also sign the affidavit on the bottom of the
application regarding perjury.
      (12)   All license holders must tender to the Liquor Commissioner their
driver licenses or state identification card to be copied and held on file with
their license application along with their Social Security number.
   (B)   Application for a Class G, GC, T or SE license shall be made as
follows.
      (1)   Class G and GC. Application shall be made on a form as may be
required by the Liquor Commissioner and shall include information he or she may
require.
      (2)   Class T and SE. Application shall be made on a form as may be
required by the Liquor Commissioner and shall include information as may be
required and shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the scheduled event.
(1980 Code, § 110.016) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord.
05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Local Liquor Control Commissioner, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.017 INELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to:
      (1)   Persons under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   A person or partner who has not been a resident of the state for at
least one year and of the county for at least 90 days prior to the time of
making the application; or, if a corporation which does not employ a resident
manager who has been a resident of the state of one year and of the county for
at least 90 days. The manager must be present on the premises at least 40 hours
per week;
      (3)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law if the Commissioner determines, after investigation, that the person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
      (5)   A person who has been convicted of the following offenses: keeping
a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, gambling, syndicated gambling,
keeping a gambling place or any other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency
and morality or the conspiracy, solicitation or attempt to commit any of the
aforementioned offenses;
      (6)   A person who has previously had a liquor license revoked for cause,
whether in the county or in any other jurisdiction;
      (7)   A person, who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for the license upon a first
application;
      (8)   A partnership, unless all of the members of the partnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
      (9)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision;
      (10)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless
it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State Business
Corporation Act to transact business in the state;
      (11)   A person whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless
the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
      (12)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or
has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges of any
violation;
      (13)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period of
which the license is to be issued;
      (14)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Local
Liquor Control Commission, any Mayor, Alderman or member of the City Council or
Commission, any president of a Village Board of Trustees or any president or
member of a County Board; and no official shall be interested directly in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
      (15)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;
      (16)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, except when the stamp has been issued to a person who is licensed by
the state to operate a riverboat gambling operation or off-track betting
parlor;
      (17)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period, or if any of the partners has been issued a federal gaming
device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the
current tax period, except when the stamp has been issued to any partner of a
co-partnership who is licensed by the state to operate a riverboat gambling
operation or off-track betting parlor;
      (18)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of the
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering
stamp by the federal government for the current tax period, except when the
stamp has been issued to a corporation or any officer, manager, director or
stockholder thereof who is licensed by the state to operate a riverboat
gambling operation;
      (19)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, except a premise which is the location of a license issued by the state
to operate a riverboat gambling operation; or
      (20)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (B)   Any false or untrue statements contained in the application for
license or at license hearing or, any violations of the terms and conditions of
the application, or, of any of the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations
hereof, shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the license by the
Liquor Control Commissioner as is provided in the Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq.
   (C)   In the event that one of the restrictions becomes known or comes into
effect after the issuance of the license, this will constitute grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license after a properly convened hearing
before the Commissioner.
(1980 Code, § 110.017) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-156, adopted 7-
19-1990; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-16-1995; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord.
05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Authorized reasons for denial of license, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1, 6-2, 6-3, 6-
11, 6-12, 6-25
§ 110.018 LICENSE APPLICATION PROCESS; NOTICE; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Notice. Upon the filing of an application for a new liquor license,
the County Liquor Control Commissioner shall review the applicant’s credentials
and requirements to determine if the license shall be granted.
   (B)   Criteria. The criteria for the license are the following:
      (1)   The class of liquor license applied for;
      (2)   The past performance of the applicant, or if a partnership, that of
each of the partners; or if a corporation, that of the officers, directors and
majority stockholder and manager, as a licensee;
      (3)   The character and reputation of the applicant; or if a partnership,
that of each of the partners; or if a corporation, that of the officers,
directors and a majority stockholder and manager, as a licensee;
      (4)   The general design and layout of the proposed premises;
      (5)   The nature of entertainment, if any, which the applicant intends to
provide;
      (6)   The compliance of the premises with all ordinances of the county
and specifically health, building, zoning, property, maintenance, housing and
fire safety ordinances;
      (7)   Any moneys owed to the county by the applicant which have remained
unpaid for a period of more than 45 days, whether for bills, taxes, license or
otherwise;
      (8)   The number, class and type of licensed premises within a one-mile
radius of the proposed license premises, and within the county as a whole;
      (9)   The zoning, general character of the surrounding neighborhood and
the projected impact of the premises upon the surrounding neighborhood and the
county as a whole. A recommendation may be solicited from the County Land Use
Department at the County Liquor Control Commissioner’s option; and
      (10)   The law enforcement problems, if any, which would be created by
the opening of the premises. A recommendation may be solicited from the County
Sheriff’s Department at the County Liquor Control Commissioner’s option.
(1980 Code, § 110.018) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.019 PREREQUISITES FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Within ten days of notification of County Board action on the license
application, the applicant shall present the following to the Liquor Control
Commissioner;
      (1)   Evidence of dram shop liability insurance, in the form of a
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the state, insuring the applicant, and the owner or lessor of the premises
in at least the minimum amount of coverage required under the Liquor Control
Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/6-21(a).
      (2)   Payment to the Commissioner by means of a certified or cashier’s
check or credit card of the license fee for the class of license desired.
Payments made by credit card will be subject to a convenience fee pursuant to
50 ILCS 345/25. The license fee for the first year shall be prorated monthly,
starting with the month of issuance, provided that no fee shall be reduced by
more than 50%.
   (B)   Each licensee dispensing draught beer is required to have coils and
other equipment used in drawing draught beer cleaned at least once each week by
either chemical or mechanical means approved by the Health Department of the
county, and to prohibit the use of cleaning by steam or hot water alone.
   (C)   Each licensee is responsible for the person or persons cleaning coils
and that the person or persons maintain a written record of the dates on which
the coils were cleaned, and the licensee must retain a copy of the record
available for inspection.
   (D)   Upon request of the Liquor Commissioner, each licensee shall secure
and file with the Commissioner’s office a certificate of approval showing
compliance with all applicable rules or regulations of the Health Department of
the county, and a certificate of approval from the Building and Zoning
Department showing compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the
Building Department and showing that licensee has sufficient zoning for
issuance of the license requested.
   (E)   After the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of division (A)
above, within the prescribed time period, the Commissioner may issue the
license.
   (F)   If the requirements of division (A) are not fulfilled within the time
periods set forth therein, the applicant shall reapply as set forth previously.
   (G)   At any time during the pendency of an application, the Commissioner
shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to any examination and
to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the Commissioner,
are material to the determination as to whether the applicant is qualified to
receive a license under the provisions of this chapter, or whether the premises
sought to be licensed are suitable for the purpose. The Commissioner shall also
have the right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any
objection to the issuance of the license. The failure of any applicant to
appear at the time and place fixed by the Commissioner for his or her
examination or to produce books and records requested, unless for good cause
shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that the applicant is not qualified
to receive a license.
   (H)   Premixed alcoholic beverages (homemade concoctions). All premixed
alcoholic beverages and their containers must comply with all sanitation
requirements as found in the Liquor Control Commission Rules and Regulations
and all local ordinances including that of the Health Department. All premix
dispensing containers or systems must be drained, contents disposed of and
thoroughly cleaned at least once every week. For mechanical systems a record
shall be kept on the premises as to the dates the cleaning was done, signed by
the person who actually performed the cleaning.
   (I)   Mandatory consultation/orientation. Commencing January 1, 1998, for
new applicants of a county liquor license, other than a Class SE or T license,
the issuance of the license will be temporary until they participate in a
mandatory consultation/orientation with their listed manager of the
establishment. If the holder of the license is a corporation, then it is
required that the manager of the establishment participate.
(1980 Code, § 110.021) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-
16-1995; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-18-1999; Res.
03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 20-520, passed
12-22-2020; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18- 2022)
Statutory reference:
   Local liquor control commission, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.020 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Licenses shall be applied for and issued in one of the following classes.
   (A)   Class A license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
alcoholic liquor for consumption in an enclosed building and also authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package not for consumption on the
premises. This class shall not permit entertainment on the premises.
   (B)   Class A1 license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises in
an enclosed building of alcoholic liquor for consumption in the premises and
also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package not for
consumption on the premises. This class shall permit entertainment on the
premises.
   (C)   Class AG license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor upon
premises used for agri-tourism, as that term is defined in the Will County
Zoning Code. This Class shall authorize the sale of liquor for consumption on
the premises during daylight hours and in illuminated areas during evening
hours. This Class shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor upon the
specified premises of packaged alcoholic liquor, not for consumption on the
premises and which is either produced or manufactured on the premises. This
class shall permit tasting or sampling on the premises.
   (D)   Class B license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
alcoholic liquor for consumption in an enclosed building only. This class shall
not permit entertainment on the premises.
   (E)   Class B1 license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises in
an enclosed building of alcoholic liquor for consumption in the premises in an
enclosed building only. This class shall permit entertainment on the premises.
   (F)   Class C license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
alcoholic liquor in its original package not for consumption on the premises.
It shall be lawful, however, to permit the tasting or sampling of alcoholic
liquor on the premises if the tasting or sampling is part of a promotion, is of
a temporary nature, or if no direct or indirect charge is made therefor. This
class shall not permit entertainment on the premises.
   (G)   Class C1 license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
a gas station of alcoholic liquor in its original package not for consumption
on the premises. This class shall not permit entertainment, tasting or sampling
on the premises.
   (H)   Class C2 license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
beer and wine in its original package not for consumption on the premises. This
class shall not permit entertainment, tasting or sampling on the premises.
   (I)   Class D license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
beer and wine for consumption on the premises within an enclosed building only.
This class shall not permit entertainment on the premises.
   (J)   Class D1 license shall authorize the holder to serve alcoholic liquors
for consumption either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or
unlicensed, as an incidental part of a food service that serves prepared meals
which excludes the serving of snacks as the primary meal. Prepared meals and
alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
   (K)   Class E license shall authorize the sale on the specified premises of
a restaurant or hotel for consumption on the premises and within an enclosed
building only, where alcohol is served at tables only, as an integral part of a
food service operation.
   (L)   Class F license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor upon the
specified premises for consumption on the premises only, to club members and
guests who are personally accompanied by a club member.
   (M)   (1)   Under the conditions prescribed herein, and unless the Liquor
Commissioner otherwise requires in his or her discretion for the public good,
Class F or GC licenses shall be allowed to hold special events as described
under §
110.021(B) and shall not be limited as to the number or frequency thereof,
solely as the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Not less than 72 hours before the event, licensee shall inform
the Liquor Commissioner in writing of the event and provide information as the
Liquor Commissioner shall require;
         (b)   No event shall take place between the hours from sunrise to
sunset;
         (c)   The event shall be subject to other conditions as the Liquor
Commissioner shall require; and
         (d)   Any on-duty County Sheriff’s deputy may order the immediate
cessation of the event if, in his or her discretion, it is necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare or if, in his or her discretion, the event is
disruptive to the neighborhood or surrounding area.
      (2)   In determining whether to require a specific special event license,
the Liquor Commissioner shall consider any elements listed in this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 110.022) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-16-1995; Res. 95-88, adopted 4-20-1995; Res. 97-
59, adopted 3-20-1997; Res. 02-430, adopted 9-19-2002; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 19-71, passed 3-21- 2019; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.021 SPECIAL LICENSES.
   (A)   Class G license. Class G license (beer garden) shall authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquor in an open air enclosed area connected to the licensed
establishment or in a pavilion on a premise that the licensee either owns or
rents. No person shall operate a beer garden without a valid license permit as
required under this section. This license is required in addition to any A, A1,
B, B1, D, E or F license. A Class G license shall be applied for and issued as
follows.
      (1)   A beer garden permit may be issued to a licensee to operate an
additional bar on the following locations:
         (a)   An open air enclosed area connected to the licensed
establishment; or
         (b)   A pavilion which is located on the grounds that the licensee
owns or rents.
      (2)   The license permit shall be issued on the same qualifications and
terms and conditions required for the original license under which the license
is granted.
      (3)   A separate Class G license must be obtained for each additional bar
(beer garden).
      (4)   A beer garden permit may be issued for an annual fee of $500.
      (5)   However, no Class G license shall be issued other than a renewal of
an existing license if the designated beer garden area is within 200 feet of a
residence, other than the residence of the owner, his or her lessee or
employees.
      (6)   No entertainment shall be allowed in the beer garden area unless a
Class SE license has been issued allowing the same, and then only under terms
of that license.
      (7)   The Liquor Commissioner may impose additional conditions as he or
she deems necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare and the
quiet enjoyment of any neighborhood residence.
   (B)   Class GC license. Class GC (golf course) shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption outdoors on the premises during daylight hours
when the golf course in use, to the holder of a Class A, A1, B, B1 or D, E or F
license.
   (C)   Class T license. A Class T license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor by civic, charitable, governmental or other not-for-pecuniary-
profit organizations on specified premises or within an area specifically
designated in the license for no longer than a 48-hour period. A Class T
license shall be available to only organizations whose offices are located
within the county, and in no event shall an organization be issued more than
three permits in any calendar year.
   (D)   Special event license.
      (1)   A class SE license shall authorize the holder of a County Class A,
A1, B, B1, D, E or F license to hold one special event within one 24-hour
period. All restrictions of the licensee’s original license classification
apply with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Entertainment is allowed unless specifically disallowed by the
Commissioner; and
         (b)   The event may be held in an enclosed outside area.
      (2)   For purposes of a Class SE license, an ENCLOSED OUTDOOR AREA shall
be defined as follows:
         (a)   An area adjacent to the license premises;
         (b)   An area enclosed by a fence at least four feet high; and
         (c)   An area with controlled, limited access.
   (E)   Application and issuance. A Class T or Class SE license shall be
applied for and issued as follows.
      (1)   Application. Application for a Class T or Class SE license shall be
made to the Commissioner under oath, accompanied by the required fee, and shall
contain information and be in the form as required by the Commissioner and
shall be made not less than 14 days prior to the scheduled event.
      (2)   Issuance. The Commissioner shall determine whether it is in the
best interests of the county to issue the license and shall make his or her
decision based on those elements listed in §
110.018.
      (3)   Decision. The Commissioner shall notify the applicant within ten
days of the hearing on the application of his or her decision, and, if the
application is denied, the applicant may request a hearing before the
Commissioner within three days of the receipt of the notification. The requests
shall be made in writing.
      (4)   Conditions. If a license is issued by the Commissioner, the
licensee shall be subject to the terms of his or her license, including all
conditions which he or she may deem appropriate, the furnishing of evidence of
dram shop insurance as required by §
110.019, all rules of the Commissioner, and the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the operation of licensed premises. Upon the issuance of the
license, the Commissioner shall set the hours of operation.
      (5)   Security conditions. Before issuing the required license, the
Commissioner may require the following.
         (a)   A copy of the County Sheriff’s office special event checklist
and recommendation for issuing of the required license will be attached to the
application. This may include the entering into a contract with the County
Sheriff’s office to provide security or the hiring of a professional security
company to do the same and may include the use of volunteers from the
sponsoring group.
         (b)   The Sheriff or his or her designee will review each application
and make a decision as to which of the requirements would be recommended before
issuance of the license by the Liquor Commissioner. Consideration will be given
to the number of hours alcohol would be served, the number of attendees
expected, and the location of the event in regards to public safety issues.
         (c)   In order to maintain public safety when an activity exceeds 500
persons on the site at one time and alcohol is being served for a considerable
length of time, the applicant will be required to enter into a contract with
the Sheriff to hire deputies if available. This will require the applicant to
reimburse the county at the time-and-a- half rate for each officer hired in
order to defer the costs. This is in addition to the applicant’s own security
staff.
(1980 Code, § 110.023) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-16-1995; Res. 95-88, adopted 4-20-1995; Res. 97-
59, adopted 3-20-1997; Res. 02-430, adopted 9-19-2002; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.022 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fees for licenses shall be as follows:
Type of License License Fee
Type of License                               License Fee
Class A (Package - Premises)                  $2,000
Class A1 (Package - Premises - Entertainment) $2,500
Class AG (Agri-Tourism)                       $2,000
Class B (Premises)                            $2,000
Class B1 (Premises - Entertainment)           $2,500
Class C (Package)                             $2,000
Class C1 (Gas Station)                        $2,000
Class C2 (Package Beer and Wine)              $1,500
Class D (Beer and Wine - Premises)            $1,300
Class D1 (Caterer Retailer)                   $250
Class E (Restaurant - Hotel)                  $2,000
Class F (Club)
   250 members or less                     $750
   251—500 members                       $1,000
   Over 500 members                        $2,000
Class G (Beer Garden)                         $500
(Supplemental License)
Class GC (Golf Course)                        0
(Supplemental License)
Class T (Temporary - 48 hours) per issuance   $50
Class SE (Special Event) per issuance         $50
Transfer of business                          $100
Change in location or expansion               $100
Change in license class; more than 6 months   $500
Half year change in license class             $300
 
   (B)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the
date of issuance, or in the case of renewals, from January 1 through the
business night of December 31, including the morning hours of January 1, per
the closing times as stated in the license. A new or renewed license will be
required in order for the licensed establishment to commence operations on
January 1 of the new year.
   (C)   No rebate of any fee shall be made to any licensee.
(1980 Code, § 110.024) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-16-1995; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord.
05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 19-71, passed 3-21-2019; Ord. 20-520, passed
12-22-2020; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to determine license fees, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 110.023 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   There shall be issued no more than 56 Class A through Class D, as well
as, Class F licenses in the aggregate, of which five shall be available for
fraternal and service organizations, and three licenses shall be available for
the Department of Conservation of the state, and the County Forest Preserve
District. The County Liquor Commissioner shall have the discretion to issue
licenses for Classes D1, E, F, G, T and SE based upon need, so long as the
applicant is in compliance with all other requirements under this chapter. The
licenses shall be available as follows.
License Number
License                 Number
Class A                 Not to exceed 6
Class A1                Not to exceed 11
Class AG (Agri-Tourism) Not to exceed 3
Class B                 Not to exceed 6
Class B1                Not to exceed 9
Class C                 Not to exceed 8
Class C1                Not to exceed 6
Class C2                Not to exceed 0
Class D                 Not to exceed 1
Class D1                As needed
Class E                 As needed
Class F                 Not to exceed 6
Class G                 As needed
Class T                 As needed
Class SE                As needed
 
   (B)   Be it understood that the designated number of licenses for fraternal
and service organization, Department of Conservation, and the County Forest
Preserve Districts shall be allotted from the next available license on the
waiting list by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   A waiting list shall be maintained for each classification of license.
The waiting lists in each classification shall be advanced in the order in
which received by the Commissioner. The applicant’s position on the waiting
list is not transferable to another person or corporation. An applicant whose
position is first on the waiting list shall complete the application for a
license within 60 days from the time the applicant is notified that a license
may be issued. Failure to so effect the completion may result in removal from
the list.
(1980 Code, § 110.025) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 95-38, adopted 2-16-1995; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord.
05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 15-159, adopted 5-21-2015; Ord. 15-183,
adopted 6-18-2015; Ord. 15-303, passed 10-15-2015; Res. 15-361, passed 11-25-
2015; Ord. 17-173, passed 7-20-2017; Ord. 18- 261, passed 9-20-2018; Ord. 19-
71, passed 3-21- 2019; Ord. 19-190, passed 7-18-2019; Ord. 19- 373, passed 12-
19-2019; Ord. 20-95, passed 3- 19-2020; Ord. 20-368, passed 10-15-2020; Ord.
21-203, passed 6-17-2021; Ord. 21-284, passed 8-19-2021; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-
18-2022; Ord. 22-423, passed 11-17-2022; Ord. 23-53, passed 2-16-2023; Ord. 23-
92, passed 3-16-2023; Ord. 23-224, passed 7-19-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.024 LICENSE RENEWALS.
   (A)   Any licensee may apply for renewal of his or her license at the
expiration thereof, provided however, that he or she continues to meet the same
qualifications as an original applicant, and provided that the premises for
which the renewal of license is sought are in compliance with all applicable
ordinances of the county. The right to file an application for renewal of a
license hereunder shall not be construed to create any vested interest or right
in an application. An application for renewal of a license hereunder shall not
prevent the Liquor Control Commissioner from decreasing the number of licenses
to be issued within his or her jurisdiction.
   (B)   On or before November 30 of the year for which the license has been
issued, a licensee shall submit an application for license renewal along with
the required license fee to the Commissioner. The license fee may be paid in
two installments: the first half of the fee shall be submitted with the renewal
application on or before November 30; the second half of the fee is to be paid
on or before July 1 of the year the renewed license has been approved. The
license fee may be paid by certified or cashier’s check or credit card.
Payments made by credit card will be subject to a convenience fee pursuant to
50 ILCS 345/25.
   (C)   Renewal applications shall contain the information as may be required
by the Liquor Commissioner unless a change (other than a change in name of the
establishment) has occurred in the information, in which case the applicant
shall submit an original application with all information required under §
110.016.
   (D)   Renewal applications submitted later than November 30 of the year for
which a current license is held shall be treated as applications for a new
license under §
110.016.
   (E)   All licensees are to keep updated records of the manager of the
establishment that has a liquor license each year at renewal time. The
information that must be provided is the manager’s name, address, phone
numbers, date of birth, driver’s license or state identification license and
Social Security number.
(1980 Code, § 110.026) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord.
05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 20-520, passed 12-22-2020; Ord. 22-236, passed
8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.025 TERM OF LICENSES.
   (A)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the
date of issuance, or in the case of renewals, from January 1 through the
business night of December 31, including the morning hours of January 1, per
the closing times as stated in the license. A new or renewed license will be
required in order for the licensed establishment to commence operations on
January 1 of the new year. A renewed license will be required in order for the
licensed establishment to commence operations on January 1 of the new year.
   (B)   Any licensee who ceases to do business for whatever reason, or, who
closes his or her place of business for whatever reason for a period in excess
of 45 days should notify the Liquor Control Commissioner in writing of the
same. The licensee may be required by the Commissioner, after receipt of notice
of a hearing, to show cause why the license for the establishment should not be
terminated.
   (C)   Any license holder for a golf course shall be exempt from the
requirement of notifying the County Liquor Control Commissioner that the
business will be closed for the winter season and more than a period of time of
45 days. If the golf course is no longer open for business, then the licensee
shall be required to notify the County Liquor Control Commissioner in writing
as in division (B) of this section.
(1980 Code, § 110.027) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 20-520, passed 12-22-2020; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18- 2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.026 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home for aged or
indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or
naval station. This prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on, or a place of business so exempted shall have been established for
those purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter. Nor shall this
restriction apply to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor or premises within 100 feet of any church where the church has
been established within 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In
the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest
part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not
to property boundaries. The provisions of 235 ILCS 5/6-11, as amended from time
to time, are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any sales are
limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors.
(1980 Code, § 110.028) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of codes and public records by reference, see 55 ILCS 5/5-6002
   Authority to determine license classification, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.027 IMMEDIATE REVOCATION.
   (A)   If the County Liquor Commissioner has reason to believe that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community he or she may, upon the issuance of a written
order stating the reason for the conclusion and without notice or hearing,
order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the
licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if the
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses
on the licensed premises the order shall not be applicable to other business or
businesses.
(235 ILCS 5/7-5)
   (B)   Upon notice from the State Liquor Commissioner to the County Liquor
Commissioner and/or the County State’s Attorney’s office, the County Liquor
Commissioner will issue an ex parte order and shall schedule a hearing on the
matter not later than three working days from the date of the order, excluding
holidays, Saturdays and Sundays; if the state liquor license is revoked for
cause, then the County Liquor Commissioner shall order a County Sheriff’s
deputy to go onto the premise and remove the county liquor license. At this
time, notice will be given to the license holder that premises can no longer
sell, distribute, give or disburse alcohol or the business must close.
(1980 Code, § 110.029) (Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Revocation or suspension of license, see 235 ILCS 5/7-5
CHANGES IN LICENSE INTEREST OR PREMISES
§ 110.040 CHANGE OR EXPANSION OF PREMISES; PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for the change of any licensed premises to
a new location or for expansion of the premises as set forth in the original
application.
   (B)   An application to change the location of the licensed premises or for
the expansion of the premises as set forth in the original application shall be
made to the Liquor Control Commissioner under oath by the licensee and shall
contain at least the following information:
      (1)   The name of the licensee;
      (2)   The class of license;
      (3)   The present licensed premises;
      (4)   The proposed licensed premises; and
      (5)   The reason for the proposed change.
   (C)   The Commissioner shall determine whether it is in the best interest of
the county to permit the proposed change in location or for the expansion of
the originally applied for premises, and shall make his or her decision based
on those elements listed in §
110.018; however, no change in the location shall be permitted unless the
licensee shall have been in the location from which he or she is seeking to
have the license transferred as a license for at least two years prior to the
date of the proposed transfer.
   (D)   The Commissioner shall notify the licensee of his or her decision
within ten days of the application, and if the application is denied, the
licensee may request a hearing before the Commissioner within three days of the
date of the receipt of the notification. The request shall be in writing.
(1980 Code, § 110.040) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-
18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.041 CHANGE OF LICENSE CLASS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
110.018, in order to change the class of license, either during the year or
upon renewal, the licensee shall submit an application under oath to the Liquor
Control Commissioner along with the required fee, containing substantially the
same information as is required in §
110.016.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
110.018, the Commissioner shall follow the same procedure as set forth in §
110.016, for the issuance of a new license and shall not issue a license in a
new class unless the appropriate committee has found that the issuance is in
the best interests of the county.
   (C)   In order to change a Class A, A1, B or Bl license to a more
restrictive class of license, either during the license year or upon renewal,
the licensee shall submit an application under oath to the Commissioner along
with the required fee, containing substantially the same information as is
required by §
110.016.
      (1)   License changes which are permitted by this section are as follows:
         (a)   Class A1 to Class A, B, B1 or D;
         (b)   Class A to Class B or D;
         (c)   Class B1 to Class B or D; or
         (d)   Class B to Class D.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall determine whether it is in the best
interests of the county to permit a change of license class and shall make his
or her decision based on those elements listed in §
110.018.
      (3)   The Commissioner shall notify the licensee within ten days of the
application of his or her decision, and if the application is denied, the
licensee may request a hearing before the Commissioner within three days of the
date of the receipt of the notification. The request shall be in writing.
      (4)   If the Commissioner grants the requested license change during the
license year and before July 1, then the second installment shall be paid on
the basis of the new license class.
(1980 Code, § 110.041) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.042 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Generally. A license shall be purely a personal privilege and the
license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily.
   (B)   Sale of business. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, an
application for the transfer of a license may be made to the Liquor Control
Commissioner in the case of a bona fide sale or transfer for valuable
consideration of the business. It shall be made as follows.
      (1)   The application shall be made under oath by the licensee and
proposed purchaser and accompanied by the required fee. The application shall
contain information of the proposed purchaser as is required of an applicant
for a new license.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall determine whether it is in the best
interests of the county to permit the transfer of license and shall make his or
her decision based on those elements listed in §
110.018.
      (3)   The Commissioner shall notify the licensee within ten days of the
application of his or her decision and if the application is denied, the
licensee may request a hearing before the Commissioner within three days of the
date of the receipt of the notification. The request shall be in writing.
(1980 Code, § 110.042) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.043 DEATH OF LICENSEE; TERMINATION OF PARTNERSHIP OR CORPORATION.
   The death of the licensee or the termination of the partnership or
corporation shall cause the license to cease, except that the executor or
administrator of the estate of the deceased licensee may be substituted as
licensee upon application made in accordance with §
110.042, if the person is authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction to
continue the operation of the business.
(1980 Code, § 110.043) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.044 CHANGES IN INTEREST; PARTNERSHIPS AND CORPORATIONS.
   Changes in personnel of any licensee are subject to the following
requirements.
   (A)   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest, or
managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in
writing to the Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All
persons shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify
to hold a license.
   (B)   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate effective on the date of
the change.
   (C)   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in the officers, directors or shareholders of more than 5% of the stock
or managers resulting in the holding of office or the shares by one who is not
eligible for a license, the license shall terminate effective on the date of
the change.
   (D)   If there are any changes in ownership of the establishment licensed
under this chapter, and the licensee does not contact the Liquor Commissioner
within ten days of the change, then the licensee shall be fined in an amount of
$500.
(1980 Code, § 110.044) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-
20-1997; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
HOURS AND POSTING OF LICENSE
§ 110.055 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to remain open for business or to admit the
public to any licensed premises, or to sell or offer for sale at retail or
offer to give away on any licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in the county,
except during the following hours:
      (1)   Sundays, 10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m;
      (2)   Mondays through Thursdays, 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following
day;
      (3)   Fridays and Saturdays, 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the following day;
      (4)   Christmas Eve, closing time shall be 12:00 midnight and on New
Year’s Eve, closing time shall be 3:00 a.m. on January 1; and
      (5)   All establishments may remain open until 2:00 a.m. the day before a
national holiday.
   (B)   Upon application by any license holder and payment of a fee of $250
per year, the Liquor Commissioner, may, in his or her discretion, issue an
additional H permit to any licensee. The H permit shall allow the licensee to
remain open one hour later than any of the above state closing times. The
Commissioner may take into account the record of the establishment with regard
to prior violations, closing hours in nearby municipalities and any other
issues related to the public health, safety and welfare; the Commissioner may,
in his or her discretion, after hearing, revoke any Class H permit if he or she
deems it in the public’s best interest.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, it shall be lawful for
the holders of a Class T license to remain open for business only as permitted
by the terms of that license and lease pursuant thereto.
   (D)   Restaurants or hotels whose premises are licensed under this chapter
shall be permitted to remain open other than the hours established by division
(A) of this section; however, no licensee or his or her agent or employee shall
sell any alcoholic liquor except during the hours permitted in division (A) of
this section; all alcoholic liquor served within 15 minutes prior to the hour
of closing permitted in division (A) of this section must be cleared away no
later than 15 minutes after alcoholic liquor was served, and in restaurants, no
alcoholic liquors shall be consumed on the premises later than 15 minutes after
the hour of closing permitted in division (A) of this section.
(1980 Code, § 110.055) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate sale of liquor, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.056 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall immediately post the license so issued in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises and shall keep the license so posted during all of the time
the license is in force.
(1980 Code, § 110.056) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.057 PERSONS ON PREMISES AFTER HOURS.
   No licensee shall permit another, except a peace officer who is in the
performance of his or her duties or an employee of the licensee who is actually
on duty, to enter or remain upon the licensed premises between the hour of
closing and the hour of opening as established by §
110.055.
(1980 Code, § 110.057) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
MINORS
§ 110.070 SALE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, deliver or attempt to sell or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, except in the performance
of a religious ceremony.
   (B)   No licensee under this chapter, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of any licensee shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated
person, or to any person known by him or her to be a habitual drunkard or an
insane, mentally ill or mentally deficient person.
   (C)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of any
alcoholic liquor, nor have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
(1980 Code, § 110.070) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited sales and possession, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 110.071 ENTRY ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No licensee shall permit or allow a person under 21 years of age to
enter or remain upon a licensed premises except that the persons may enter into
and remain in a restaurant as defined in §
110.003, or in the company of a parent or guardian.
   (B)   No licensee shall employ any person under the age of 21 years, to
sell, handle, draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or to tend
bar, on the licensed premises.
(1980 Code, § 110.071) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited entry to a licensed premises, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16.2
§ 110.072 WARNING SIGN.
   Every licensee under this chapter shall display in a prominent place in each
and every area in which alcoholic beverages are served or sold a printed card
which shall read as follows.
      WARNING TO MINORS:
      You are subject to a fine of up to $750 and criminal prosecution, under
the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of the County of Will, if
you purchase, attempt to purchase or obtain by any means or have in your
possession alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining liquor.
(1980 Code, § 110.072) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.073 PROOF OF AGE.
   (A)   If a licensee under this chapter or any officers, associates, members,
representatives, agents or employees of the licensee believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making the sale
or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification
containing proof of age.
   (B)   Proof of age shall be determined by the presentation of a valid
driver’s license with a picture of the individual, or a valid identification
card with a picture of the individual issued by the Secretary of State. In
addition, two other forms of identification documents containing the
individual’s current address and date of birth must be produced at the same
time. Failure to produce these identifications will constitute notice to the
licensee that the individual is not of legal age to purchase or consume
alcoholic beverages. In the course of examining the identification documents,
if the licensee finds that the documents are forged, changed or altered in any
way, the licensee is under an affirmation duty to confiscate the documents in
question and immediately notify the local police authorities. The licensee then
must notify the Liquor Control Commissioner in writing on the next business
day.
   (C)   No person under the age of 21 years shall misrepresent his or her age
for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining an alcoholic beverage in any place
where beverages are served or sold.
   (D)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card, use
the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification cards, or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.
(1980 Code, § 110.073) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited entry to a licensed premises, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16.2
   Transfer, possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor; restrictions, see
235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 110.074 ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONSUMPTION, DISPENSING AND/OR POSSESSION OF
ALCOHOL.
   (A)   Any person under the age of 21 who has been found consuming,
dispensing and/or being in the possession of alcoholic liquor is in violation
of this chapter.
   (B)   If found to be in violation of this chapter for the consuming,
dispensing and/or possession of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of
21, this person shall be fined a maximum of $200 for each violation.
(1980 Code, § 110.074) (Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited sales and possession, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
   Transfer, possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor; restrictions, see
235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 110.075 BEER/BEVERAGE/SNACK CARTS ON A GOLF COURSE.
   At all golf courses, the person driving the beer/beverage/snack cart on the
course and delivering, giving or selling any alcohol, must be 21 years of age
or older. At all times the driver of the cart must be able to identify
themselves and show proof of the date of birth.
(1980 Code, § 110.075) (Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted
11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
CONDUCT ON PREMISES
§ 110.090 INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (A)   No licensee shall permit or allow an intoxicated person to enter into
or allow to remain upon the premises.
   (B)   No licensee shall sell alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated or
incompetent persons.
(1980 Code, § 110.085) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.091 DISORDERLY PERSONS.
   No licensee shall permit or allow any person to enter into or remain upon
the premises who is engaged in conduct which, under the circumstances, creates
or which would tend to create a breach of the peace.
(1980 Code, § 110.086) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.092 DANCING.
   No licensee shall permit or allow dancing upon the premises except in an
area specifically designated for dancing only or upon a stage.
(1980 Code, § 110.087) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.093 DISCRIMINATION.
   No licensee shall discriminate in service because of race, sex, religion,
national origin or physical handicap.
(1980 Code, § 110.088) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Discrimination, see 235 ILCS 5/6-17
§ 110.094 VIOLATIONS OF COUNTY, STATE OR FEDERAL LAWS.
   (A)   No licensee shall permit or allow the violation of county ordinance,
state statute or federal law upon the licensed premises by any person.
   (B)   No licensee shall violate any county ordinance, state statute or
federal law upon the premises.
(1980 Code, § 110.089) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.095 NUDITY.
   The following conduct on premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor is
prohibited:
   (A)   Any person who performs any of the following acts in a public place
commits public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in 720
ILCS 5/11-30;
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person or another; and
      (3)   PUBLIC PLACE for the purpose of this section means any place where
the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
   (B)   The act or simulated caressing or fondling of genitals, buttocks or
breast;
   (C)   The actual or simulated display or exposure of genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, anus or breast;
   (D)   The permitting of any person to remain in or upon the licensed
premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals, pubic
hair, buttocks, breasts or anus;
   (E)   The displaying of films, pictures or any other visual display
depicting acts set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section; and
   (F)   Effective August 19, 2004, any lingerie show at a license liquor
facility shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 119 of this code.
(1980 Code, § 110.090) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 94-50, adopted 5-
19-1994; Res. 00-133, adopted 3-16-2000; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
   Public indecency, see 720 ILCS 5/11-30
   Chicago v. Pooh Bah Industries, Inc., 224 Ill.2d 390 (2006)
§ 110.096 SOLICITING DRINKS.
   No person shall engage in the solicitation of drinks from customers other
than to take orders for drinks and to mix and deliver drinks as requested by
the customers.
(1980 Code, § 110.091) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.097 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   All alcoholic liquors must be consumed within the establishment. Consumption
of alcoholic beverages is not allowed on a public way, outside the
establishment or in or around a parking lot connected to or controlled by the
licensee. The licensee shall take action to stop the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in those areas. A licensee holding a Class G (beer garden) license
connected to the licensed establishment may allow patrons to drink in an open
air enclosed area. A licensee holding a Class GC (golf course) license may
allow patrons to consume alcoholic beverages on the golf course during daylight
hours while the golf course is in use.
(1980 Code, § 110.092) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.098 LICENSEE TO AID IN ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow persons in a drunken
condition to remain upon or loiter in or around any licensed premises, or to
harbor, conceal, aid or assist any person who has any criminal offense against
the laws of the state; or to refuse to aid or assist the law enforcing officers
of the county in the apprehension of persons accused of or suspected of crime.
(1980 Code, § 110.093) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.099 LINGERIE SHOWS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No licensee shall permit, contract for or allow any person or persons
to enter or remain on the licensed premises to engage in conduct commonly
called a lingerie show as defined in §
110.003 after the licensee has been found to have violated on three separate
occasions §
110.095. The acts leading to the violations must have occurred after May 19,
1994, and the acts leading to the second violation must have occurred after a
finding of violation of the first, and acts leading to the third violation must
have occurred after a finding of violation on the second.
   (B)   Effective August 19, 2004, any lingerie show at a licensed liquor
facility shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 119 of this code.
(1980 Code, § 110.094) (Res. 94-50, adopted 5-19-1994; Res. 00-133, adopted 3-
16-2000; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
   Chicago v. Pooh Bah Industries, Inc., 224 Ill.2d 390 (2006)
§ 110.100 STANDARDS OF OPERATION.
   Licensees shall be held accountable in the operation of their establishment,
for the safety of their patrons, employees and the general public and shall be
evaluated whether they have:
   (A)   Provided sufficient security personnel and established procedures and
policies that reduce the incidence of disorderly and/or violent behavior in
their establishment and in their parking lot of their establishment;
   (B)   Checked identification of persons entering establishment to determine
that patrons are of lawful age;
   (C)   Provided sufficient lighting for security purposes;
   (D)   Consulted with the Sheriff’s office when special events are held to
determine appropriate security and planning;
   (E)   Participated in training, approved by the beverage industry and Police
Departments, in the effective ways to safely operate liquor establishments such
as those offered by the Joliet Police Department’s Safety Training to Encourage
Profitable Services (STEPS) program, Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers
Education and Training (BASSET) Program or any other equivalent program;
   (F)   Reported disturbances in their establishment to the Sheriff’s
Department when the disturbances resulted in physical contact that would likely
result in injury (arguing and mild shoving need not be reported if the
Sheriff’s deputies are not needed for assistance and the dispute is handled
peacefully by licensee’s personnel);
   (G)   Cooperated with Sheriff’s deputies in suppressing disorderly conduct
and violence and assisted the deputies in obtaining the names and addresses of
the perpetrators or witnesses and cooperating in the prosecution of offenders;
   (H)   Discontinued service of alcoholic beverages to persons who manifest
signs that they are becoming intoxicated;
   (I)   Obeyed the closing time regulations;
   (J)   Violated the nudity section of this code (§
110.095); and/or
   (K)   Permitted the sale, exchange or use of illegal drugs or chemical
substances in their establishment or its parking lot.
(1980 Code, § 110.095) (Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-
18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.101 PHYSICAL VIOLENCE INVOLVING WEAPONS.
   The Liquor Commissioner may suspend or revoke any licenses issued by him or
her if he or she determines, after hearing, that there was any physical attack
or fight involving a weapon on the premises, or if there was any unlawful
discharge of a firearm on the premises.
(1980 Code, § 110.098) (Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted
11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
PHYSICAL CONDITION OF PREMISES
§ 110.115 SANITATION.
   The licensee shall maintain the premises in clean and sanitary condition and
shall comply with all other ordinances regulating the condition of premises
used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption.
(1980 Code, § 110.110) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.116 LIGHTING; VIEW.
   All licensees shall keep the premises continuously lighted during business
hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the
interior of the premises shall be clearly visible.
(1980 Code, § 110.111) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.117 OUTSIDE VIEWING.
   All new licensees are required to have a clear glass, unobstructed window in
their place of business, affording a view of the interior of the establishment
from the outside. The window shall be a minimum size of 36 inches by 48 inches
installed at eye level and window shall be in place before the issuance of the
license. Current license holders are required to install windows one year from
the adoption of this ordinance amendment (March 18, 1999). This section applies
to establishments at ground level. Establishments that are not located at
ground level are required to install an 18 inches by 18 inches clear glass
window in the ground level entrance door.
(1980 Code, § 110.112) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.118 GAS STATIONS.
   Gas stations licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall have a totally
enclosed separate area partitioned off from the remaining area, open to the
public. The area within which the alcoholic beverages are sold shall be open
only to the general public over 21 years of age. The entrance leading into the
area selling alcoholic beverages shall have a lockable door, which shall be
secured during the times when alcoholic beverages are not allowed to be sold.
If the walls enclosing the liquor sale area are solid, a clear glass window
measuring a minimum 36 inches by 48 inches must be installed at eye level. A
light must be on within the enclosed area at all times to facilitate viewing.
(1980 Code, § 110.113) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.119 TELEPHONES.
   All licensees establishments are required to have a working telephone behind
the bar accessible to the employees. In cases of emergencies or disturbances,
the licensee must allow the public access to the telephone free of charge to
summon emergency services.
(1980 Code, § 110.114) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.120 REPORTING OFFENSES.
   All licensees are required to immediately report to the Sheriff’s Department
any and all disturbances that occur on the premises. This includes all areas,
adjacent rooms, buildings and parking lots over which the licensee has control.
It is the responsibility of the licensee to immediately report to the Sheriff’s
Department any disturbances occurring on the premises or in any public area
which disturbance originated in the establishment. Failure to report
disturbances will entail either a fine, suspension or revocation of license.
(1980 Code, § 110.115) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-
20-1997; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.121 ACCOUNTABILITY OF LICENSEE FOR OFFENSE.
   The licensee may be prosecuted for any offense defined by this chapter if:
   (A)   An agent, independent contractor or employee of the licensee performs
conduct which itself constitutes an element of the offense while acting within
the scope of his or her employment or on behalf of the licensee; or
   (B)   An agent, independent contractor or employee of the licensee allows
conduct to continue at the liquor establishment, which itself constitutes an
element of the offense, while acting within the scope of his or her employment
or on behalf of the licensee; or
   (C)   The licensee performs or continues to allow conduct, which itself
constitutes an element of the offense, while acting within the scope of the
business; or
   (D)   The commission of the offense is authorized, requested, commanded or
not prevented by the licensee.
(1980 Code, § 110.116) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.122 ACCOUNTABILITY OF EMPLOYEE FOR OFFENSE.
   The employee may be prosecuted for any offense defined in this section if:
   (A)   The employee is acting as an agent of the licensee and performs
conduct which itself constitutes an element of the offense in violation of any
county ordinance, state statute or federal law while acting within the scope of
employment or on behalf of the licensee; or
   (B)   The employee is acting as an agent of the licensee and allows conduct
on the liquor establishment’s premises, which itself constitutes an element of
the offense in violation of any country ordinance, state statute or federal
law, while acting within the scope of employment or on behalf of the licensee;
or
   (C)   If the employee is found in violation of any county ordinance, state
statute or federal law while acing within the scope of employment on behalf of
the licensee, then the employee shall be fined no less than $100 for each
violation.
(1980 Code, § 110.117) (Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-
18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.123 PHYSICAL CONDITION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Sign required. Licensee must post a sign stating the name of the
establishment with letters not less than four inches in height, on the outside
of the building, and visible from the street, by illumination or otherwise, and
visible during any time when the licensee is open for business.
   (B)   Permanent outside signs. One outside sign, per brand, in place and in
use at any time, costing not more than $893, exclusive of erection,
installation, repair and maintenance costs and permit fees. Permanent outside
signs shall bear only the manufacturer’s name, brand name, trade name, slogans,
markings, trademark or other symbols commonly associated with and generally
used in identifying the product.
   (C)   Temporary outside signs.
      (1)   Only one per brand.
      (2)   Examples are banners, flags, pennants, streamers and other items of
a temporary and nonpermanent nature.
      (3)   Must include the manufacturer’s name, brand name, trade name,
slogans, markings, trademark or other symbol associated with and used in
identifying the product.
      (4)   May also include, for example, the product, price, packaging, date
or dates of promotion and an announcement of a retail licensee’s specific-
sponsored event, if the temporary outside sign is intended to promote a
product, and provided that the announcement of the retail licensee’s event and
the product promotion are held simultaneously.
      (5)   May not include names, slogans, markings or logos that relate to
the retailer.
      (6)   Distributors may bear the cost of creating or printing a sign for a
retail licensee’s specific-sponsored event; or for a retail licensee
containing, for example, community goodwill expressions, regional sporting
event announcements and seasonal messages, provided that the primary purpose of
the sign is to highlight, promote or advertise the product.
      (7)   Signs provided by the manufacturer to the distributor or importing
distributor may also include, for example (subject to the limitations of this
section), preprinted community goodwill expressions, sporting event
announcements, seasonal messages and manufacturer promotional announcements. A
distributor or importing distributor shall not bear the cost of the
manufacturer preprinted signs.
   (D)   Permanent inside signs.
      (1)   Whether visible from the outside or inside of the premises,
include, for example, neons, illuminated signs, clocks, table lamps, mirrors,
tap handles, decals, window painting, window trim and spirits or wine lists or
menus.
      (2)   All signs in place and in use at any one time shall cost in the
aggregate not more than $2,000 per manufacturer.
      (3)   Must include manufacturer’s name, brand name, trade name, slogans,
trademark, markings or other symbol commonly associated with and generally used
in identifying the product.
      (4)   May not include names, slogans, markings or logos that related to
retailers.
      (5)   May be displayed in an adjacent courtyard or patio commonly
referred to as a beer garden that is a part of the retailer’s licensed
premises.
   (E)   Temporary inside signs and inside advertising materials.
      (1)   Shall include, for example, lighted chalk boards, acrylic table
tent beverage or hors d’oeuvre list holders, banners, flags, pennants,
streamers and inside advertising materials such as posters, placards, bowling
sheets, inserts for acrylic table tent beverage or hors d’oeuvre list holders,
table tents, sports schedules or similar printed or illustrated material.
      (2)   Items, for example, such as coasters, trays, napkins and cups may
not be provided to retailers.
      (3)   Items shall not cost more than $325 in the aggregate per
manufacturer in place and in use at any one time.
      (4)   Nothing permits a distributor from paying the cost of printing or
creating any temporary inside banner or inserts for acrylic tent beverage or
hors d’oeuvre list holders for a retail license, provided that the primary
purposes for the banner of inserts is to highlight, promote or advertise the
product.
      (5)   All temporary inside signs and inside advertising materials may be
displayed in an adjacent courtyard or patio commonly referred to as a beer
garden that is a part of the retailer’s licensed premises.
(1980 Code, § 110.118) (Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.124 DOORS TO BE UNLOCKED.
   During the hours that the licensee is permitted to conduct business, all
doors for the entrances shall not be locked.
(1980 Code, § 110.119) (Ord. 99-115, adopted 3-18-1999; Ord. 05-500, adopted
11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER AND LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSION
§ 110.135 COUNTY EXECUTIVE TO BE COMMISSIONER.
   The County Executive shall be the Liquor Control Commissioner and he or she
shall have all of the authority vested in the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
by state law, this chapter or other ordinances of the county.
(1980 Code, § 110.130) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Local liquor control commissioner, see 235 ILCS 5/4-2
§ 110.136 COMPENSATION.
   There shall be paid to the Liquor Control Commissioner an annual salary in
an amount as may from time to time be fixed by the County Board in its annual
appropriation ordinance.
(1980 Code, § 110.131) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation, see 235 ILCS 5/4-3
§ 110.137 DEPUTIES; NUMBER; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The County Executive, as Liquor Control Commissioner, may appoint two
Deputy Liquor Commissioners to assist him or her in his or her duties.
   (B)   The compensation of each Deputy Liquor Commissioner shall be in the
amount as provided by the County Board in the annual appropriation ordinance.
(1980 Code, § 110.132) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Local liquor control commissioner, see 235 ILCS 5/4-2
§ 110.138 DEPUTY TO BE SWORN.
   The Deputy Liquor Control Commissioners, before entering upon the duties of
his or her office, shall be sworn upon his or her oath to faithfully discharge
their duties of Deputy Liquor Control Commissioners.
(1980 Code, § 110.133) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.139 POWERS OF SHERIFF’S DEPUTIES.
   (A)   Arrest authority. The Liquor Control Commissioner and Deputy Liquor
Control Commissioners shall be peace officers for the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. All Sheriff’s deputies shall have the power to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Closing liquor facilities. The County Sheriff’s deputies shall close a
liquor facility for conduct that is unmanageable, disorderly or uncontrollable
for purposes of public safety. The County Sheriff or his or her deputies shall
seize the county license from the premises and instruct the licensee that the
license can be retrieved the next business day at the County Sheriff’s
Department. The facility shall then be closed for the rest of the business day
and be allowed to operate the following business day upon retrieval of the
county license.
(1980 Code, § 110.134) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-
20-1997; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.140 RECORD OF LICENSES; COPIES; NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OR REVOCATION.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete
record of all licenses issued by him or her pursuant to this chapter; he or she
shall furnish the County Clerk, Treasurer, County Sheriff and State’s Attorney
with a copy thereof, except for Class T or SE licenses. Copies of Class SE and
T licenses shall be provided to the County Sheriff; and upon the issuance of
any new license or the revocation or suspension of any old license, the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall give written notice of the action to each of these
officers within 48 hours of the action.
(1980 Code, § 110.135) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.141 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers,
functions and duties with respect to licenses for the sale of alcoholic
liquors:
      (1)   To grant, or suspend for not more than 30 days, or to revoke for
cause, all local licenses issued to persons, partnerships, corporations or
clubs subject to his or her jurisdiction;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement, peace officer, Deputy
Liquor Commissioner or inspector to enter any time upon premises licensed
hereunder, to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or any
rules or regulations adopted by it or by the State Liquor Control Commissioner
have been violated, and at that time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith;
      (3)   To receive complaints from any citizen within its jurisdiction that
any of the provisions of the State Liquor Control Act, as set out in 235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq., or this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
hereto, have been or are being violated, and to act upon the complaints;
      (4)   To receive all local license fees and to pay the same forthwith to
the County Treasurer;
      (5)   To receive all fines levied at a hearing held before the Liquor
Commission and to pay the same forthwith to the County Treasurer. The County
Treasurer shall deposit all money to the General Fund;
      (6)   The Commissioner shall have the right to examine or cause to be
examined under oath, any applicant for a liquor license or for a renewal
thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been
served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be
examined, the books and records of any applicant or licensee; to swear in
witnesses, hear testimony and take proof for his or her information in the
performance of his or her duties, and for these purposes to issue subpoenas
which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of
obtaining any information desired by the Commissioner under this section, he or
she may authorize his or her agent or agents to act on his or her behalf;
      (7)   The Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him or
her if he or she determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this Act or any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by the
particular County Board or any applicable rule of regulation established by the
County Liquor Commissioner which is consistent with law;
      (8)   In the conduct of any hearing to examine under oath any licensee
and to cause to be examined the books and records of the licensee; to hear
testimony and take proof, and to administer and cause to be administered oaths;
      (9)   To require that all licensed premises be maintained and operated in
a sanitary condition, in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations
of the Health Department of the county, and in compliance with all zoning
regulations of the county; to require any additional security or enforcement to
assure compliance with all applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of the
county and the state; to assure the public safety, welfare and best interests
of people of the county; to determine the environmental and economic impact of
the area surrounding the licensed premises; and to enforce this chapter against
any public nuisance;
      (10)   To recommend to the County Board the further regulations and
restrictions regarding the issuance of, and operations under local licenses,
not inconsistent with law, as the public good and convenience may require;
      (11)   To investigate changes in this chapter and recommend changes to
the County Board;
      (12)   To adopt any rules and regulations consistent with the provisions
of this chapter as may be necessary;
      (13)   To report to the County Board the relinquishment, whether
voluntary or involuntary of any license, so that the County Board may consider
whether or not the number of licenses should be adjusted; and
      (14)   (a)   To suspend or revoke licensee’s license issued under this
chapter for violation of any portion of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or
evocation, the Commissioner may instead levy a fine on the licensee for the
violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished by fines as follows:
 
Time Period                                       Fine
For the first violation within a 12-month period  $1,000
For the second violation within a 12-month period $1,500
For a third violation within a 12-month period    $2,500
 
         (b)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
         (c)   Not more than $15,000 in fines may be imposed against any
licensee during this period of this license.
(235 ILCS 5/7-5)
   (B)   All fines imposed by the Commissioner must be paid by cash, money
order or certified check made payable to the County Treasurer.
   (C)   All fines imposed by the Commissioner must be paid within ten days.
Failure to pay a fine within the ten-day period will constitute a separate
offense.
   (D)   All fines imposed by the Commissioner may be paid to the Commissioner
on the day of hearing. All fines imposed by the Commissioner not paid on the
day of hearing shall be paid to the Treasurer.
(1980 Code, § 110.136) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 94-50, adopted 5-19-1994; Res. 97-59, adopted 3-20-1997; Res. 03-
296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 17-173, adopted
7-20-2017; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Local Liquor Control Commission, see 235 ILCS 5/7-5
§ 110.142 POWER AND DUTIES OF STATE’S ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The State’s Attorney of the county shall act as attorney for the
Liquor Commission and Commissioner, and shall present evidence in any hearing
before the Commissioner for violations of the provisions of this chapter, or on
any appeal thereof.
   (B)   The State’s Attorney shall have the authority to prosecute any
violations of the County Liquor Control Ordinance in the Circuit Court of the
county.
(1980 Code, § 110.137) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of State’s Attorney, see 55 ILCS 5/3-9005
HEARING PROCEDURES
§ 110.155 TYPE OF NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever this chapter requires a hearing before the Liquor Control
Commission or the Commission acts affirmatively concerning a license or
licensee, the licensee shall be afforded reasonable notice of the hearing.
   (B)   The notice shall state:
      (1)   The time, place and nature of the charge;
      (2)   The date when the appearance of the licensee is required before the
Liquor Commissioner;
      (3)   A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held;
      (4)   A reference to the particular sections of the ordinance involved;
and
      (5)   A statement informing the licensee of his or her ability to respond
by presenting evidence and argument.
(1980 Code, § 110.150) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.156 HEARINGS.
   (A)   A hearing required under this chapter shall beheld in accordance with
the following rules.
      (1)   A hearing shall be set by the Liquor Commissioner at the initial
appearance date or any continuance thereof and shall be held at a reasonable
time, date and place.
      (2)   No cause shall be heard earlier than three days after receipt by a
licensee of the notice required under this chapter.
      (3)   A licensee may present evidence and argument.
      (4)   The Liquor Control Commission or Commissioner may limit, but not
prohibit, the presentation of evidence and argument.
      (5)   A certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter shall be
present at each hearing and shall record the testimony and evidence presented.
   (B)   The Commission may, in its discretion, grant a continuance if
extenuating and unusual circumstances are presented in support of the request
for continuance.
(1980 Code, § 110.151) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 90-104, adopted 5-
17-1990; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord.
22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.157 APPEAL ON THE RECORD.
   (A)   Any appeal taken from a decision of the Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be reviewed on the record of the hearing at which the decision was
rendered as taken by and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
   (B)   The State’s Attorney shall establish the violation by clear and
convincing evidence.
(1980 Code, § 110.152) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Res. 03-296, adopted 6-
19-2003; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished by fines as follows.
 
Time Period                                       Fine
For the first violation within a 12-month period  $1,000
For the second violation within a 12-month period $1,500
For a third violation within a 12-month period    $2,500
 
   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (C)   Not more than $15,000 in fines may be imposed against any licensee
during this period of this license.
(1980 Code, § 110.999) (Res. 86-90, adopted 6-19-1986; Ord. 05-500, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 22-236, passed 8-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of corporate powers, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1004
   Local control of Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
CHAPTER 111: BUSINESS TAXATION
Section
   
111.01   Leasing occupation tax
   
111.02   Retailers occupation tax; supplementary tax
   
111.03   Service occupation tax; supplementary tax
   
111.04   Recovery of sales tax on building materials
   
111.05   Supplementary use tax
Cross-reference:
   Tax abatement guidelines for location and retention of commercial and
industrial businesses, see §§
157.15 through
157.18
§ 111.01 LEASING OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of renting or
leasing tangible personal property to users thereof, at the rate of 0.5% of the
gross receipts from renting or leasing when made in the course of business.
   (B)   Every person engaged in this business in the unincorporated areas of
the county, shall file a return with the State Department of Revenue in the
manner required by § 5 of the Leasing Occupation Tax Act adopted by the
Seventy-Fourth General Assembly.
   (C)   At the time the return is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed under division (A) above, based
on receipts from renting or leasing tangible personal property during the
preceding month.
(1980 Code, § 111.01) (1965 pp. 642-643, adopted 9-14-1965) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237,
p. 33)
§ 111.02 RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX; SUPPLEMENTARY TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the unincorporated area of
the county in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, at
the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from these sales when made in the course
of business in accordance with § 25.05-2 of An Act to Revise the Law in
Relation to Counties.
   (B)   Every person engaged in this business in the county, except in a
municipality, shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the State Department of Revenue required by state statute.
   (C)   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed under division (A), based on
the receipts from sales or tangible personal property during the preceding
month.
(1980 Code, § 111.02)
   (D)   A county supplementary retailers’ occupation tax at a rate of one-
fourth of 1% is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail within the county.
   (E)   Persons administering and accounting for the tax are subject to the
same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties, and the same
conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties and definitions of terms, and
the same mode of procedures as found in the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act as
are now or hereafter amended.
(1980 Code, § 111.02) (Am. 1959, p. 315; 1965 pp. 350—351, adopted 7-19-1967;
1969 p. 532, adopted 8- -1969) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 232, p. 320) (Res. 87-22, adopted
3-19-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Retailers occupation tax, county, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1006
§ 111.03 SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX; SUPPLEMENTARY TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the unincorporated area of
the county in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1% of the
cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by the service
personnel either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service in accordance with § 25.05-3 of
An Act to Revise the Law in Relation to Counties.
   (B)   Every supplier or service worker required to account for the county
service occupation tax for the benefit of the county shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by state statute.
   (C)   At the time the report is filed there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed under division (A).
   (D)   Consent and authority are given to the State Department of Revenue to
collect and enforce the tax imposed by division (A) of this section, and all
penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereof, for or on behalf of the
county.
   (E)   A county supplementary service occupation tax is imposed upon all
persons engaged in the business of making sales of service within the county at
the rate of one-fourth of 1% of the cost price of all tangible personal
property or transferred by service people, either in the form of tangible
personal property or in the form of real estate, as an incident to a sale of
service.
   (F)   Persons administering and accounting for the tax are subject to the
same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties, and the same
conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties and definitions of terms, and
the same mode of procedures as found in the Service Occupation Tax Act and
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, respectively, as are now or hereafter amended.
(1980 Code, § 111.03) (Am. 1961 pp. 367—368; Am. 1967 pp. 351—352; 1969 p. 533,
adopted 8- -1969; 1967 p. 380, adopted 8-9-1967) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 327;
Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 318; Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 57) (Res. 87-23, adopted 3-19-
1987)
Statutory reference:
   Service occupation tax, county, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1007
§ 111.04 RECOVERY OF SALES TAX ON BUILDING MATERIALS.
   (A)   In accordance with the terms of the State Enterprise Zone Act (P.A.
82-1019), the County Board hereby authorizes any retailer operating within the
unincorporated county to recover the local sales tax paid to the State
Department of Revenue on sales of building materials which will be incorporated
into real estate in the Des Plaines River Valley enterprise zone, providing
that the retailer must unconditionally refund the tax to the purchaser or
provide documentation to show that the retailer bore the burden of the tax.
   (B)   The State Department of Revenue is hereby authorized to notify each
retailer of building materials within the City of Joliet, City of Lockport,
Village of Rockdale and unincorporated county locations of this tax credit or
refund.
(1980 Code, § 111.04) (Ord. 84-16, adopted 2-16-1984)
§ 111.05 SUPPLEMENTARY USE TAX.
   (A)   A county supplementary use tax is imposed upon the privilege of using
in the county, any item of tangible personal property which is purchase outside
of the state at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with
an agency of this state’s government, at a rate of one-fourth of 1% of the
selling price of tangible personal property, as selling price is defined in the
Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955, as amended. The tax shall be collected
from persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being within the county.
   (B)   Persons administering and accounting for the tax are subject to the
same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties, and the same
conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties and definitions of terms, and
the same mode of procedures as found in the Use Tax Act as are now or hereafter
amended.
(1980 Code, § 111.05) (Res. 87-24, adopted 3-19-1987)
CHAPTER 112: MOTOR RACES; STUNT EVENTS
Section
   
112.01   Permit required
   
112.02   Permit fee; disbursement
   
112.03   Application for permit
   
112.04   Issuance of permit; display
   
112.05   Exhaust mufflers
   
112.06   Inspections
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall hold, manage, conduct, produce, present, operate or carry on
any motor vehicle race or motor vehicle stunt event unless he or she obtains a
written permit to do so.
(1980 Code, § 112.01) (1964 p. 274, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p.
78) Penalty, see §
112.99
Statutory reference:
   Necessity of permit, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-9001
§ 112.02 PERMIT FEE; DISBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The annual permit fee shall be $100 for all races and events held in a
calendar year; however, no fee shall be charged a county fair association,
state fair or other not-for-profit association or corporation. Application for
a permit shall be made and the permit fee shall be paid on or before July 1 of
each year. No permit shall be issued unless the fee is fully paid in advance of
issuance.
   (B)   The County Board shall pay one-half of each fee into the county
treasury and shall transfer the remainder to the road and bridge fund of the
township or road district where the race or event takes place.
(1980 Code, § 112.02) (1964 pp. 274—275, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236,
pp. 78—79) Penalty, see §
112.99
Statutory reference:
   Fees, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-9002
§ 112.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Every person, before holding, managing, conducting, producing,
presenting, operating or carrying on any motor vehicle race or motor vehicle
stunt event, shall apply for a permit. The application shall be in writing
filed with the Clerk of the County Board. The application shall state the
following information.
      (1)   The date of the application;
      (2)   The name of the applicant, and if a corporation, the name and
address of the president, secretary, treasurer and registered agent;
      (3)   The residence address of the applicant;
      (4)   The location or address at which the races or events are to take
place; and
      (5)   Whether or not the applicant claims exemption as a county fair,
state fair or other not-for- profit association or corporation. If an exemption
is claimed, the following shall be stated:
         (a)   Names and addresses of the officers and board of directors;
         (b)   The charter or articles under which it is organized;
         (c)   Certification that no part of the income is distributed or
distributable to its members, directors or officers; and
         (d)   If compensation is paid or to be paid for services rendered, the
names and addresses of the persons to whom paid, the amount paid and the
services rendered.
   (B)   All applications shall be verified upon the oath of the applicant.
(1980 Code, § 112.03) (1964 pp. 274—275, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236,
pp. 78—79) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; DISPLAY.
   (A)   The application shall be on forms furnished by the Clerk of the County
Board upon request.
   (B)   Upon performance of all conditions prerequisite to the issuance of the
permit, the Clerk shall issue it. The permit is not transferable or assignable.
   (C)   Every permit shall be posted where the event or race is held, in a
place as to be plainly in view of the public who may enter the place.
(1980 Code, § 112.04) (1964 p. 275, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p.
79) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 EXHAUST MUFFLERS.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any race or event unless it is
equipped with an exhaust muffler in effectual working order and condition. The
muffler shall be used whenever the engine is in operation so that there will be
no excessive or unusual noise, or the engine shall be so constructed or
designed that it is deadened as if it were equipped with a muffler.
(1980 Code, § 112.05) (1964 p. 275, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p.
79) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 INSPECTIONS.
   The Sheriff, any peace officer or any officer designated by the County Board
to make inspections under or enforce any licensing or regulatory ordinance,
shall have the right of entry to any place where a race or event is held for
the purpose of enforcement or inspection, and may arrest or cause to be
arrested any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or any
ordinance of the county, or of the municipality in which the race or event is
held.
(1980 Code, § 112.06) (1964 p. 275, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p.
79) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500. In all actions for the violation of any provision of
this chapter, a warrant for the arrest of the accused may issue. The person
upon whom any fine is imposed, upon the order of the court, may be committed to
the county jail until the fine and costs are fully paid.
(1980 Code, § 112.99) (1964 p. 275, adopted 6- -1964) (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p.
79)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Registration; fee
   
113.03   Hours solicitation permitted
   
113.04   License required
   
113.05   Standards for issuance and supervision of license
   
113.06   License prohibited
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER. One who takes orders for future delivery, or for intangible
services in public places or from house to house and not from an established
place or private grounds.
   PEDDLERS or HAWKERS. One who sells tangible commodities from house to house,
store to store, on the streets or in any public place. The sales are not made
from one spot except where they are made in a street or he or she makes
delivery at the time of the sale.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR or ITINERANT MERCHANT. One who sells commodities from
private premises but remains at one place for that purpose only, generally not
more than six weeks.
(1980 Code, § 113.01) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 120—121, adopted 3-24-1976)
§ 113.02 REGISTRATION; FEE.
   (A)   (1)   All hawkers, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors
of merchandise in any area not in the corporate limits of a municipality, which
licenses and regulates them, must register their name and the name of any firm
they represent with the County Clerk.
      (2)   Prior to accepting registration, the applicant shall present a
letter from the County Land Use Department indicating that the application is
in compliance with the County Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   No fee shall be required for the registration as required under this
chapter.
(1980 Code, § 113.02) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 120—121, adopted 3-24-1976) (Res.
00-417, passed 10-19-2000) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 HOURS SOLICITATION PERMITTED.
   All hawkers, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise shall only engage in door-to-door solicitation between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(1980 Code, § 113.03) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 120—121, adopted 3-24-1976)
Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm or corporation to engage in the
business of hawkers, peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of any
merchandise, article or thing without securing a license.
(1980 Code, § 113.04) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 120—121, adopted 3-24-1976)
Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE AND SUPERVISION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The County Executive’s office is authorized to evaluate each license
applicant to determine if a license should be denied or suspended because of
recent criminal activity or the nature of the criminal activity reported.
   (B)   The County Executive’s office is authorized to suspend the license of
persons who solicit business on the basis that they are offering a free hail or
storm damage evaluation or a free furnace or boiler examination when the offer
is being made at the door of a residence and has not previously been requested
by the residence owners.
   (C)   The County Executive’s office is authorized to suspend the peddler’s
license of any person who represents or implies that he or she is in any way a
representative of the county government in making any inspections or
solicitations.
(1980 Code, § 113.05) (Res. 05-384, adopted 8-18-2005)
§ 113.06 LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   The issuance of a license to canvassers, peddlers, hawkers, transient
vendors or itinerant merchants for the purpose of selling fireworks within the
unincorporated areas of the county is prohibited. Any license purportedly
issued for that purpose is hereby deemed null and void.
(1980 Code, § 113.06) (Res. 08-259, adopted 6-19-2008)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not already provided shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500. Each
day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(1980 Code, § 113.99) (Sup. Rec. Bk.    , pp. 120—121, adopted 3-24-1976)
CHAPTER 114: FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SANITATION
Section
   
114.001   Purpose
   
114.002   Definitions
   
114.003   Adoption by reference
   
114.004   Conflict of ordinance; effect on partial invalidity
 
   
114.015   Permit provisions
   
114.016   Food service sanitation rules and regulations
 
   
114.035   Enforcement
 
   
114.055   Inspections
 
   
114.075   Plan Review
   
114.076   Variances and hearings
   
114.077   Repeal and date of effect
 
   
114.090   Current rules
   
114.091   Injunctions
 
   
114.999   Penalties
   
Appendix A:   Food Service Establishment/ Retail Food Storage Fees
§ 114.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and supervise the sanitation of
individuals or organizations that provide or offer food and/or beverages to the
public including but not limited to food establishments; to require permits for
the operation of individuals or organizations that provide or offer food and/or
beverages to the public including but not limited to food establishments; to
establish a schedule of fees to be charged to offset the cost of issuance of
such permits; to regulate the inspections of such establishments; to provide
for the incorporation by reference the standards of the Illinois Department of
Public Health as set forth in its Rules and Regulations entitled Illinois
Department of Public Health, Food Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750, and any
subsequent revisions, issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health and as
may be hereinafter amended or revised, and/or as may be amended or revised by
the Will County Board.
(1980 Code, § 114.01) (Ord. 88-75, passed 6-16-1988; Res. 05-450, passed 10-20-
2005; Ord. 08-418, passed 10-16-2008; Res. 11-291, passed 6-15-2011; Ord. 11-
351, passed 9-21- 2011; Ord. 14-192, passed 7-17-2014; Ord. 16- 303, passed 10-
20-2016; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 114.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CORE ITEM. A provision in the IDPH Code this is not designated as a
priority or priority foundation item. CORE ITEM includes an item that usually
relates to general sanitation, operational controls, sanitation standard
operating procedures (SSOPs), facilities or structures, equipment design, or
general maintenance.
      EQUIPMENT. A device used in the operation of a food establishment for
storing, preparing and serving food/beverage. EQUIPMENT could include but is
not limited to refrigerator, freezer, hood, ice maker, mixer, oven, sink,
slicer, ware washing machines.
      HEALTH AUTHORITY.  The person or persons designated by the Will County
Board of Health to enforce this chapter.
      FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves,
vends food directly to the consumer, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption, such as a restaurant, satellite or catered feeding location,
catering operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to
a conveyance used to transport people, market, vending location, conveyance
used to transport people, institution or food pantry; and relinquishes
possession of food to a consumer directly, or indirectly, through a delivery
service such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders,
or delivery service that is provided by common carriers.
         (a)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT includes an element of the operation such as
a transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a
vending location or satellite feeding location, unless the vending or feeding
location is permitted by the regulatory authority; and an operation that is
conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary or permanent facility or location;
where consumption is on or off the premises; and regardless of whether there is
a charge for food.
         (b)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT does not include an establishment that offers
only prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature control for safety foods;
a food produce stand that only offers whole, uncut, fresh fruits and
vegetables; a food processing plant including those that are located on the
premises of a food establishment; a vending machine that offers only
prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature control for safety foods; a
kitchen in a private home, such as a small family daycare provider or a bed and
breakfast operation as defined in the Bed and Breakfast Act that prepares and
offers food to guests; a private home that receives catered or home delivered
food; a closed family function where food is prepared or served for individual
family consumption; or a cottage food operation.
      PERSON. An individual, or a firm, partnership, company corporation,
trustee, association, or public or private entity.
      PRIORITY ITEM. A provision in the IDPH Code whose application contributes
directly to the elimination, prevention or reduction to an acceptable level,
hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and there is no other
provision that directly controls the hazard. PRIORITY ITEM includes items with
a quantifiable measure to show control of hazards such as cooking, reheating,
and cooling and hand washing.
      PRIORITY FOUNDATION ITEM. A provision in the IDPH Code whose application
supports, facilitates or enables one or more priority items. PRIORITY
FOUNDATION ITEM includes an item that requires the purposeful incorporation of
specific actions, equipment or procedures by industry management to attain
control of risk factors that contribute to foodborne illness or injury such as
personnel training, infrastructure or necessary equipment, HACCP plans,
documentation or record keeping and labeling.
      SPECIAL PROCESS. Includes smoking food as a method of food preservation
rather than as a method of flavor enhancement, curing food, using food
additives or adding components such as vinegar as a method of food preservation
rather than as a method of flavor enhancement, or to render a food so that it
is not time/temperature control for safety food, packaging time/temperature
control for safety food using a reduced oxygen packaging method except where
the growth of and toxin formation by Clostridium botulinum and the growth of
listeria monocytogenes are controlled, operating a molluscan
shellfish life-support system display tank used to store or display shellfish
that are offered for human consumption, custom processing animals that are for
personal use as food and not for sale or service in a food establishment,
sprouting seeds or beans, and preparing food by another method that is
determined by the Health Authority to require a variance.
      THIRD-PARTY OPERATORS. The term "3rd Party Operator" shall mean an
individual, or firm, partnership, company, corporation, trustee, association,
or public or private entity handling the food service at a permitted
establishment.
   (B)   All other items are as defined in the Illinois Department of Public
Health, Food Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750, and any subsequent revisions.
(1980 Code, § 114.02) (Ord. 88-75, passed 6-16-1988; Res. 05-450, passed 10-20-
2005; Ord. 08-418, passed 10-16-2008; Res. 11-291, passed 6-15-2011; Ord. 11-
351, passed 9-21- 2011; Ord. 14-192, passed 7-17-2014; Ord. 16- 303, passed 10-
20-2016; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 114.003 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Section 8-103.10, Section 8- 103.11, Section 8-103.12, Section 8-
201.13, and Section 8-201.14 of the United States Food and Drug
Administration's Food Code 2013, and any subsequent revisions to those
documents thereto are hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   The Illinois Department of Public Health, Division of Food and Drugs,
regulation: Food Handling Regulations Act 410 ILCS 625.
   (C)   The Illinois Department of Public Health, Food Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
750, and any subsequent revisions to those documents thereto are hereby adopted
by reference as § 114.003, with an addition to the following:
      (1)   Section 4-201.11 - Equipment and Utensils.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 114.004 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE, EFFECT ON PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   (A)   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision for any building, fire, safety or health ordinance,
or other code, existing on effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail.
   (B)   If any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such invalidation shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which
shall remain in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be joint and severable.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017)
§ 114.015 PERMIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Permit.  
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any individual or organization to provide
or offer food and/or beverages to the public or for any person to operate a
food establishment within the county in the state, without first obtaining a
valid permit issued to them by the Health Authority. Only a person who complies
with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain
such a permit.
      (2)   The permit will be issued with specific operational restrictions in
the name of the owner/operator and the establishment. It is not transferable to
another owner/operator at the establishment nor is it useable by the same
owner/operator at some other location or outside of the permitted fixed
facility nor can the facility operate outside the permitted restrictions. A
valid permit shall be posted for public display in every food establishment.
      (3)   Issuance of permit.
         (a)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make
written application for a permit on forms provided by the Health Authority. If
construction or remodeling is required, plans and specifications must be
submitted with the application prior to construction (see §
114.075). Such application shall include, but is not limited to, the name and
address of the owner, the location and type of the proposed food establishment,
the signature of the applicant, and the appropriate annual permit fee. All
persons operating a food establishment shall be required to apply for renewal
of a permit under this division each calendar year after the first permit is
issued.
         (b)   Prior to approval of an application for permit, the Health
Authority shall inspect the proposed establishments and existing establishments
coming under new ownership to determine compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and/or in accordance with the approved plans.
         (c)   The Health Authority shall issue a permit if its inspection
reveals that the establishment complies with the requirements of this chapter,
and the appropriate annual permit fee has been received by the Health
Authority.
         (d)   Permits shall be valid for one calendar (January 1 through
December 31) year. The owner/operator must be in compliance with applicable
annual permit requirements. Fees for annual permits are included in
Appendix A and are non-refundable.
      (4)   Permit fee.  The annual fees to be charged for the issuance of
permits to operate by the Health Authority in pursuance of its authority to
regulate and supervise food establishments are indicated in
Appendix A. Permit fees are non-refundable.
   (B)   Temporary food establishments. Permits for temporary food
establishments shall be valid only for the period of time designated for the
temporary permit and must be in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
Each temporary permit shall not exceed 14 days for that specific event.
Temporary permit applications must be submitted and payment received at least
seven days prior to the event or a late fee is assessed as outlined in
Appendix A. Temporary permit fees are non-refundable. Temporary permits will
not be issued to facilities or operators in place of having an appropriate
approved food establishments. Only a person who complies with the requirements
of the temporary food guidelines which includes but is not limited to
mechanical refrigeration for time/temperature control for safety food shall be
entitled to receive or retain such a permit. The Health Authority shall issue a
temporary permit if its inspection reveals that the establishment complies with
the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable laws, and the
appropriate temporary permit fee has been received by the Health Authority.
Fees for temporary food establishment permits are included in Appendix A and
are non-refundable.
      (1)   Multiple location temporary event permit. An operator may obtain a
multiple location temporary event permit. The permit shall be valid only from
January 1 through December 31. An operator shall apply for a multiple location
temporary event permit and pay applicable fees as outlined in
Appendix A. Multiple location temporary permit applications must be submitted
and payment received at least seven days prior to the first event in which the
vendor will be participating or a late fee may be assessed as outlined in
Appendix A. A list of events in which the vendor is participating shall be
included with the multiple location temporary permit application. Multiple
location temporary permits will not be issued to facilities or operators in
place of having an appropriate approved food establishment. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of the temporary food guidelines which includes
but is not limited to mechanical refrigeration for time/temperature control for
food safety food shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. The
Health Authority shall issue a multiple location temporary permit if its
inspection reveals that the establishment complies with the requirements of
this chapter, and the appropriate multiple location temporary permit fee has
been received by the Health Authority. Operators shall conspicuously display
the multiple location temporary permit at each event in which they participate.
Permits shall not be copied nor used at multiple locations on the same day.
Fees for multiple location temporary food establishment permits are included in
Appendix A and are non-refundable.
   (C)   Discounted permit fees. The following shall be subject to 50% of the
food permit fee, the discounted permit fee does not relieve any person from
obtaining a permit and meeting all other requirements of the chapter:
      (1)   All governmental entities including, but not limited to, townships,
cities, fire protection districts, county facilities;
      (2)   All schools, public or private, which serve food or beverages in
conjunction with school authorized activities; this discount does not apply to
day care centers, preschools, schools permitted for milk service only and third
party operators;
      (3)   All churches and temples;
      (4)   Temporary food permit fees for all non-profit, benevolent,
charitable, or community organizations. (However, 100% of the annual applicable
permit fee must be paid by non-profit benevolent, charitable or community
organizations.)
   (D)   Exempt from permit fees. The following shall be exempt from the food
permit fee; the permit fee exemption does not relieve any person from obtaining
a permit and meeting all other requirements of the chapter: All soup kitchens,
food pantries, and surplus food outlets which provide food to the public at no
charge.
   (E)   One-half year permits. Any permit (with the exception of temporary
permits and the supplemental permits) issued after July 1 shall be charged one-
half of the annual fee. The annual permit fee shall be made payable to the Will
County Health Department and this fee shall not be refundable.
   (F)   Renewal of annual permits. The annual permit fee shall be due no later
than December 31st. Notwithstanding the foregoing, due to the COVID-19
Pandemic, annual permit fee payments for the calendar year 2021 (which are due
on or before December 31, 2020) shall not be assessed a penalty fee unless the
establishment is operating and the annual permit fee is not paid prior to March
1, 2021. Such late penalty fee shall be an additional 25% of the annual permit
fee. For all calendar years subsequent to calendar year 2021, permit fees not
received by December 31st of the previous calendar year will be assessed a late
penalty of an additional 25% of the annual permit fee.
   (G)   Failure to apply for an annual permit. Food establishments with new
operators who begin operations prior to obtaining a food permit will be charged
the annual permit fee and will be assessed a late penalty of an additional 25%
of the annual permit fee.
   (H)   Outdoor grilling at fixed food establishments. Any person, desiring to
cook or grill outside the permitted fixed category one or category two food
establishment on a periodic or seasonal basis but is not associated with
temporary event, shall make written application for a supplemental permit on
forms provided by the Health Authority. Such application shall include, but not
limited to, the name and address of the owner, the location of the fixed food
establishment, the signature of the applicant, the menu, and the appropriate
outdoor grilling permit fee.
      (1)   A HACCP plan must be submitted to and approved by the Health
Authority prior to issuing of the supplemental permit to grill outdoors.
Failure to comply with all components of the HACCP plan will result in the
immediate suspension of the supplemental permit.
      (2)   Grill cooking must be done on the premises immediately adjacent to
the permitted fixed food establishment. All other food preparation and food
service must be done within the facility.
      (3)   The grill must meet the published standards of an American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) accredited equipment certification program, or be
approved by the Department.
      (4)   The grill must be located on a smooth and easily cleanable surface
during use. Sealed concrete, mortared non-textured brick, commercially designed
synthetic floor material, and asphalt are some recommended surface materials.
      (5)   Grills shall be effectively separated from public access and not in
close proximity to waste receptacles or dumpsters.
      (6)   At least one hand washing lavatory with hot and cold water under
pressure, and plumbed to an approved wastewater disposal system, shall be
provided. The hand washing station may be located inside the facility if it is
easily accessible to the grilling area.
      (7)   Products being grilled should be protected from the elements.
Acceptable protection shall include a closed grill cover, a canopy or a roofed
area.
      (8)   Approved mechanical refrigeration must be provided if raw products
or other time/temperature control for safety food items are not immediately
brought from inside the approved kitchen facility to the grill.
      (9)   All cooked time/temperature control for safety food products must
be held and served inside the facility at 135 degrees F.
      (10)   The person in charge shall be onsite at all times that foods are
being grilled.
      (11)   Grilling menu must be limited to food items requiring limited
preparation which does not include processes such as smoking and pig roasting.
         (a)   Prior to approval of an application for supplemental permit, the
Health Authority shall inspect the establishment to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
         (b)   The Health Authority shall issue a permit if its inspection
reveals that the establishment complies with the requirements of this chapter,
and the appropriate supplemental permit fee has been received by the Health
Authority.
         (c)   Permits shall be valid only for the period of time designated
for the supplemental permit per one calendar (January 1 through December 31)
year. It shall be unlawful for any fixed facility to
operate as stated above within Will County in the State of Illinois, which does
not possess a valid supplemental permit issued to them by the Health Authority.
Only a fixed facility which complies with the requirements of this chapter
shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit.
         (d)   The supplemental permit will be issued in the name of the owner
and the establishment. It is not transferable to another owner at the
establishment nor is it useable by the same owner at some other location. A
valid permit shall be posted for public display.
   (I)   Cottage food. Any person desiring to operate as a cottage food
operation as defined in Section 4 of the Illinois Food Handling Regulation
Enforcement Act must register annually by submitting the Will County Health
Department Application for Cottage Industry Registration and pay the
registration fee as outlined in
Appendix A.
   (J)   Vending machines. Only those vending machines that vend in part or in
total time/temperature control for safety food, and/or beverages into an open
container shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. Vending
machines must meet all applicable requirements in the Illinois Department of
Public Health, Food Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750, and any subsequent revisions.
Vending machines that vend in part or in total time/temperature control for
safety food, and/or beverages into an open container that are located and
serviced by the same operator of a permitted establishment who already holds a
Will County establishment permit are not subject to the vending machine fees in
Appendix A. These vending machines shall be permitted and inspected under the
establishment permit. Fees for annual permits are included in
Appendix A and are not refundable.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018; Ord. 20-428,
passed 11-19- 2020; Ord. 20-519, passed 12-22-2020) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.016 FOOD SERVICE SANITATION RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The IDPH code Section 4-201.11 shall include the following - Equipment and
Utensils: All equipment must bear the seal of approval of the National
Sanitation Foundation or an equivalent sanitation standard, and be approved by
the Health Authority. Approved mechanical refrigeration is required to store or
display time/temperature control for safety food unless approved by Health
Authority. Other materials may be evaluated and approved by the Health
Authority on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 114.035 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Annual review. Upon receipt of an application with the appropriate
annual permit fee to renew the annual permit, the Health Authority shall
evaluate the record of the establishment to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If the evaluation reveals that the applicable
requirements of this chapter have been met, a new permit shall be issued by the
Health Authority. Whenever the record reveals serious and/or repeated
violations of this chapter, the permit shall not be renewed until a re-
inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this chapter have been
met. If the re-inspection reveals continued serious violations of this chapter,
the permit shall not be renewed and the Health Authority shall, within a
reasonable time, so notify the applicant in writing. Such notice shall state,
if requested in writing by the applicant within ten days of receipt of notice,
a hearing will be held within 30 days of notice at a reasonable time and place
to be designated by the Health Authority. Notice referred to in this division
shall be given in the manner prescribed in division (D) of this section.
   (B)   Suspension of permit. The Health Authority may, without warning,
notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment, if the
holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or
if the operation does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or if
the operation otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by division (D) of
this section titled Service of Notices. When a permit is suspended, food
operations shall immediately cease upon receipt of notice. If requested in
writing by the permit holder within ten days of notice of suspension, a hearing
shall be held within 30 days of the permit holder’s written request. Suspension
shall continue until the Health Authority determines the reason for the
suspension no longer exists.
   (C)   Revocation of permit. The Health Authority may, after providing
opportunity for hearing, revoke a permit to operate when a food establishment
has had their permit suspended three times in a calendar year (January 1st
through December 31st), according to the provision in §
114.055(D)(6), or for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements
of this chapter or for interference with the Health Authority in the
performance of duty. Prior to revocation, the Health Authority shall notify, in
writing, the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, of the specific
reason(s) for which the permit is to be revoked and that the permit shall be
revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice, unless a
written request for hearing is made by the permit holder prior to the
expiration of the ten days. If requested, a hearing shall be held within 30
days of notice of revocation. Unless rescinded in writing by the Health
Authority at the time of hearing, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
   (D)   Service of notices. A notice provided for in this chapter is properly
served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or the person in
charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the
notice shall be filed in the records of the Health Authority.
   (E)   Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit has
become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for
a new permit. A written corrective action plan which addresses all violations
may be required along with the written application for a new permit.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.055 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspection frequency. An inspection of a food establishment shall be
performed according to the relative risk of causing foodborne illness as
defined by the Illinois Department of Public Health's Food Code but not less
frequently than required by the Local Health Protection Grant Rules. Additional
inspections of the establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Access. Representatives of the Health Authority, with proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter any food establishment at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance
with this chapter or to investigate a complaint. The representatives shall be
permitted to examine the records of this establishment to obtain information
pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used.
   (C)   Report of inspections. Whenever an inspection of a food establishment
is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form used by
the Health Authority. The inspection report form shall summarize the
requirements of this chapter. Inspectional remarks shall reference by item
number the violation and the correction to be made. A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the
establishment at the conclusion of the inspection or electronically within a
timely manner. Alternate inspection forms and reports may be used provided they
assure adherence to proper food sanitation principles. All completed inspection
reports are public documents that shall be made available for public disclosure
to any person who requests it according to law.
   (D)   Correction of violations. The completed inspection report form shall
specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found;
and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period
specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as but not limited to
lack of a potable water supply, complete lack of refrigeration, sewage backup
into the establishment, pest infestation or a foodborne illness suspected to
have originated from the establishment, the operations shall immediately cease
and the permit to operate shall be suspended as per §
114.035(B). Following permit suspension, the owner/operator may be required
upon notice and as a condition of lifting the suspension to attend an informal
hearing. See Appendix A for informal non-refundable hearing fee to be paid
prior to hearing.
      (2)   All priority items, as defined in §
114.002 shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten
days following inspection. A follow-up inspection should be conducted to
confirm correction. If compliance is not received upon re-inspection(s), the
owner/operator may be required and notified in writing to attend an informal
hearing if the violations are not corrected. The fee associated with the
informal hearing process is included in Appendix A. Hearing fees are non-
refundable.
      (3)   All priority foundation and core items, as defined in §
114.002 shall be corrected as soon as possible, but at any event, by the time
of the next routine inspection.
      (4)   If a facility is not under the supervision of a nationally
recognized Certified Food Protection Manager and if compliance is not received
upon re-inspection(s), the owner/operator may be required and notified in
writing to attend an informal hearing. The fee associated with the informal
hearing process is included in
Appendix A. Hearing fees are non-refundable.
      (5)   If the number of foodborne illness risk factors in the
establishment is seven or greater, the permit shall be immediately suspended by
the Health Authority per §
114.035(B). The establishment shall cease food operations immediately. The
suspension shall remain in effect until a Health Authority re- inspection and
the number of foodborne illness risk factors has been improved to three or
less. The Health Authority will conduct a reinspection at the request of the
operator. Following permit suspension, the owner / operator will be required
and notified in writing to attend an informal hearing. The fee associated with
the informal hearing process is included in
Appendix A. Hearing fees are non- refundable.
      (6)   In the case of temporary food establishments and supplemental
grilling operations, all priority and priority foundation items shall be
corrected immediately. If violations are not corrected, the establishment shall
not be issued a permit to operate by the Health Authority. If the temporary
food establishment or supplemental grilling is already operating, food service
operations shall cease immediately until authorized to resume by the Health
Authority.
   (E)   Failure to comply.
      (1)   Failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result
in cessation of food operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection
findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request
is filed with the Health Authority within ten days following cessation of
operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held
within 30 days of receipt of the request.
      (2)   Whenever a food establishment is required under provisions of §
114.035 to cease operations, all food operations will cease immediately and
will remain in such state until it is shown upon re-inspection that conditions
responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for
re-inspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
   (F)   Examination and condemnation of food.  
      (1)   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Authority as often as
necessary for enforcement of this chapter. The Health Authority may, upon
written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying the reasons
therefore, place an embargo/hold order on any food which it believes is in
violation of any section of this chapter. The Health Authority shall tag,
label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the embargo/hold order. No
food subject to an embargo/hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the
establishment.
      (2)   The Health Authority shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without
risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be
filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested, the food shall be
destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held
within 30 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced
at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in
charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such
food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Procedure when infection is suspected. When the Health Authority has
reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of a
food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee
or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take appropriate action.
The Health Authority may require any or all of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food
establishments.
      (2)    The immediate closing of the establishment concerned until, in the
opinion of the Health Authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists.
      (3)   Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
      (4)   Medical and laboratory examination of ill and exposed employees to
ensure they are no longer infectious. Employees who test positive will be
restricted from food handling duty until satisfactory negative laboratory
examination or time without symptoms as per Illinois Communicable Disease
Administrative Code.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.075 PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Review of construction or remodeling plans.  
      (1)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled, and
whenever an existing structure is converted for such use, properly prepared
plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review
and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans
and specifications shall include the menu, facility layout, equipment layout,
mechanical plans, finish materials, specifications sheets for all proposed
equipment, and a HACCP plan if applicable. A plan review fee, based on the fee
schedule as indicated in
Appendix A will be charged for all reviews, with the exception of food
pantries. Plan review fees are non- refundable.
      (2)   The Health Authority shall approve the plans and specifications if
they meet the requirements of this chapter. No building permit for any such
construction or remodeling shall be issued until and unless the Health
Authority has given approval in writing to the plans for such construction or
remodeling.
   (B)   HACCP plan review. A food establishment shall submit a HACCP plan
prior to commencing reduced oxygen packaging utilizing sous vide or the cook/
chill method. The Health Authority shall review a submitted HACCP plan and
shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision to approve or deny the
HACCP plan as submitted by the food establishment, provided all conditions of
this chapter are met including payment of fee (see
Appendix A ), and submission of supporting data. HACCP plan review fees are
non-refundable.
   (C)   Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are
required by this chapter to be submitted to the Health Authority, the Health
Authority shall inspect the food establishment prior to the start of operations
to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Food establishments outside jurisdiction of the Will County Health
Department. Food prepared for human consumption outside of Will County and
transported into Will County shall conform to the standards and provisions of
this chapter. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the
Health Authority may accept reports from the regulating health authorities
where such establishments are located.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.076 VARIANCES AND HEARINGS.
   (A)   Variances. If a food establishment wishes to implement a special
process as defined in §
114.002 or if circumstances exist which make it impractical to achieve full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, an applicant may seek a
variance from the Health Authority as follows:
      (1)   Such requests shall be made in writing, and include a Hazard
Analysis Critical Control Point Plan (HACCP) if required, and all pertinent
data and information, as stipulated in applicable code(s), to support the
requested waiver of the requirements of this chapter as being consistent with
the responsibility of the Health Authority to protect and provide for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the county and of other
affected communities.
      (2)   The Health Authority shall review variance requests and shall
notify the applicant in writing of its decision to either grant or deny the
variance within ten business days of receipt of the variance request provided
all conditions of this section are met including payment of fee (see
Appendix A), and submission of supporting data.
      (3)   The fee associated with the variance request process is included in
Appendix A. Variance fees are non-refundable.
   (B)   Exceptions to variance. Reduced oxygen packaging utilizing sous vide
or the cook/chill method do not require a variance. However, the food
establishment shall submit a HACCP plan prior to commencing these special
processes as required in §
114.075.
   (C)   Hearings before the Environmental Health Director. Any person affected
by any order or notice issued by the Health Department in connection with any
section of this chapter, may file in the office of the Health Department a
written request for a hearing before the Environmental Health Director. The
Environmental Health Director shall hold a hearing at a time and place
designated within 30 days from the date on which written request was filed. The
petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the
hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be
held. If as a result of the hearing, the Environmental Health Director finds
that strict compliance with the order, or notice, would cause undue hardship on
the petitioner, and that the public health would be adequately protected and
substantial justice done by varying or withdrawing the order or notice, the
Environmental Health Director may modify or withdraw the order or notice and as
a confirmation for such action, may, where deemed necessary, make requirements
which are additional to those prescribed in this chapter for the purpose of
properly protecting the public health. The Environmental Health Director shall
render a decision within ten days after the date of the hearing which shall be
reduced to writing and placed in the file in the office of the Health
Department as a matter of public record. Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the Environmental Health Director may seek relief therefrom through a
hearing before the Executive Director.
   (D)   Hearings before the Executive Director.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Environmental Health
Director rendered as the result of a hearing held in accordance with this
section may file in the office of the Health Department a written request for a
hearing at a time and place designated by the Executive Director within 30 days
of the date on which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the
hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing not less than
five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result
of facts elicited as a result of the hearing, the Executive Director finds that
strict compliance with the decision of the Environmental Health Director would
cause undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public health would be
adequately protected and substantial justice done by granting a variance, the
Executive Director may grant a variance and as a condition for such variance,
may, where it deems necessary, make requirements or special conditions which
are additional to those prescribed by this chapter, all for the purpose of
properly protecting the public health.
      (2)   The Executive Director shall render a decision within ten days
after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing and placed on
file in the office of the Health Department and a copy thereof shall be served
on the petitioner personally or by delivery to the petitioner by certified
mail.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 114.077 REPEAL AND DATE OF EFFECT.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effective immediately following its
adoption and publication as provided for by law and in accordance with the law,
and at that time all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017)
§ 114.090 CURRENT RULES.
   (A)   Rules and regulations for food service establishments. This chapter
shall be regulated by the Health Authority in accordance with theIllinois
Department of Public Health, Food Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750, and any
subsequent revisions, and applicable laws and regulations. Copies of said Code
shall be on file in the County Clerk's Office and the offices of the Health
Authority.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018)
§ 114.091 INJUNCTIONS.
   The Health Authority may seek to enjoin violators of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017)
§ 114.999 PENALTIES.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or refuses to comply
with any lawful order or requirement of the Health Authority duly made in
writing as provided herein shall, upon finding of guilty, be subject to a fine
of up to $500 for each and every violation; and each day after the expiration
of the time limit for abating unsanitary conditions and completing improvements
to abate such conditions as ordered by the Health Authority shall constitute a
distinct and separate violation.
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017)
APPENDIX A: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT/RETAIL FOOD STORAGE FEES
Type Permit fee
Type                                           Permit fee
School Milk Cooler Only (50% discount not      $50
applicable)
0 (carry out) - 40 Seats                       $255
(Including seasonal facilities)
41 - 100 Seats                                 $400
(Including seasonal facilities)
101 Seats and over                             $730
(Including seasonal facilities)
Commissary and Caterers                        $730
(Including seasonal facilities)
Temporary Food Service / Retail Food Permit
Low Risk                                       $60
(As determined by the Health Authority)
Temporary Food Service /Retail Food Permit
Medium Risk - (As determined by the Health     $90*
Authority)
Temporary Food Service / Retail Food Permit
High Risk - (As determined by the Health       $135*
Authority)
Multiple Location Temporary Food Permit
(Valid January – December)
Low Risk                                       $300*
(As determined by the Health Authority, does
not include High Risk)
Multiple Location Temporary Food Permit
(Valid January – December)                   $510*
Medium Risk (As determined by the Health
Authority, does not include High Risk)
Temporary Permit Late Fee
(A late fee will be charged when vendor has
not applied and paid for the permit a minimum  $30
of 7 days prior to the event in which the date
of payment does not count)
(50% discount not applicable)
Supplemental Grilling Permit                   $200
Government, Schools, churches and temples      50% of all above applicable fees
*50% Discount for Temporary Permit Fees Also Applicable to Non-profit,
Benevolent, Charitable, or Community Organizations
 
 
Retail Food Stores Fees
Type                                        Permit fee
Less than 250 Square Feet (prepackaged food $220
only - minor business component)
250 to 5,000 Square Feet or Seasonal food
store less than 5,000 Sq Ft                 $225
(Including seasonal facilities)
5,001 to 10,000 Square Feet                 $400
(Including seasonal facilities)
10,001 and over                             $730
(Including seasonal facilities)
Government, Schools, churches and temples   50% of all above applicable Fees
 
 
Mobile Units Fees
Type                                      Permit fee
Push Carts for Frozen Novelties           $200
Mobile Units without Preparation          $255
Mobile Units with Preparation             $375
Government, Schools, churches and temples 50% of all above applicable Fees
 
Vending Machines Fees
Type Fee
Vending Machines Fees
Type                                                                 Fee
1-3 Vending machines with time/temperature control for safety food   $50
4-6 Vending machines with time/temperature control for safety food   $100
7-10 Vending machines with time/temperature control for safety food  $150
11-14 Vending machines with time/temperature control for safety food $200
15-20 Vending machines with time/temperature control for safety food $250
21+ Vending machines with time/temperature control for safety food   $300
 
Plan Review Fees
Type Fee
Plan Review Fees
Type                                          Fee
Minor Plan Review (small / minor change)      $190
Food Service 0 - 40 Seats                     $260
Food Service 41 - 100 Seats                   $395
Food Service 101 Seat and over                $570
Commissary and Caterers                       $570
Retail Food Store less than 250 Square Feet
(prepackaged food only - minor business       $190
component)
Retail Food Store 250 to 5,000 Square Feet    $220
Retail Food Store 5,001 to 10,000 Square Feet $350
Retail Food Store 10,001 Square Feet and over $525
Mobile Units without Preparation              $220
Mobile Units with Preparation                 $350
Push Carts for Frozen Novelties               N/A
Priority Plan Review (will respond with       2 x applicable plan review fee
clarification or approval letter in 7 days)
 
 
* Other Fees
Informal Hearing Fee          $150
Cottage Food Registration Fee $25
Variance/HACCP Plan Fee       $100
Non-Sufficient Funds (NSF)    $25
Replacement Food Permit Fee   $25
 
*    (50% discount not applicable)
(Ord. 17-276, passed 10-19-2017; Ord. 18-326, passed 11-15-2018; Ord. 20-428,
passed 11-19-2020)
CHAPTER 115: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
115.01   Permits to cross county roads
   
115.02   Cable Television Ordinance adopted by reference
§ 115.01 PERMITS TO CROSS COUNTY ROADS.
   The County Board shall allow cable television companies who have a franchise
from a city or village in the county to cross or go along county roads for the
purpose of carrying on their business. Permits to cross or go along county
roads shall be issued by the Highway Department in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Department.
(1980 Code, § 115.01) (Res. 81-222, adopted 11-19-1981)
§ 115.02 CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Cable Television Ordinance adopted August 26, 1982 and as amended from
time to time, is adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this code
as if fully set out herein.
(1980 Code, § 115.02) (Res. 82-108, adopted 8-26-1982; Res. adopted 3-17-1983;
Res. 94-131, adopted 5-19-1994; Res. 00-378, passed 10-19-2000)
CHAPTER 116: RAFFLE AND POKER RUN REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
License; Bond
   
116.15   License required; application
   
116.16   License fee
   
116.17   Issuance
   
116.18   Bond required
Conduct of Raffles
   
116.30   Restrictions
   
116.31   Ineligibility
   
116.32   Record keeping
   
116.33   Additional duties of the County Executive
 
   
116.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is the regulation and licensing of games of
chance as defined in ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, § 1-8.
(1980 Code, § 116.01) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   KEY LOCATION.
      (1)   For a poker run, the location where the poker run concludes and the
prizes are awarded.
      (2)   For a raffle, the location where the winning chances in the raffle
are determined.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An agency of the state or a unit of local government
in this state that is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain
public order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle or poker run.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for- profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   POKER RUN. A prize-awarding event organized by an organization licensed
under this Act in which participants travel to multiple predetermined
locations, including a key location, to play a randomized game based on an
element of chance. POKER RUN includes dice runs, marble runs, or other events
where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an
item or playing a randomized game at each location.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in subsection (b) of Section 28-2 of
the Criminal Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed under the
Illinois Raffles and Poker Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   RAFFLE does not include any game designed to simulate: (1) gambling games as
defined in the Riverboat Gambling Act, (2) any casino game approved for play by
the Illinois Gaming Board, (3) any games provided by a video gaming terminal,
as defined in the Video Gaming Act or (4) a savings promotion raffle authorized
under Section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank
Act, Section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B of the
National Bank Act, or section 4 of the Home Owners' Loan Act.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(1980 Code, § 116.02) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021)
LICENSE; BOND
§ 116.15 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans', or other bona fide not-
for-profit organizations that operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately
before making application for a raffle license and which have during that
entire five-year period been engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a
non-profit fund raising organization that the licensing authority determines is
organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group or individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster, or to
any law enforcement agencies and associations that represent law enforcement
officials.
   (B)   (1)   Poker run licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor business, fraternal, educational, veterans', or other bona
fide not-for-profit organizations that operate without profit to their members
and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years
immediately before making application for a poker run license and which have
during that entire five-year period been engaged in carrying out their objects.
Licenses for poker runs shall be issued for the following purposes: (1)
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident, or disaster or (2) to maintain the financial stability of
the organization.
      (2)   Waiver of five-year requirement. The five-year requirement under
divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section, may be waived for a bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, or veterans'
organization that applies for a license to a raffle or poker run if the
organization is a local organization that is affiliated with and chartered by a
national or state organization that meets the five-year requirement.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances or
poker runs without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this
chapter.
   (D)   All applications for any raffle or chance or poker run shall be made
prior to the holding of the raffle or chance or poker run and shall be made to
the Will County Executive. The following form shall be used.
PROPOSED APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE
Sponsoring Organization                   
Address                    Phone          
Raffle Manager                            
Address                    Phone          
Total value of all prizes to be awarded:
$                      (Limit of $250,000)
Maximum value of any given prize:
$                      (Limit of $250,000)
Maximum value of Boards of Education or their approved foundation’s house
raffles (limit $750,000)
Price of Raffle Chance:
$                      (Limit of $1,000)
Date(s) of sale of chances:
From:                    
To:                        
Date and time of drawing and determination of winner(s)
                                
Location where winning chances will be determined :
                              
It is understood that granting of this license entitles the licensee
organization to conduct only the raffle described above.
I do solemnly swear, under penalty of perjury, that the above-named
organization is a not-for- profit organization of the character described in
the Will County Code of Ordinances.
                                          
President, Sponsoring Org.
                                          
Date
                                          
Secretary, Sponsoring Org.
                                          
Date
   ---------------------------------
( ) Receipt of $       Application and License Fee
                                              
County Executive            Date
( ) Application Accepted
                                               
County Executive         Date
( ) Application Rejected
                                               
County Executive            Date
(Time Limit: For an individual license - 120 days for sale of chances
For an annual license - 365 days for sale of chances.)
 
   PROPOSED APPLICATION
   FOR POKER RUN
Sponsoring Organization                             
Address                                   Phone                
Poker Run Manager                                      
Address                                  Phone                
Total value of all prizes to be awarded:
$                             (Limit of $250,000)
Maximum value of any given prize:
$                             (Limit of $250,000)
Date(s) and times of poker run:
From:                  
To:                     
Locations of Poker Run:
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
It is understood that granting of this license entitles the licensee
organization to conduct only the poker run described above.
I do solemnly swear under penalty of perjury that the above-named organization
is a not-for-profit organization of the character described in the Will County
Code of Ordinances.
                                                  
President, Sponsoring Org.
                                                  
Date
                                                  
Secretary, Sponsoring Org.
                                                  
Date
( ) Receipt of $              Application and License Fee
                                                  
County Executive      Date
( ) Application Accepted
                                                  
County Executive      Date
( ) Application Rejected
                                                  
County Executive      Date
(1980 Code, § 116.10) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021) Penalty, see
116.99
§ 116.16 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Individual license. An individual license may be issued for a fee of
$10 which shall be charged and payable at the time of application, for each
license issued. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one
raffle/poker run with a maximum aggregate prize value of $250,000 for the year.
For raffles, the maximum price per chance shall not exceed $1,000 and the time
for selling chances shall be limited to no more than 120 days.
   (B)   Annual licenses. An annual license may be issued for a fee of $25
which shall be charged and payable at the time of application, for each license
issued. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for up to 52
drawings for raffles or 52 poker runs per year with a maximum aggregate prize
value of $2,000,000 for the year. For raffles, the maximum price per chance
shall not exceed $1,000 and chances may be sold for 365 days.
***Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any
violation of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 116.11) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021)
§ 116.17 ISSUANCE.
   The county shall act within 30 days of the receipt of the application for a
license. Issuance of the raffle license by the county authorizes sales of
raffle chances only in the county.
(1980 Code, § 116.12) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005)
§ 116.18 BOND REQUIRED.
   All operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond in a sum of the aggregate retail value of the prizes set out on
the application in favor of the organization, conditioned upon his or her
honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the bond shall
provide that notice shall be given in writing to the Will County Executive not
less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The Will County Board’s Executive
Committee may waive this bond requirement by a majority vote of the members
present. To be eligible for a bond waiver, the members of the licensed
organization must first approve the bond waiver by an affirmative vote of the
requisite number of members of the licensed organization or, if the licensed
organization does not have members, of members of the governing board of the
organization, to constitute an affirmative action of the licensed organization.
As part of the bond waiver application, the licensed organization shall provide
(1) an estimate of the cost to obtain the bond, and (2) proof of the licensed
organization’s approval of the waiver, either by official letter, meeting
minutes, or signed attestation on the waiver application. This section does not
apply to poker runs.
(1980 Code, § 116.13) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021; Ord. 22-164, adopted 6-16-2022)
Penalty, see §
116.99
CONDUCT OF RAFFLES
§ 116.30 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions apply to raffles in Will County.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
raffle or poker run.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member of
the sponsoring organization may manage or participate in the management or
operation of the raffle or poker run. Sponsoring organizations may contract
with third parties who, acting at the direction of an under the supervision of
the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the sponsoring
organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay
reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the following:
(a) advertising, marketing and promotion, (b) legal, (c) procurement of goods,
prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the raffle, (d)
rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented, (e)
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping, (f) website hosting, (g) mailing and
delivery, (h) banking and payment processing, and (i) other services relating
to the operation of the raffle.
   (C)   If a licensee rents the premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle, the rent may not be determined based upon the
percentage of receipts or profits from the raffle.
   (D)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (E)   Winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on
the license.
   (F)   No person under the age of 18 may participate in the conducting of
raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent
or guardian.
(1980 Code, § 116.20) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.31 INELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   The following are ineligible for any raffle or poker run license
issued under the provisions of this chapter: Any person whose felony conviction
will impair the person's ability to engage in the licensed position.
      (1)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      (2)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      (3)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions (A)
(1) or (A)(2) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest,
or in which a person is active or employed.
      (4)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated
or not; or
      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle or poker run as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Applicant convictions.
      (1)   In considering an application for raffle or chance or poker run
license, the Will County Executive shall not require applicants to report and
shall not consider that information and those criminal history records set
forth under ICLS Ch. 230, Act 15, § 3.1(a). Furthermore, upon a finding that an
applicant for a license was previously convicted of a felony shall consider any
evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors contained in the applicant's
record, including any of the factors and evidence set forth under ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 15, § 3.1(b).
      (2)   If the Will County Executive refuses to issue a license to an
applicant, then the applicant shall be notified of the denial in writing with
the following included in the notice of denial:
         (a)   A statement about the decision to refuse to issue a license;
         (b)   A list of the convictions that the County Executive determined
will impair the applicant's ability to engage in the position for which a
license is sought;
         (c)   A list of convictions that formed the sole or partial basis for
the refusal to issue a license; and
         (d)   A summary of the appeal process or the earliest the applicant
may reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
(1980 Code, § 116.21) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.32 RECORD KEEPING.
   Records shall be kept by the licensee organization as provided in ILCS Ch.
230, Act 15, § 6.
(1980 Code, § 116.22) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.33 ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE.
   No later than May 1 of each year, the County Executive shall prepare,
publicly announce, and publish a report of summary statistical information
relating to new and renewal license applications during the preceding calendar
year. Each report shall show, at a minimum:
   (A)   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter;
   (B)   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year who had any criminal convictions;
   (C)   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter in the previous calendar year who were granted a license;
   (D)   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a criminal
conviction who were granted a license under this chapter within the previous
calendar year;
   (E)   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year who were denied a license; and
   (F)   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a criminal
conviction who were denied a license under this chapter in the previous
calendar year in whole or in part because of a prior conviction.
(Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter or provisions contained herein may result in
the revocation of any license issued hereunder and is a Class C misdemeanor.
(1980 Code, § 116.99) (Res. 81-179, adopted 9-24-1981; Ord. 05-501, adopted 11-
17-2005; Ord. 21-442, adopted 12-16-2021)
CHAPTER 117: BID CONTRACTORS
Section
Registration, Bonding and Insurance
   
117.01   Title of subchapter
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Registration required
   
117.04   Application
   
117.05   Fees; bonds
   
117.06   Liability insurance required
   
117.07   Registration issuance
   
117.08   Scope of general contractor’s registration
   
117.09   Registration revocation and reinstatement
Cross-reference:
   Purchasing Code, see
Ch. 41
REGISTRATION, BONDING AND INSURANCE
§ 117.01 TITLE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Contractors’ Registration, Bonding and
Insurance Ordinance.
(1980 Code, § 117.20) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other business entity
engaged in the business of constructing, altering or repairing buildings or
other structures or lots and all trades and crafts associated with the work,
including, but not restricted to, general building contractors, excavating
contractors, carpentry contractors, heating, air conditioning, ventilating,
mechanical, electrical and plumbing contractors and subcontractors.
      (2)   Any person whose construction, repair or alteration of any building
or structure within the county, for which a building permit is required, is
presumed to be a contractor and must be registered hereunder unless the
presumption is rebutted.
      (3)   A homeowner, his or her family member or an unpaid friend engaged
in constructing, altering or repairing his or her personal residence or lot
shall not be considered a contractor for the purposes of this subchapter.
   FAMILY MEMBER. A brother, sister, mother, father, aunt, uncle, step-brother,
step-sister, step- mother, step-father, half-brother, half-sister, father-in-
law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-in-law.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR.
      (1)   A contractor who use one or more trades people or subcontractors to
perform the required construction to complete any project for which a building
permit is required. When a general contractor employs a full-time trades person
or trades people who perform a variety of miscellaneous tasks, i.e., carpentry,
siding, excavating, concrete or drywall and the like, the registration fee
shall be $250. A list of tasks and tradesmen performing them will be required
from the general contractor at the time of registration.
      (2)   A general contractor/construction manager, not employing full-time
trades people and using subcontractors to complete construction, shall pay a
fee of $150 and all subcontractors working on the project shall be required to
register and pay the subcontractors fee of $75.
   SUBCONTRACTORS. A contractor who performs only that type of work that is
classified as a trade including but not limited to:
      (1)   Carpentry;
      (2)   Plumbing;
      (3)   Cement;
      (4)   HVAC;
      (5)   Brick/masonry;
      (6)   Insulation;
      (7)   Drywall;
      (8)   Housemover;
      (9)   Painting;
      (10)   Electric;
      (11)   Siding/drive siding;
      (12)   Irrigation (sprinkler system);
      (13)   Swimming pool;
      (14)   Excavating;
      (15)   Damp proofing; and
      (16)   Elevator installers.
(1980 Code, § 117.21) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
§ 117.03 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall act or perform any services as a contractor or subcontractor
within the county without first registering with the county, as herein
provided.
(1980 Code, § 117.22) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for contractor’s registration required in §
117.03 shall be made in writing to the County Land Use Department upon forms
furnished by the county.
   (B)   Each application shall state:
      (1)   The name and business address of the applicant;
      (2)   Whether it is a general contractor or subcontractor’s registration
application. If it is a general contractor, a list of trades people and trades
people performing each trade will be required at the time of registration. A
subcontractor will be required to list the trade or trades involved; and
      (3)   A statement that the applicant is familiar with all pertinent
county ordinances, codes and regulations including building codes and agrees to
fully comply with same.
(1980 Code, § 117.23) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
§ 117.05 FEES; BONDS.
   (A)   Registration fees. All registrations shall be valid for one calendar
year from January 1 to December 31. The fees for a contractor’s registration,
as required in §
117.03, are as follows:
 
                                                 Registration
                                                 Jan. 1— June 3July 1—Dec. 31
General contractor (with tradesmen) registration $250            $125
fee
General contractor/ construction manager         $150            $75
(without tradesmen) registration fee
Subcontractor’s registration fee per specialty $75             $40
 
   (B)   Bonds. Each applicant for a registration, as required in §
117.03, shall, before receiving a registration, deposit with the County Land
Use Department a permit and license bond issued by a company approved and
authorized to issue bonds by the state bound to the county in the penal sum of
$10,000. The bond shall be conditioned on the faithful compliance with the
applicant’s duties and compliance with all applicable county codes, resolutions
and ordinances.
(1980 Code, § 117.24) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
§ 117.06 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall act as a general contractor or subcontractor within
the county, nor shall be registered, unless the general contractor or
subcontractor deposits with the County Land Use Department a certificate of
liability insurance issued to the contractor or subcontractor by a company
approved and authorized to issue the insurance by the state and the general
contractor or subcontractor shall continuously remain insured for the full
period of the registration period, listing the county as the certificate holder
and written in the following amounts:
 
General contractor:
General liability                        $1,000,000
Worker’s compensation and employer’s Broad form coverage in amount required by law
liability
Subcontractor:
General liability                        (No set amount- certificate must show amount of insurance coverage)
Workers’ compensation                  Broad form coverage and employer’s liability in amounts required by
                                         law
 
      (3)   A contractor with no employees must submit an affidavit (sworn and
notarized statement) to the fact at the time of registration.
      (4)   If the insurance should at any time expire, be cancelled or
otherwise lapse, the registration of the general contractor or subcontractor
shall immediately be revoked and the general contractor or subcontractor shall
immediately cease all work within the county.
   (B)   The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance is not
cancellable during the policy period without ten days prior written notice to
the county.
   (C)   If the insurance is canceled during the period of registration, the
registration is revoked as of the date the insurance is canceled.
   (D)   The general contractor or subcontractor must immediately notify the
County Land Use Department if his or her insurance is canceled.
(1980 Code, § 117.25) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 93-139, passed 6-17-
1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-1996) Penalty, see 10.99
§ 117.07 REGISTRATION ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The County Land Use Department shall register contractors to work in
the unincorporated county upon proper application, compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and payment of the fee set out in §
117.05.
   (B)   All registrations shall be valid for one calendar year from January 1
to December 31 unless otherwise revoked as prescribed in this subchapter.
   (C)   All general contractors and subcontractors must register prior to
being issued any building permits by the County Land Use Department.
   (D)   Any and all insurance companies used by general contractors or
subcontractors to comply with the provisions of this subchapter must maintain a
minimum A rating.
(1980 Code, § 117.26) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
§ 117.08 SCOPE OF GENERAL CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All contractors registered under §
117.03 shall comply with the provisions of all applicable county codes,
resolutions and ordinances during the performance of construction activities
within unincorporated county.
   (B)   All general and subcontractors registered under this subchapter shall
be responsible for any and all employees working for him or her or under his or
her registration.
   (C)   All general contractors shall hire only subcontractors who are
registered under this subchapter.
(1980 Code, § 117.27) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
§ 117.09 REGISTRATION REVOCATION AND REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   Any registration issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by the County Land Use Department for any violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter. The revocation shall be in addition to any fine
or penalty imposed.
   (B)   No person whose registration has been revoked as herein provided shall
be eligible for a new registration for a period to be determined by the
Director of Building Services based upon the severity of the violation.
   (C)   All appeals from the action of the County Land Use Department to
revoke a contractor’s or subcontractor’s registration shall be filed within ten
days of the action with the Land Use Committee of the County Board who shall
conduct a hearing on the revocation.
   (D)   The County Land Use Department may refuse to issue a registration in
the event that any of the provisions of this subchapter, which are conditions
precedent to the issuance of the registration, have not been met. Any appeals
from an action of the County Land Use Department to refuse to issue a
contractor’s or subcontractor’s registration should be filed within ten days
with the Land Use Committee of the County Board who shall conduct a hearing on
the refusal to issue a registration.
(1980 Code, § 117.28) (Res. 93-94, passed 4-15-1993; Res. 96-250, passed 11-21-
1996)
CHAPTER 118: BATH HOUSES AND MASSAGE PARLORS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   License required
   
118.03   License application
   
118.04   License fee
   
118.05   Fingerprinting and investigation of applicant
   
118.06   Health and Human Services Committee determination hearing; County
Board decision
   
118.07   Operating restrictions
   
118.08   Revocation or suspension of license; other remedies
 
   
118.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate and license massage parlors, see ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §
5-1097
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BATH HOUSE. A commercial business which offers to the purchasing public at a
fee or price, facilities for taking a regular bath, shower, steam bath, sauna
bath or hot tub bath. Any business concern that offers any of these services at
a price shall be regarded for purposes of this chapter as a BATH HOUSE, whether
or not the business carries on any other kind of business within its premises.
If the bath services are not submitted to the purchasing public for a price,
but are merely offered as an adjunct of other services, which other services
are paid for by the purchasing public, the business entity shall not be deemed
a BATH HOUSE for purposes of this chapter.
   MASSAGE PARLORS. A business enterprise which offers for a fee to the
purchasing public rubbing or manipulation of any part of the human body, male
or female, whether or not the activity is the only activity engaged in on the
premises by the business entity. This definition does not apply to a
chiropractic clinic run by a licensed chiropractor where only chiropractic
techniques are practiced. This definition also does not apply to clinics or
work performed by physicians, osteopaths and cosmetologists licensed by the
state and having no criminal record. This definition also does not apply to
naprapathic treatment given by or under the supervision of a naprapath
graduated from a recognized school of naprapathy to include the Chicago College
of Naprapathy, Chicago National College of Naprapathy, Joliet Naprapathy
Academy, National College of Naprapathy.
(1980 Code, § 118.01) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984)
§ 118.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bath house or massage parlor in the
unincorporated areas of the county without a valid and current license under
this chapter.
   (B)   Commencing 60 days after passage of this chapter, all bath houses and
massage parlors within the unincorporated areas of the county, must be licensed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 118.02) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   All applicants for a license under this chapter must submit their
application for the license with the requisite license fee, payable in advance,
to the County Clerk. Upon demand by the applicant, the County Clerk shall
provide the applicant with an application form. This application form shall
require the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the person making the application and
executing it;
   (B)   The name and address of the owner or owners of the business to be
licensed. If the business is a corporation, the form should provide space for
the corporate address, as well as the names and addresses of the president,
secretary and treasurer of the corporation and all persons employed by the
corporation who operate the facility;
   (C)   The purpose for which the business entity desires to make use of the
premises, including specifically whether massages are to be offered and whether
any kind of bath is to be offered;
   (D)   The address of the facility where the bath house or massage parlor is
to be operated;
   (E)   The number of employees expected to be employed by the facility; and
   (F)   A statement by the applicant that he or she has read the data he or
she placed in the application and that the data is true and correct, along with
a space for his or her signature and the signature of a notary public.
(1980 Code, § 118.03) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984; Res. 02-79, passed 2-21-2002)
§ 118.04 LICENSE FEE.
   At the time of submitting his or her application, the applicant shall pay a
license fee of $2,000, and the fee shall be paid before January 1 of each
calendar year succeeding the first application.
(1980 Code, § 118.04) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984; Res. 02-79, passed 2-21-2002)
§ 118.05 FINGERPRINTING AND INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   Upon receipt of the license fee and application, the County Clerk shall
direct the applicant to make arrangements with the County Sheriff to have his
or her fingerprints taken and the fingerprints of all managing officers or
employees of the business entity. The County Clerk shall forward a copy of the
application to the Sheriff for him or her to conduct the tests and make his or
her own investigation into any prior criminal history or background of the
applicant or any other person whose name appears on the application form. The
Clerk shall also forward a copy of the application to the Health and Human
Services Committee and shall put the application on the agenda for the first
practicable meeting of the Health and Human Services Committee. The Clerk shall
further inform the applicant of the date and time of this meeting. No license
shall be granted to any applicant who has been convicted of a felony within the
last ten years of the date of application.
(1980 Code, § 118.05) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984)
§ 118.06 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMITTEE DETERMINATION HEARING; COUNTY
BOARD DECISION.
   The Health and Human Services Committee shall conduct a hearing in the
ordinary course of its business to determine whether the applicant should be so
licensed, and shall make its decision within 60 days after its meeting and
hearing. Upon making its determination, this determination shall be forwarded
to the County Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting for the Board’s
determination to agree with or reject the Committee’s recommendation, as the
case may be. The County Board’s decision shall be made within 60 days after
having received the Committee’s recommendation and this decision shall be
final.
(1980 Code, § 118.06) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984)
§ 118.07 OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No female employee of the bath house or massage parlor shall appear in
the presence of a nude male patron, nor shall any female employee appear nude
before any male or female patron, clothed or unclothed. Likewise, no male
employee of the bath house or massage parlor shall appear before a nude female
patron, nor shall any male employee appear nude before any male or female
patron, clothed or unclothed.
   (B)   Businesses operating under this chapter will be closed from 10:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m.
(1980 Code, § 118.07) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.08 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; OTHER REMEDIES.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
having the license of the bath house or massage parlor revoked, in addition to
the fine set forth in §
118.99. In any event, if the county contemplates revocation or suspension of
the license, the county shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the
license should be revoked or suspended. The Health and Human Services Committee
of the County Board shall be the hearing officer at the hearing and shall have
the power to decide the case. The Health and Human Services Committee’s
decision will be final other than any court remedies the applicant may have
under the State Administrative Review Act or any other remedies provided by
law.
(1980 Code, § 118.98) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $500, in addition to the license suspension or revocation
set forth in §
118.08.
(1980 Code, § 118.99) (Res. 84-14, adopted 3-15-1984; Res. 84-29, adopted 4-19-
1984)
CHAPTER 119: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
119.001   Recitals
   
119.002   Short title
   
119.003   Definitions
   
119.004   Computation of time
   
119.005   Nuisance declared
Adult Use Commission
   
119.020   Generally
   
119.021   Powers and duties
Adult Establishment Licenses
   
119.035   Licenses generally
   
119.036   Required application form
   
119.037   Administration processing fee
   
119.038   Required information and documents
   
119.039   Incomplete application returned
Processing of Application
   
119.050   Reviewing departments
   
119.051   Reports
   
119.052   Adult Use Commission review
   
119.053   Reliance on diagram
   
119.054   Applicant cooperation required
   
119.055   Time for issuance or denial
   
119.056   Decision final
Standards For License Issuance or Denial
   
119.070   Issuance
   
119.071   Denial
   
119.072   License deemed to be issued
   
119.073   Change in information
Inspections By the County
   
119.085   Authority
   
119.086   Licensee cooperation
   
119.087   Interference or refusal illegal
   
119.088   Suspension or revocation
Regulations Applicable to All Adult Entertainment Establishments
   
119.100   General compliance
   
119.101   Hours of operation
   
119.102   Animals
   
119.103   Restrooms
   
119.104   Restricted access
   
119.105   Specific prohibited acts
   
119.106   Exterior display
   
119.107   Signage limitations
   
119.108   Noise
   
119.109   Gambling and related devices prohibited
   
119.110   Manager’s station
   
119.111   Alcohol prohibition
   
119.112   Licensee responsibility for employees
Special Regulations
   
119.125   Adult booths
   
119.126   Adult cabarets
   
119.127   Adult stores
   
119.128   Adult theaters
License Revocation or Suspension
   
119.140   Grounds
   
119.141   Procedure
Records
   
119.155   Administrative record
   
119.156   Employee registration and recordkeeping by license
 
   
119.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 110
   Bath houses and massage parlors, see
Ch. 118
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 119.001 RECITALS.
   The foregoing recitals are incorporated herein as the findings and
determinations of the County Executive and members of the County Board.
(1980 Code, § 119.001) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as, and may be referred to as, the Will County
Adult Use Ordinance.
(1980 Code, § 119.002) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings given here.
   ADULT BOOTH. Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off from
the remainder of the establishment by one or more walls or other dividers or
partitions and used to show, play or otherwise demonstrate any adult materials
or to view any live performance that is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISH- MENT. Any of the following commercial
establishments, as defined herein:
      (1)   ADULT CABARET. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the
following:
         (a)   Persons who appear semi-nude;
         (b)   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides,
computer displays or other visual representations or recordings of any kind
that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
      (2)   ADULT STORE. Any commercial establishment that:
         (a)   Contains one or more adult booths;
         (b)   As a significant portion of its business offers for sale, rental
or viewing any adult materials; or
         (c)   Has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult
materials.
      (3)   ADULT THEATER. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business features or provides:
         (a)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides or
other visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of
specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities; or
         (b)   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYEE. Any individual, including entertainers, who
works in or at, or renders any services directly related to the operation of,
an adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that this definition
shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult
materials), food and beverages or performing maintenance or repairs, to the
licensed premises.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE. A license issued for an adult entertainment
establishment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT PATRON. Any individual, other than an adult
establishment employee, present in or at any adult entertainment establishment
at any time when the adult entertainment establishment is open for business,
provided, however, that this definition shall not include persons delivering
goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and beverages or performing
maintenance or repairs, to the licensed premises.
   ADULT MATERIAL. Any of the following, whether new or used:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other reprinted matter or
digitally-stored materials;
      (2)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer
displays other visual representations or recordings of any kind, that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposures, depiction or
description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities; and/or
      (3)   Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or
describe specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT USE COMMISSION. A commission appointed by the County Executive with
the advice and consent of the County Board pursuant to §§
119.020 and
119.021 of this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where admission, services, performances
or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of consideration.
   COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE. The ordinance known and referred to as the Will
County Zoning Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time.
   DAYS. Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this
chapter.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The place or location described in an adult establishment
license where an adult entertainment establishment is authorized to operate. No
sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-way or grounds adjacent to
any place or location shall be included within the licensed premises.
   LICENSEE. Any person or entity that has been issued an adult establishment
license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. A state of dress or undress that exposes to view:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   REVIEWING DEPARTMENT AND COMMISSIONS. Office of the County Sheriff, the
County Health Department, the County Land Use Department, the County Adult Use
Commission and the County Planning and Zoning Commission.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor
accessory apparel such as hats, gloves and socks.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other
wearing apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT. Any unlawful lewd, indecent or immoral conduct,
including specifically, but without limitation, any of the lewd, indecent or
immoral criminal acts specified in any of the following statutes:
      (1)   Article II of the Illinois Criminal Code (sex offenses);
      (2)   ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-4 (unauthorized videotaping);
      (3)   ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12C-30 (contributing to the criminal
delinquency of a juvenile);
      (4)   The Obscene Phone Call Act, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 135, §§ 0.01 et
seq.;
      (5)   The Wrongs to Children Act, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 150, §§ 0.01 et
seq.;
      (6)   The Improper Supervision of Children Act, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act
640, §§ 001 et seq.;
      (7)   The Sale of Immoral Publications to Children Act, being ILCS Ch.
720, Act 670, §§ 0.01 et seq.;
      (8)   The Cannabis Control Act, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et
seq.; and
      (9)   The State Controlled Substances Act, being ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570,
§§ 100 et seq.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; or
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition.
   STRADDLE DANCE. The use by any person, including specifically, but without
limitation, any adult establishment employee, of any part of his or her body to
touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any adult
establishment patron or any other person or the touching of the genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus or female breast of any person by any adult establishment
patron. Conduct shall be a STRADDLE DANCE regardless of whether the “touch” or
“touching” occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified
anatomical area. Conduct shall also be a STRADDLE DANCE regardless of whether
the “touch” or “touching” is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly
referred to by the slang terms “lap dance”, “table dance” and “face dance”
shall be included within this definition.
(1980 Code, § 119.003) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.004 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter, the time
within which any act required by this chapter is to be done shall be computed
by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a federal or state holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded.
   (B)   If the day immediately following the Saturday, Sunday or holiday is
also a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
(1980 Code, § 119.004) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.005 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   Any adult entertainment establishment established, operated or
maintained in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter or of any adult establishment licenses shall be declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance.
   (B)   The county may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set
forth in this chapter, commence any action to enjoin, remove or abate the
nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take other steps and apply to
the court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as well as abate
or remove the public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from
establishing, operating or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment
contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 119.005) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADULT USE COMMISSION
§ 119.020 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Creation. A Commission entitled Adult Use Commission is hereby created
and established for the purposes set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Composition. The County Executive with the advice and consent of the
County Board shall appoint three people, each from different County Board
districts, to serve for a period of two years on matters relating to the
implementation and enforcement of the regulations set forth in this chapter and
to the exercise of the Adult Use Commission’s powers and duties under this
chapter. The persons appointed shall comprise the Adult Use Commission.
Initially, one member shall be appointed for one year, one member shall be
appointed for two years, and one member shall be appointed for three years,
with the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term of two
years. Each appointee shall serve until a replacement appointment has been
approved by the County Board.
   (C)   Filing of appointments. The County Executive shall file a written
appointment of each of the members of the Adult Use Commission in the office of
the County Clerk within five days after each appointment.
(1980 Code, § 119.020) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.021 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Adult Use Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance,
renewal, suspension and revocation of, adult establishment licenses as set
forth in this chapter;
   (B)   To conduct or provide for inspections of adult entertainment
establishments as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law;
   (C)   To periodically review the provisions of this chapter and the conduct
and operation of adult entertainment establishments and adult establishment
licensees, and to make related reports and recommendations to the County Board
that the Adult Use Commission shall deem necessary;
   (D)   To conduct and prepare hearings, studies and reports on adult
entertainment establishments, and the regulations relating thereto, as the
Adult Use Commission shall deem necessary;
   (E)   To take further actions as the Adult Use Commission shall deem
necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to exercise
additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to those
powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter;
   (F)   To recommend further regulations regarding adult entertainment
establishments and adult establishment licenses as the members of the
Commission may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare
or to otherwise carry out the purposes and objectives of the regulations
established pursuant to this chapter; and
   (G)   To conduct hearings on the revocation or suspension of an adult
establishment license as required pursuant to §§
119.140 and
119.141 of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 119.021) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES
§ 119.035 LICENSES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Required. An adult establishment license shall be required to
establish, operate or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the
unincorporated areas of the county.
   (B)   Operation without license prohibited. Except as provided in division
(F) of this section with regard to adult entertainment establishments existing
prior to the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person not having a current and valid adult establishment license to establish,
operate or maintain an adult entertainment establishment within the
unincorporated areas of the county at any time after tine effective date of
this chapter.
   (C)   Operation in violation of license prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any licensees to establish, operate or maintain an adult entertainment
establishment within the unincorporated area of the county except in the manner
authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this chapter and the
licensee’s adult establishment license.
   (D)   Content and display of license. Every adult establishment license
shall be provided by the county and shall, at a minimum, prominently state on
its face the name of the licensee, the expiration date and the address of the
adult entertainment establishment. Every licensee shall cause the licensee’s
adult establishment license to be framed, covered by glass and hung at all
times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so that it
can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the licensed
premises.
   (E)   License term. Except as hereinafter provided, adult establishment
licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended or
revoked, for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of the year following
the year of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year. Adult
establishment licenses issued after January 1 of any year for operations to
commence in that year shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated,
suspended or revoked, for a term commencing on the date of issuance and
terminating on December 31 of the same year.
   (F)   Existing establishments. An adult entertainment establishment existing
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall submit an application for an
adult establishment license no later than October 1, 1999; shall cease
operations on November 15, 1999, unless it has secured by that date an adult
establishment license pursuant to this chapter; and shall be subject to all
other provisions of this chapter as of November 25, 1999. Any facility licensed
by the Liquor Control Commissioner of the county on the date of the passage of
this chapter shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter for a period
of five years from the date of the passage of this chapter.
   (G)   Renewal. An adult establishment license may be renewed only by making
application as required for an initial license pursuant to §§
119.035 through
119.039 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days
before the expiration of the then-current license term. The expiration of the
license shall not be affected or extended by a renewal application that is made
less than 30 days before expiration.
(1980 Code, § 119.030) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.036 REQUIRED APPLICATION FORM.
   An application for an adult establishment license, or the renewal thereof,
shall be made in writing to the Adult Use Commission on a form prescribed by
the Commission and shall be signed by the applicant, if the applicant is an
individual; by at least one of the persons entitled to share in the profits of
the organization and having unlimited personal liability for the obligations of
the organization and the right to bind all other persons, if the applicant is a
partnership (general or limited), joint venture or any other type of
organization where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of
the organization; by a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a
corporation; or by the trustee, if the applicant is a land trust. The
application shall be verified by oath or affidavit as to all statements made on
or in connection with the application and any attachments thereto. Each
application shall specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises
for which an adult establishment license is sought. Each initial or renewal
application shall be accompanied by even identical copies.
(1980 Code, § 119.031) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.037 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESSING FEE.
   (A)   Fee. Every applicant for an adult establishment license or the renewal
of an existing adult establishment license shall pay an administrative
processing fee in the amount of $200 by certified check to the county at the
time of filing the application. The administrative processing fee shall in all
cases be non-refundable and shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of
the county.
   (B)   Bond or other security. Each adult establishment license, and any
renewals thereof, shall be conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in
good standing by the applicant and licensee of a surety bond or other similar
security in favor of the county in the amount of $5,000 to the county. Before
an adult establishment license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish the
bond or security, and before an adult establishment license is renewed or
reinstated following revocation or suspension, the licensee shall submit
evidence that the bond or other security, in the amount required pursuant
hereto, remains in full force and effect. The bond or other security, or part
thereof, for an adult entertainment establishment shall be forfeited
automatically pursuant to §§
119.140 and
119.141 of this chapter in order to reimburse the county for the county’s costs
in association with the proceedings related to any suspension or revocation of
the license.
(1980 Code, § 119.032) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.038 REQUIRED INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTS.
   Each application shall include the following information and documents.
   (A)   Individuals. The applicant’s legal name, all aliases, business address
and Social Security number, written proof of age, citizenship and place of
birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization.
   (B)   Corporations. The applicant corporation’s complete name and official
business address; the legal name, all aliases and the ages, business addresses
and Social Security numbers of all of the directors, officers and managers of
the corporation and of every person owning or controlling more than 50% of the
voting shares of the corporation; the corporations’ date and place of
incorporation and the objects for which it was formed; proof that the
corporation is a corporation in good standing and authorized to conduct
business in the state; and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process.
   (C)   Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures or any other type of
organization where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of
the organization. The applicant organizations’ complete name and official
business address; the legal name, all aliases and the ages, business addresses
and Social Security numbers of each partner (other than limited partners) or
any other person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether
or not any the person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the
organization. If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that must
be disclosed pursuant to divisions (A) or (B) above, then the interest holders
shall disclose the information required in the divisions with respect to their
interest holders.
   (D)   Land trusts. The applicant land trust’s complete name; the legal name,
all aliases and the business address of the trustee of the land trust; the
legal name, all aliases and the ages, business addresses and Social Security
numbers of each beneficiary if the land trust and the specific interest of each
beneficiary in the land trust; and the interest, if any, that the land trust
holds in the licensed premises.
   (E)   All applicants.
      (1)   The general character and nature of the business of the applicant;
      (2)   The length of time that the applicant has been in the business;
      (3)   The location including street address and legal description and
telephone number of the premises for which the adult establishment license is
sought;
      (4)   The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the
adult establishment license;
      (5)   The identity of each fee simple owner of the licensed premises;
      (6)   A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the
licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed
structural internal features of the licensed premises, the interior rooms,
walls, partitions, stages, performance areas and restrooms. A professionally
prepared audiogram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint
shall not be required, provided however, that each diagram shall be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches and sufficient to show clearly the various interior dimensions of all
areas of the licensed premises and to demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The requirements of this division shall not apply
for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee certifies
that the licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately preceding
issuance of the license and that the previous diagram continues to accurately
depict the exterior and interior layouts of the licensed premises. The approval
for use of the diagram required pursuant to this division shall not be deemed
to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute, any other
county approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable county ordinances and
regulations;
      (7)   The names of each governmental body from which within five years
immediately prior to the date of the present application, the applicant, or any
of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to divisions (A) or
(B) above of this section, has received a license or other authorization to
conduct or operate a business substantially the same as an adult entertainment
establishment, and the names and addresses of each business; requiring a
federal, state or local liquor license; or requiring a federal, state or local
gaming license;
      (8)   The specific type or types of adult entertainment establishment(s)
that the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises;
      (9)   A copy of each adult establishment license, liquor license and
gaming license currently held by the applicant, or any of the individuals
identified in the application pursuant to divisions (A) or (B) of this section;
      (10)   Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to divisions (A) or (B) of this section, has been, within
five years immediately preceeding the date of the application, convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contendere to, any specific criminal act. As to each conviction,
the applicant or other individual shall provide the conviction date, the case
number, the nature of the misdemeanor or felony violation(s) or offense(s), and
the name and location of the court;
      (11)   Whether the applicant or any of the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to divisions (A) or (B) of this section, has had a license
or other authorization to conduct or operate a business substantially the same
as an adult entertainment establishment or any business requiring either a
liquor or gaming license, revoked or suspended, and, if so, the date and
grounds for each revocation or suspension, and the name and location of the
establishment at issue; and
      (12)   The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-to-
day on-site managers of the proposed adult entertainment establishment. If the
manager is other than the applicant, the applicant shall provide, for each
manager, all of the information required pursuant to division (A) of this
chapter and divisions (E)(7) through (E)(11).
(1980 Code, § 119.033) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.039 INCOMPLETE APPLICATION RETURNED.
   Any application for an adult establishment license that does not include all
of the information and documents required pursuant to §
119.038 as well as the administrative processing fee and bond or other security
required pursuant to §
119.037, shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not be acted on or
processed by the county. The Adult Use Commission shall, within five days of
the submittal, return the incomplete application to the applicant along with a
written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete.
(1980 Code, § 119.034) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.
§ 119.050 REVIEWING DEPARTMENTS.
   Within three days after receipt of a complete application for an adult
establishment license that includes all of the information and documents
required pursuant to §
119.038 as well as the administrative processing fee and bond or other security
required pursuant to §
119.037, the Adult Use Commission shall transmit a copy of the application to
the reviewing departments.
(1980 Code, § 119.050) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.051 REPORTS.
   Each of the reviewing departments shall, within 25 days after transmittal of
the application thereto:
   (A)   Review the application;
   (B)   Conduct inspections of the proposed licensed premises and background
investigations of the applicant and any of the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to §
119.038 regarding matters within their respective jurisdictions, as shall be
reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the application and
to determine whether the proposed adult entertainment establishment and
licensed premises comply with the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; and
   (C)   Prepare and submit to the Adult Use Commission a written report
regarding the results and findings for reviews, inspections and investigations.
(1980 Code, § 119.051) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.052 ADULT USE COMMISSION REVIEW.
   The Adult Use Commission shall also conduct the inspections and
investigations as the Commission shall deem reasonably necessary to verify the
information set forth in the application and to determine whether the proposed
adult entertainment establishment and licensed premises comply with the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances,
rules and regulations.
(1980 Code, § 119.052) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.053 RELIANCE ON DIAGRAM.
   In the event that the licensed premises has not yet been constructed or
reconstructed to accommodate the proposed adult entertainment establishment,
the Adult Use Commission and the reviewing departments shall base their
respective written reports, investigations and inspections to the extent
necessary, on the diagram submitted pursuant to §
119.038. Any adult establishment license issued prior to the construction or
reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed adult entertainment
establishment shall contain a condition that the adult entertainment
establishment shall not open for business until the licensed premises has been
inspected and determined to be in substantial compliance with the diagram
submitted with the application.
(1980 Code, § 119.053) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.054 APPLICANT COOPERATION REQUIRED.
   An applicant for an adult establishment license shall cooperate fully in the
inspections and investigations conducted by the Adult Use Commission and the
reviewing departments. The applicant’s failure or refusal of any of the
following shall constitute an admission by the applicant that the applicant is
ineligible for an adult establishment license and shall be grounds for denial
of the license by the Adult Use Commission:
   (A)   To give any information reasonably relevant to the investigation of
the application;
   (B)   To allow the licensed premises to be inspected;
   (C)   To appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath
regarding the application; or
   (D)   To otherwise cooperate with the investigation and inspection required
by this section.
(1980 Code, § 119.054) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.055 TIME FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   The Adult Use Commission shall, within 30 days after submittal of a properly
completed application, either issue or deny issuance of an adult establishment
license pursuant to the provisions of §§
119.070 through
119.073. The Adult Use Commission shall issue or deny the license within a 30-
day period regardless of whether or not the Adult Use Commission has received
all of the reviewing department reports.
(1980 Code, § 119.055) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.056 DECISION FINAL.
   The action taken by the Adult Use Commission to issue or deny issuance of an
adult establishment license pursuant to §§
119.070 through
119.073 shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review.
(1980 Code, § 119.056) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
STANDARDS FOR LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL
§ 119.070 ISSUANCE.
   The Adult Use Commission shall issue an adult establishment license to an
applicant if, but only if, the Adult Use Commission finds and determines all of
the following, based on the reports, investigations and inspections conducted
by the Adult Use Commission and the reviewing departments and on any other
credible information on which it is reasonable for the Adult Use Commission to
rely.
   (A)   All information and documents required by §
119.038 of this chapter for issuance of an adult establishment license have
been properly provided and the material statements made in the application are
true and correct.
   (B)   For adult stores and adult theaters, all persons identified in the
application pursuant to §
119.038 of this chapter are at least 18 years of age and not under any legal
disability. For adult cabarets, all persons identified in the application
pursuant to §
119.038 are at least 21 years of age and not under any legal disability.
   (C)   No person identified in the application pursuant to §
119.038 has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any specified
criminal act within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
   (D)   No person identified in the application pursuant to §
119.038 has been convicted of, or pleaded nolo contendere to any violation of a
provision of this chapter within five years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
   (E)   No person identified in the application pursuant to §
119.038 is overdue on payment to the county of taxes, fees, fines or penalties
assessed against, or imposed on, any individual in connection to any adult
entertainment establishment.
   (F)   No person identified in the application pursuant to §
119.038 is residing with, or married to, a person who has been denied an adult
establishment license within 12 months immediately preceding the date of the
application; whose adult establishment license has been revoked within 12
months immediately preceding the date of the application; or whose adult
establishment license is under suspension at the time of application.
   (G)   The adult entertainment establishment and the licensed premises, and
the proposed operation of the adult entertainment establishment, comply with
all then-applicable building, health and life safety codes and regulations and
have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the then-
applicable provisions of the County Zoning Ordinance, including specifically,
but without limitation, the zoning certificate required for the adult
entertainment establishment.
   (H)   The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the
application that the applicant has read this chapter and all provisions of the
County Zoning Ordinance applicable to adult entertainment establishments, that
the applicant is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the
licensed premises and the proposed adult entertainment establishment and its
proposed operation are and shall be in compliance therewith.
(1980 Code, § 119.065) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.071 DENIAL.
   If the Adult Use Commission determines that the applicant has not met any
one or more of the conditions set forth in this chapter, the Adult Use
Commission shall deny issuance of the adult establishment license and shall
give the applicant a written notification and explanation of the denial. The
Adult Use Commission’s notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by
certified Unites States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the applicant’s address as set forth in the application. The adult
establishment license shall be deemed denied on the day that the notice of
denial is delivered in person or three days after it is placed in the United
States mail as provided in this section.
(1980 Code, § 119.066) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.072 LICENSE DEEMED TO BE ISSUED.
   If the Adult Use Commission does not issue or deny the adult establishment
license within 30 days after the properly completed application is submitted,
then the adult establishment license applied for shall be deemed to have been
issued.
(1980 Code, § 119.067) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.073 CHANGE IN INFORMATION.
   During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of any adult
establishment license, the applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the
Adult Use Commission in writing of any change in any material information given
by the applicant or licensee in the application for the license, including
specifically, but without limitation, any change in managers of the adult
entertainment establishment or in the individuals identified in the application
pursuant to §
119.038; or if any of the events specified in §
119.088 of this chapter occur.
(1980 Code, § 119.068) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
INSPECTIONS BY THE COUNTY
§ 119.085 AUTHORITY.
   The Adult Use Commission and other county representatives and departments
with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect all adult entertainment
establishments as shall be necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws.
(1980 Code, § 119.075) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.086 LICENSEE COOPERATION.
   A licensee shall permit representatives of the county to inspect the
licensed premises and the adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable laws at any time during which the licensed premises is occupied or
the adult entertainment establishment is open for business.
(1980 Code, § 119.076) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.087 INTERFERENCE OR REFUSAL ILLEGAL.
   It shall be unlawful for the licensee, any adult establishment employee or
any other person to prohibit, interfere with or refuse to allow any lawful
inspection conducted by the county pursuant to this chapter or any other
authority.
(1980 Code, § 119.077) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.088 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   Any prohibition, interference or refusal shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the adult establishment license pursuant to §§
119.140 and
119.141 of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 119.078) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 119.100 GENERAL COMPLIANCE.
   All licensed premises and adult entertainment establishments shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter; all other applicable county ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations; and all other applicable federal, state and
local laws.
(1980 Code, § 119.090) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.101 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any time
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any weekday or Saturday. No
adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any time on any
Sunday or on any legal state or federal holiday.
(1980 Code, § 119.091) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.102 ANIMALS.
   No animals, except for seeing-eye dogs required to assist the blind, shall
be permitted at any time at or in any adult entertainment establishment
licensed premises.
(1980 Code, § 119.092) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.103 RESTROOMS.
   All restrooms in adult entertainment establishments shall be equipped with
standard toilets, sinks and other traditional lavatory facilities. No adult
materials or live performances shall be provided or allowed at any time in the
restrooms of an adult entertainment establishment. Separate male and female
restrooms shall be provided for and used by adult establishment employees and
adult establishment patrons.
(1980 Code, § 119.093) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.104 RESTRICTED ACCESS.
   No adult establishment patron shall be permitted at any time to enter into
any of the non-public portions of any adult entertainment establishment,
including specifically, but without limitation, any storage areas of dressing
or other rooms provided for the benefit of adult establishment employees. This
section shall not apply to persons delivering goods and materials, food and
beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the licensed premises;
provided, however, that any persons shall remain in non-public areas only for
the purposes and to the extent and time necessary to perform their job duties.
(1980 Code, § 119.094) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.105 SPECIFIC PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment shall appear, be present or perform while nude.
   (B)   No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual
activity with or for any adult establishment patron or any other adult
establishment employee or any other person. No adult establishment patron or
any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or
conduct any specified sexual activity with or for any adult establishment
employee or adult establishment patron or any other person.
   (C)   Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all adult entertainment
establishments.
(1980 Code, § 119.095) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.106 EXTERIOR DISPLAY.
   No adult entertainment establishment shall be maintained or operated in any
manner that causes, creates or allows public viewing of any adult material, or
any entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, from any sidewalk, public or private
right-of- way, or any property other than the lot on which the licensed
premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an adult entertainment
establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights or
spotlights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any words, lettering,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner
except to the extent specifically allowed pursuant to §
119.107 with regard to signs. This section shall apply to any advertisement,
display, promotional material, decoration or sign; to any performance or show;
and to any window, door or other opening.
(1980 Code, § 119.096) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.107 SIGNAGE LIMITATIONS.
   All signs for adult entertainment establishments shall be flat wall signs
that conform with the signage requirements found in the County Zoning
Ordinance. Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter shall contain
only the name of the adult entertainment establishment and/or the specific type
of adult entertainment establishment conducted on the licensed premises.
Temporary signage shall not be permitted in connection with any adult
entertainment establishment.
(1980 Code, § 119.097) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.108 NOISE.
   No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed premises
shall be used at any time.
(1980 Code, § 119.098) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.109 GAMBLING AND RELATED DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   No adult entertainment establishment shall contain any video, pinball, slot,
bagatelle, pigeon-hole pool or any other games, machines, tables or implements.
(1980 Code, § 119.099) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.110 MANAGER’S STATION.
   Each adult entertainment establishment shall have one or more manager’s
stations. The interior of each adult entertainment establishment shall be
configured in a manner that there is a direct and substantially unobstructed
view from at least one manager’s station to every part of each area, except
restrooms, or the establishment to which any adult establishment patron is
permitted access for any purpose.
(1980 Code, § 119.100) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.111 ALCOHOL PROHIBITION.
   No alcoholic liquor of any kind shall be sold, used, consumed or possessed
at any time on any licensed premises or at any adult entertainment
establishment.
(1980 Code, § 119.101) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.112 LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission by an adult establishment employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the act or
omission of the licensee if the act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the
licensee’s negligent failure to supervise the adult establishment employee. The
licensee shall be punishable for any act or omission in the same manner as if
the licensee committed the act or caused the omission. Accordingly, any act or
omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed, for purposes of determining whether the licensee’s
adult entertainment license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed, to be the
act or omission of the licensee.
(1980 Code, § 119.102) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
§ 119.125 ADULT BOOTHS.
   (A)   Prohibited except in adult stores. Adult booths shall be prohibited in
all adult entertainment establishments except adult stores.
   (B)   Occupancy and prohibited acts. Only one individual shall occupy an
adult booth at any one time. No individual occupying an adult booth shall
engage in any specified sexual activities. No individual shall steal, damage or
deface any portion of an adult booth.
   (C)   Open booth requirement. In addition to satisfying the requirement of §
119.110, all adult stores containing adult booths shall be physically arranged
in a manner that the entire interior portion of each adult booth shall be
visible from the common area of the adult store. To satisfy this requirement,
there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed entranceway for each adult
booth and for the entranceway from the area of the adult store that provides
other adult materials to the area of the adult store containing the adult
booths. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of being closed or
obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drapes or
any other obstruction whatsoever than would be capable of wholly or partially
obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult booths or any person
situated in an adult booth. It shall be unlawful to install adult booths within
an adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of providing secluded
viewing of adult materials or live performances.
   (D)   Aisle required. There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle
alongside the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each person situated in
a booth shall be visible at all times from the aisle.
   (E)   Holes prohibited. Except for the open booth entranceway, the walls and
partitions of each adult booth shall be constructed and maintained of solid
walls or partitions without any holes or openings whatsoever.
   (F)   Signage. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entranceway to each adult booth that states that only one person is allowed in
an adult booth at any one time; that it is unlawful to engage in any specified
sexual activities while in an adult booth; and that it is unlawful to damage or
deface any portion of an adult booth.
   (G)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult booth or a licensed premises that includes an adult booth shall be under
the age of 18.
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult booth
or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth.
      (3)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult booth or at any licensed premises that includes an adult
booth.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult booth or any licensed premises
that includes an adult booth.
(1980 Code, § 119.110) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.126 ADULT CABARETS.
   (A)   Performance area. The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be
limited to one or more stages of platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a
“cabaret stage”). Each cabaret stage shall be at least 18 inches in elevation
above the level of the patron seating areas. Each cabaret stage shall be
separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all areas of the premises
to which adult entertainment patrons have access. A continuous barrier at least
three feet in height and located at least eight feet from all points of each
cabaret stage shall separate each cabaret stage from all patron seating areas.
The barrier shall consist of horizontal or vertical members spaced no more than
nine inches apart and nine inches from the floor or the walls to which it is
attached.
   (B)   Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally
distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all
objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less
than 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on ten-foot
centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas of the adult cabaret
where adult establishment patrons are admitted.
   (C)   Tipping. No tip or gratuity from any adult establishment patron may be
offered or accepted for any performance by an adult establishment employee on
any adult cabaret stage at any time prior to the completion of any performance.
No adult establishment patron shall offer, and no adult establishment employee
having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept any form of tip or gratuity
offered directly to the employee by the adult establishment patron. Following
completion of a performance, all tips and gratuities to adult establishment
employees performing on any cabaret stage shall be placed into a receptacle
provided for receipt of tips and gratuities by the adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   Notice of select rules. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with
letters at least one inch high, shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent
to every cabaret stage stating the following:
      This adult cabaret is regulated by the County of Will. Entertainers are:
         1. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct.
         2. Not permitted to appear in a state of nudity.
         3. Not permitted to accept tips or gratuities for any performance
until after completion of the performance.
         4. Not permitted to accept any tips directly from patrons even after
completion of the performance. Any such tips must be placed into the receptacle
provided by management.
   (E)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at
any adult cabaret or a licensed premises used for an adult cabaret shall be
under the age of 21.
      (2)   No person under the age of 21 shall be admitted to any adult
cabaret or to any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret.
      (3)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult cabaret or any licensed premises used for an adult cabaret.
      (4)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
othergoods or services at or from any adult cabaret or any licensed premises
used for an adult cabaret.
(1980 Code, § 119.111) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.127 ADULT STORES.
   (A)   Windows and signs. Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered
or obstructed in any way. No signs or other obstructions shall be placed in the
windows.
   (B)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult store or a licensed premises used for an adult store shall be under the
age of 18.
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult store
or to any licensed premises used for an adult store.
      (3)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult store or any licensed premises used for an adult store.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult store or any licensed premises
used for an adult store.
(1980 Code, § 119.112) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.128 ADULT THEATERS.
   (A)   Seating. Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual
chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and
not on couches, benches or any other multiple person seating structures. The
number of seats shall equal the maximum number of persons who may occupy the
adult theater.
   (B)   Aisle. Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside
the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be
visible from the aisle at all times.
   (C)   Sign. Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous
place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists
the maximum numbers of persons who may occupy the auditorium area, which number
shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
   (D)   Age limitations.
      (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult theater or a licensed premises used for an adult theater shall be under
the age of 18.
      (2)   No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any adult
theater or to any licensed premises used for an adult theater.
      (3)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
remain at any adult theater or any licensed premises used for an adult theater.
      (4)   No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed or permitted to
purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult material or
other goods or services at or from any adult theater of any licensed premises
used for an adult theater.
(1980 Code, § 119.113) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
§ 119.140 GROUNDS.
   Pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
119.141, the Adult Use Commission may suspend for not more than 30 days, or
revoke, any adult establishment license if the Adult Use Commission, based on
credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that any
one or more of the following has occurred.
   (A)   The licensee has violated any of the provisions or requirements of
this chapter or the adult establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or the
provisions of the County Zoning Ordinance applicable to the licensed premises
or the adult entertainment establishment.
   (B)   The licensee knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading
information or withheld information on any application or other document
submitted to the county for the issuance or renewal of any adult establishment
license, or knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other person to
furnish or withhold any information on the licensee’s behalf.
   (C)   The licensee has committed a felony or specified criminal act on the
licensed premises.
   (D)   The licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the licensee’s
negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the adult entertainment
establishment, allows, an adult establishment employee, an adult establishment
patron or any other person to violate any of the requirements of the adult
establishment license issued pursuant hereto, or commit any felony or specified
criminal act on the licensed premises.
   (E)   The licensee, or any person identified pursuant to §
119.038 becomes disqualified for the issuance of an adult establishment license
at any time during the term of the license at issue.
(1980 Code, § 119.125) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.141 PROCEDURE.
   An adult entertainment establishment license may be suspended for not more
than 30 day or revoked pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this
section.
   (A)   Notice. Upon determine that one or more of the grounds for suspension
or revocation under §
119.140 may exist, the Adult Use Commission shall serve a written notice on the
licensee in person or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the licensee’s address as set forth in the
licensee’s application. The written notice shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   State that the Adult Use Commission has determined that the adult
establishment license may be subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to §
119.088;
      (2)   Identify the specific grounds for the Adult Use Commission’s
determination; and
      (3)   Set a date for a hearing regarding the Adult Use Commission’s
determination as to the possibility of suspension or revocation of the adult
establishment license. The date of the hearing shall be no less than five days
after service of the Adult Use Commission’s notice, unless an earlier or later
date is agreed to by the licensee and the Adult Use Commission.
   (B)   Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Adult Use Commission.
At the hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence and witnesses to
refute the grounds cited for suspending or revoking the license and the county
and any other persons may submit evidence to sustain the grounds. The
administrative record compiled on the adult entertainment establishment
pursuant to §
119.155 shall be made part of the hearing record. Within three days after the
close of the hearing, the Adult Use Commission shall, having considered the
record, set the hearing and render a decision in writing, setting forth the
reasons for the decision. The action taken by the Adult Use Commission shall be
final and shall be subject to judicial review.
   (C)   Notice and effective date of suspension or revocation. The Adult Use
Commission’s written decision shall be posted at the office of the Adult Use
Commissioner and shall be served on the licensee in person or by certified
United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s application. Any suspension
or revocation, as the case may be, shall take effect on the day that the Adult
Use Commission’s written decision is delivered in person or three days after it
is placed in the United States mail as provided in this division.
   (D)   Surrender of license and security. Upon the suspension or revocation
of an adult establishment license pursuant to this chapter:
      (1)   The Adult Use Commission shall take custody of the suspended or
revoked license; and
      (2)   A part or all of the bond or other security submittee for the adult
entertainment establishment pursuant to §
119.037(B) shall be forfeited as the Adult Use Commission shall deem necessary
to reimburse the county for the costs associated with the proceedings related
to the suspension or revocation at issue. The bond or other security shall be
replenished to equal the amount required pursuant to §
119.037(B) prior to the issuance of any new adult establishment license for the
licensed premises or for the reinstatement of any suspended license.
(Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
RECORDS
§ 119.155 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD.
   The Adult Use Commission shall cause to be kept in the office of the Adult
Use Commission an accurate record of every adult establishment license
application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and
material pertaining to the application; any adult establishment license issued
pursuant thereto; and any adult entertainment establishment operated pursuant
to the adult establishment license.
(1980 Code, § 119.135) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.156 EMPLOYEE REGISTRATION AND RECORDKEEPING BY LICENSE.
   The licensee of every adult entertainment establishment shall register each
of the licensee’s adult establishment employees with the Adult Use Commission
by providing the following information to the Adult Use Commission no later
than the business day immediately preceding the day of commencement of the
employee’s employment at the adult entertainment establishment:
   (A)   Legal name;
   (B)   Any and all aliases;
   (C)   Current residential address and telephone number, and all residential
addresses for the previous three years; and
   (D)   Date of birth.
(1980 Code, § 119.136) (Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
§ 119.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or assists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter or of any of the provisions or requirements of any
adult entertainment license shall be fined not more than $500 for each
violation. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The Adult Use Commission shall give written notice to any person of
any violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by
certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s application.
(Res. 99-320, passed 8-19-1999)
CHAPTER 120: SALE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS
Section
General Provisions
   
120.01   Words and phrases defined
   
120.02   Enactment of chapter
Licensing and Regulations
   
120.15   License required; regulations
   
120.16   Tobacco or alternative nicotine product sales to minors
   
120.17   Purchase of tobacco, alternative nicotine product or misrepresentation
of age by minors prohibited
   
120.18   Possession of tobacco or alternative nicotine product by minors
prohibited
   
120.19   Application for license
   
120.20   Ineligible applicants
   
120.21   License application process; notice; exception
   
120.22   Prerequisites for issuance
   
120.23   License fees; terms
   
120.24   Powers of Sheriff’s deputies; County Executive; immediate revocation
   
120.25   Injunctions
   
120.26   Severability
 
   
120.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 120.01 WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT excludes
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products and any product
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco
product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.
   LICENSEE.  The person or persons named in the retail tobacco product license
and shall include all officers, partners, agents or employees.
   PREMISES. The area under the control of the licensee and used in the
conducting of business for which the license to sell tobacco products is being
issued. The areas include but not restricted to are: the area described in the
application where tobacco products are sold, parking lots, beer gardens and
those areas internally connected thereto by a doorway which areas are
integrally related to the operation of the licensed establishment.
   RETAIL SALE.  The sale for use or consumption and not for resale in any
form.
   SALE or TO SELL. 
      (1)   Any transfer or exchange in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for direct or indirect consideration, and including all sales made by any
person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and
includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts:
         (a)   The selling of tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products;
         (b)   The giving away of tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products; and
         (c)   The dispensing of tobacco products by a vending machine.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter, however, shall prevent the possession and
transportation of tobacco products by the possessor for the personal use of the
possessor, his or her family and guests, so long as otherwise in compliance
with state law, as it is amended from time to time.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service
device, which must be housed indoors and, which upon insertion of money, tokens
or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products.
(1980 Code, § 120.01) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009; Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-
15-2019)
§ 120.02 ENACTMENT OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §
5-1052.
(Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-15-2019)
LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
§ 120.15 LICENSE REQUIRED; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or permit the sale of any tobacco products in
unincorporated Will County without first having obtained a license to sell
tobacco products in each location, place or premises wherein it is proposed by
a prospective licensee to sell tobacco products.
   (B)   Where two or more locations, places or premises are under the same
roof, or are located at one street address, a separate license shall be
obtained for each location, place or premises, unless all rooms in which it is
intended to sell tobacco products are directly connected or are adjacent to and
accessible to each other without leaving the building. Each licensee shall
define with certainty the room or rooms in which tobacco products are to be
sold.
   (C)   No person licensed to sell tobacco products under any license issued
by the County Executive shall be permitted to sell, give away or otherwise
dispose of tobacco products at any place other than the place specifically
described in his or her license whether the place is in the same building or
not.
(1980 Code, § 120.10) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009; Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-
15-2019) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.16 TOBACCO OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT SALES TO MINORS.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give, or furnish any tobacco products
or alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an
alternative nicotine product, to a person under 18 years of age. Any deputy
sheriff of this county may issue a ordinance violation notice for this
violation.
(Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-15-2019) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.17 PURCHASE OF TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT OR MISREPRESENTATION
OF AGE BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase tobacco
products or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of
an alternative nicotine product, or to misrepresent his identity or age, or to
use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products. Any deputy sheriff of this county
may issue an ordinance violation notice for this violation.
(Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-15-2019) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.18 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT BY MINORS
PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any
tobacco products or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or
component of an alternative nicotine product; provided that the possession by a
person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or
guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall
not be prohibited. Any deputy sheriff of this county may issue an ordinance
violation notice for this violation.
(Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-15-2019) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.19 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a retail tobacco product license shall be made to the County
Executive in writing,
under oath, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by the duly
authorized agent thereof if a legally constituted organization, and shall
include the following information and statements:
   (A)   The name, age, date of birth, last three residence addresses and
Social Security number of the applicant. In the case of a partnership, the
application must contain the names, ages, and last three residence addresses
and Social Security number of each partner;
   (B)   If a corporate license is sought, the application must contain the
name of the corporation, the date of incorporation, the articles of
incorporation and the names, addresses and Social Security numbers of all
officers and directors. If a majority of the stock of the corporation is owned
by one person, the name, address and Social Security number of that majority
stockholder shall be set forth in the application;
   (C)   In the case of an individual, the application must contain his or her
place of birth, and if the applicant is a naturalized citizen, then the date
and place of naturalization must be shown;
   (D)   The capital investment which the applicant intends to make in the
business of selling tobacco products at retail upon receipt of a license;
   (E)   The location, address and legal description of the premises to be
licensed. If the premises are leased, the applicant shall attach a copy of the
lease to the license application;
   (F)   A statement whether the applicant has made any other application for a
tobacco retail license and what disposition, if any, was made of the
application and a statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws
of the state or the United States, and that the applicant will not violate any
of the ordinances of the county;
   (G)   A statement whether or not the applicant was ever convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has a conviction, a statement of
the nature of the crime, the date and place of conviction and the sentence
imposed; and
   (H)   Each license holder must tender to the County Executive his or her
driver’s license or state identification card to be copied and held on file
with his or her license application along with his or her Social Security
number.
(1980 Code, § 120.11) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009)
§ 120.20 INELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to:
      (1)   Persons under the age of 18 years;
      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
      (3)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law if the County Executive determines, after investigation, that the
person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of the following offenses: keeping
a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, gambling, syndicated gambling,
keeping a gambling place or any other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency
and morality or the conspiracy, solicitation or attempt to commit any of the
aforementioned offenses;
      (5)   A person who has previously had a retail tobacco license revoked
for cause, whether in the county or in any other jurisdiction;
      (6)   A person, who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for the license upon a first
application;
      (7)   A partnership, unless all of the members of the partnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
      (8)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which
is qualified under the State Business Corporation Act to transact business in
the state;
      (9)   A person whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless
the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
      (10)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period of
which the license is to be issued;
      (11)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;
      (12)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, except when the stamp has been issued to a person who is licensed by
the state to operate a riverboat gambling operation or off-track betting
parlor;
      (13)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period, or if any of the partners has been issued a federal gaming
device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the
current tax period, except when the stamp has been issued to any partner of a
co-partnership who is licensed by the state to operate a riverboat gambling
operation or off-track betting parlor;
      (14)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of the
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering
stamp by the federal government for the current tax period, except when the
stamp has been issued to a corporation or any officer, a manager, director or
stockholder thereof who is licensed by the state to operate a riverboat
gambling operation; and
      (15)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, except a premise which is the location of a license issued by the state
to operate a riverboat gambling operation.
   (B)   Any false or untrue statements contained in the application for
license or at license hearing or, any violations of the terms and conditions of
the application, or of any of the statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations
hereof, shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the licensee by the
County Executive.
   (C)   In the event that one of the restrictions becomes known or comes into
effect after the issuance of the license, this will constitute grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license after a properly convened hearing.
(1980 Code, § 120.12) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.21 LICENSE APPLICATION PROCESS; NOTICE; EXCEPTION.
   Upon the filing of an application for a retail tobacco product license, the
County Executive shall review the applicant’s credentials and requirements to
determine if the license shall be granted. The criteria for the license are the
following:
   (A)   The past performance of the applicant, or if a partnership, that of
each of the partners; or if a corporation, that of the officers, directors and
majority stockholder and manager, as a licensee;
   (B)   The character and reputation of the applicant; or if a partnership,
that of each of the partners; or if a corporation, that of the officers,
directors, and a majority stockholder and manager, as a licensee;
   (C)   The general design and layout of the proposed premises;
   (D)   The compliance of the premises with all ordinances of the county and
specifically health, building, zoning, property, maintenance, housing and fire
safety ordinances;
   (E)   Any moneys owed to the county by the applicant which have remained
unpaid for a period of more than 45 days, whether for bills, taxes, license or
otherwise;
   (F) The zoning, general character of the surrounding neighborhood and the
projected impact of the premises upon the surrounding neighborhood and the
county as a whole. A recommendation may be solicited from the County Land Use
Department at the County Executive’s option; and
   (G)   The law enforcement problems, if any, which would be created by the
opening of the premises. A recommendation may be solicited from the County
Sheriff’s Department at the County Executive’s option.
(1980 Code, § 120.13) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009)
§ 120.22 PREREQUISITES FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   At the time set forth herein for the renewal of a retail tobacco
products license, and in case of a successful new applicant, the current
licensee or the applicant shall present the following to the County Executive:
      (1)   Payment to the County Executive by means of a certified or
cashier’s check of the license fee for the retail tobacco products license by
the following payment schedule:
         (a)   The entire amount for the year at the time of approval for the
license to be awarded; and
         (b)   The first half of the fee is to be paid on or before December 31
of the previous year for the renewal of the license for the following year.
Then, the second half of the fee is to be paid on or before July 1 of that year
the license has been approved.
      (2)   If payment of the license fee is not received on any of the above
dates in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) which are required by this section,
the licensee may be fined no less than $100, have the license suspended or have
the license revoked.
   (B)   (1)   To ensure employer responsibility and self-compliance, all
applicants will be required to either:
         (a)   Attend a vendor education session; or
         (b)   View a video recording of same issued by the County Health
Department.
      (2)   Store management responsible for new employee or staff training
will also be required to comply with division (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b). The
County Health Department shall provide retailers with all educational materials
necessary to effectuate this provision.
   (C)   Each licensee shall secure and file with the County Executive, a
certificate of approval showing compliance with all applicable rules or
regulations of the Health Department of the county.
   (D)   If the applicant has fulfilled the requirements of divisions (A) and
(B) above, within the prescribed time period, the County Executive may issue
the license.
   (E)   If the requirements of divisions (A) and (B) are not fulfilled within
the time periods set forth therein, the applicant shall reapply as set forth
previously.
   (F)   At any time during the pendency of an application, the County
Executive shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to any
examination and to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the
County Executive, are material to the determination as to whether the applicant
is qualified to receive a license under the provision of this chapter, or
whether the premises sought to be licensed are suitable for that purpose. The
County Executive shall also have the right to require the applicant to answer
any charges made in any objection to the issuance of the license. The failure
of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the County Executive
for his or her examination or to produce books and records required, unless for
good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that the applicant is not
qualified to receive a license.
(1980 Code, § 120.14) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009)
§ 120.23 LICENSE FEES; TERMS.
   (A)   The annual license fee for the license shall be $25.
   (B)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the
date of issuance, or in the case of renewals, from January 1 through the
business night of December 31. A new or renewed license will be required in
order for the licensed establishment to commence sales on January 1 of the new
year.
   (C)   No rebate of any fee shall be made to any licensee.
   (D)   The retail tobacco product license shall be displayed prominently at
the primary point of sale.
   (E)   The retail tobacco product license is non-transferable, except a new
license will be issued to a licensee who changes location, subject to
applicable fees.
(1980 Code, § 120.15) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009)
§ 120.24 POWERS OF SHERIFF’S DEPUTIES; COUNTY EXECUTIVE; IMMEDIATE REVOCATION.
   (A)   Enforcement authority. All Sheriff’s deputies shall have the power to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, which shall include the authority to
conduct annual compliance checks subject to staffing and budgetary constraints.
   (B)   County Executive.
      (1)   The County Executive may authorize any Sheriff’s deputy to enter
any place used for the retail sale of tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products, during normal business hours, licensed or unlicensed hereunder, to
determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, and
at that time to examine the premise/facility.
      (2)   The County Executive may receive complaints from any citizen within
its jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this chapter, or any state law
regarding the illegal sale of tobacco or alternative nicotine products, have
been or are being violated and to act upon the complaints.
      (3)   The County Executive shall have the right to examine or cause to be
examined under oath, any applicant for a retail tobacco product license or for
a renewal thereof, or any person legally responsible for any premises/facility
upon whom notice of violation, revocation or suspension has been served and to
examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any applicant,
licensee or person legally responsible for any premises/facility; to swear in
witnesses, hear testimony and take proof for his or her information in the
performance of his or her duties, and for these purposes to issue subpoenas
which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of
obtaining any information desired by the County Executive under this chapter,
he or she may authorize his or her agent or agents to act on his or her behalf.
   (C)   Closing retail tobacco premises.
      (1)   The County Sheriff’s deputies may immediately close a premises/
facility for the unlicensed retail sale of tobacco products. The facility shall
then be closed for the rest of the business day and be allowed to operate the
following business day but may not engage in the retail sale of tobacco
products unless properly licensed pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   If the County Executive has reason to believe that any premise/
facility engaged or is engaging in the unlicensed retail sale of tobacco
products he or she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason
for the conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the unlicensed premises
to cease all retail sales of tobacco products for not more than seven days,
giving the premises/facility an opportunity to be heard during that period,
except that if the premises/facility shall also be engaged in the conduct of
another business or businesses on the licensed premises/facility the order
shall not be applicable to other business or businesses. Upon notice from the
County Executive or the County State’s Attorney’s office, the County Executive
will issue an ex parte order and shall schedule a hearing on the matter not
later than five working days from the date of the order, excluding holidays,
Saturdays and Sundays.
      (3)   The County Executive may revoke or suspend any retail tobacco
product license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the licensee
has violated any of the provision of this chapter or any state law regarding
the illegal sale of tobacco. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the County
Executive may instead levy a fine on the licensee for the violations.
   (D)   Fines.
      (1)   The County Executive may levy a fine on the person legally
responsible for a premises/facility if he or she determines that the person
legally responsible for a premises/facility has violated any of the provisions
of this chapter or any state law regarding the illegal sale of tobacco.
      (2)   All fines imposed by the County Executive must be paid by cash,
money order or certified check made payable to the County Treasurer.
      (3)   All fines imposed by the County Executive must be paid within ten
days. Failure to pay the fine within the ten-day period will constitute a
separate offense.
      (4)   All fines imposed by the County Executive may be paid to the County
Executive on the day of the hearing. All fines imposed by the County Executive
not paid on the day of hearing shall be paid to the Treasurer.
   (E)   Violation. Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director,
manager or other agent or employee of any premises/facility shall be deemed and
held to be the act of the person legally responsible for the premises/facility;
and the person legally responsible for the premises/facility shall be
punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or
omitted by the person legally responsible for the premises/facility personally.
(1980 Code, § 120.16) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009; Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-
15-2019) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.25 INJUNCTIONS.
   In addition to any sanction, the County Executive may request that the Will
County State’s Attorney institute, in circuit court, an action to enjoin
violations of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 120.18) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009; Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-
15-2019)
§ 120.26 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, clause or division of this chapter shall be held invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 120.19) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In lieu of suspension or revocation of a licensee, or in the case of a
violation by an unlicensed premises/facility, the County Executive shall punish
violations of this chapter by fines as follows:
 
Violation                               Fine
First violation within 12-month period  $250
Second violation within 12-month period $500
Third violation within 12-month period  $1,000
 
   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (C)   Any deputy sheriff of this county may issue a violation notice for the
following violations.
 
Fine Schedule
               §                   §                   §
               120.15 Tobacco or    120.15 Purchase of   120.15 Possession of
               Alternative Nicotine Tobacco or           Tobacco or Alternative
               Product Sales to     Alternative Nicotine Nicotine Product by
               Minors               Product by Minors    Minors
                                    Prohibited
First Offense  $100.00              $50.00               $50.00
Second Offense $200.00              $100.00              $100.00
Three or more  $500.00              $200.00              $200.00
offenses
 
(1980 Code, § 120.17) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009; Ord. 19-186, adopted 8-
15-2019)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In lieu of suspension or revocation of a licensee, or in the case of a
violation by an unlicensed premises/facility, the County Executive shall punish
violations of this chapter by fines as follows:
 
Violation                               Fine
First violation within 12-month period  $250
Second violation within 12-month period $500
Third violation within 12-month period  $1,000
 
   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(1980 Code, § 120.17) (Ord. 09-181, adopted 6-18-2009)
CHAPTER 121: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Authority
   
121.03   Prohibition
   
121.04   Exemptions
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VIDEO GAMING LOCATION. Any “licensed establishment,” “licensed fraternal
establishment,” “licensed veterans establishment,” or “licensed truck stop” as
those terms are defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40,
§§ 1 et seq., as of the date of the enactment of this chapter or as
subsequently amended.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Board
utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive
free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include
a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement
purposes only.
(Ord. 15-102, passed 4-16-2015)
§ 121.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by ILCS Ch. 230, Act
40, § 27.
(Ord. 15-102, passed 4-16-2015)
§ 121.03 PROHIBITION.
   The operation of video gaming terminals, within the geographical boundaries
of unincorporated Will County is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 15-102, passed 4-16-2015)
§ 121.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The operation of video gaming terminals at any video game location that has
either been granted a license, by the Illinois Gaming Board, to operate a video
game establishment prior to the enactment date of this chapter or that is
eligible for and has submitted a complete application to the Illinois Gaming
Board for a gaming license prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be
exempt from the prohibition set forth in §
121.03.
(Ord. 15-102, passed 4-16-2015)
CHAPTER 122: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Section
   
122.01   Title
   
122.02   Enabling statute
   
122.03   Definitions
   
122.04   Regulations and standards
   
122.05   Permitting requirements
   
122.06   Permit fees
   
122.07   Adjustments or relocations of wireless telecommunication facilities
   
122.08   Damage to wireless telecommunications facility
   
122.09   Damage to county infrastructure or property
   
122.10   Variance requirements
   
122.11   Abandonment and removal
   
122.12   County wireless telecommunication facilities
   
122.13   No implied warranties
   
122.14   Hold harmless agreement
§ 122.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “Wireless
Telecommunication Facilities” chapter.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.02 ENABLING STATUTE.
   (A)   The legislature passed Public Act 100-0585, the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (hereinafter "the Act"), enabling Will County to pass
an ordinance to adopt rates, fees and terms which comply with the Act for the
collocation of small wireless facilities within the county's rights-of-way. All
definitions, terms and conditions of the Act are incorporated herein and made a
part hereof without the necessity of repeating all definitions, terms and
conditions. To implement a clear, simplified permitting process, the county is
reiterating some, but not all, of the provisions from the Act. The fact that a
provision from the Act is not specifically listed in this chapter does not
impact its legal effect. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum
extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (B)   Since the Will County Department of Highways Permit Regulations and
Access Control Regulations does not sufficiently address the collocation of
small wireless facilities, and the legislature has enacted specific terms which
apply only to small wireless companies who request to locate small wireless
facilities within the county rights-of-way, the county is enacting this new
chapter, the Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Chapter.
   (C)   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter
regarding the siting and installation of wireless telecommunication facilities
are more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other
local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this
chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.03 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms from the Will County Department of Highways Permit Regulations and
Access Control Regulations shall be applicable to this chapter unless otherwise
stated. In the event there is a conflict between the Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities Ordinance and the Will County Department of Highways Permit
Regulations and Access Control Regulations, the Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities Ordinance shall govern. As used in this chapter, the subsequent
terms shall have the following meanings:
   ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An existing pole or other structure within
the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is not a
county-owned infrastructure.
   COUNTY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE. Streetlights and traffic signals owned,
operated and maintained by the county and within the public right-of-way.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS). A type of wireless telecommunication
facility consisting of a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected
to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within
a geographic area.
   LANDSCAPE SCREENING. The installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery,
bushes or other foliage intended to screen ground mounted wireless
telecommunication equipment from public view.
   PROVIDER. Excludes any person who is providing service to or for a private
niche market.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed in the State of Illinois as a
professional structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the
Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989.
   STRUCTURE. Includes alternative antenna structure and county-owned
infrastructure as herein defined, collectively.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the County Engineer or designee from specific
limitations of this chapter.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA. An antenna that is part of a wireless
telecommunications facility.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT. Equipment, exclusive of an antenna,
that is part of a wireless telecommunications facility.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. An antenna, equipment, and related
improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide publicly accessible
wireless transmission of voice, data, images, or other information including,
but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service,
paging, and Wi-Fi antenna service.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.04 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be permitted to be placed in
public rights-of-way as attachments to existing alternative antenna structures
or county-owned infrastructure or as an attachment to a new alternative antenna
structure subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Siting of wireless telecommunication facilities. When deciding where
to install wireless telecommunication facilities, wireless services providers
shall take into consideration the surrounding and adjacent land uses and make
every effort to avoid siting wireless telecommunication facilities at or near
properties with high frequency outdoor usage such as parks, schools,
recreational facilities, etc.
   (B)   New alternative antenna structures. With respect to the application
for the installation of a wireless telecommunication facility on a new
alternative antenna structure, the county may propose that the wireless
telecommunication facility be collocated on an existing alternative antenna
structure within 100 feet of the proposed installation, which the applicant
will accept if it has the right to use the alternate antenna structure on
reasonable terms and conditions and the alternate location and structure does
not impose technical limits or unreasonable additional material costs as
determined by the applicant. The applicant shall provide a written
certification describing any property rights, technical limits or material
costs as reasons that the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in
this division.
   (C)   Signage. Identification signage shall be affixed onto each wireless
telecommunication facility identifying the wireless services provider, contact
phone number and unique identifier. Installation of other signs on a wireless
telecommunication facility shall be prohibited, unless they are for warning
labels or otherwise are required by law or regulations.
   (D)   Frequency interference. The wireless services provider's operation of
the wireless telecommunication facilities in the rights-of-way shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by the county's public safety or roadway
facility communications, including, but not limited to, streetlight and traffic
signal transmissions. In the event that an interference with the frequencies
used by the county's public safety or roadway facility communications is
detected, at any time, the wireless services provider is required to, at its
own expense, either: (i) reconfigure or filter its antenna system's
transmissions or frequency; or (ii) cease transmitting/receiving from said
unit; or (iii) remove the entirety of the installation immediately upon
notification of said interference. In the event a relocation is required, the
wireless services provider will be required to apply for a new wireless
telecommunication facilities permit under the terms of this chapter.
   (E)   Attachment limitations. No wireless telecommunication antenna or
facility shall be attached to an alternative antenna structure or county-owned
infrastructure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   Height requirements. The maximum height of a wireless
telecommunication antenna attached to a structure is limited to ten feet above
the structure on which the wireless telecommunication antenna is collocated.
The height of a new or replacement structure on which wireless
telecommunication facilities are collocated shall be limited to the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing structure, other
than a tower supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date
the application is submitted to the county, that is located within 300 feet of
the new or replacement structure and that is in the same rights-of-way within
the jurisdictional boundary of the county; or
         (b)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (2)   Antenna size. The wireless telecommunication antenna, including
antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas, shall be located inside
an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet.
Applicant shall provide written proof by way of design drawings and details at
time of application submittal that show the volume limitation has been met.
      (3)   Equipment volume of above-ground wireless telecommunication
facility. The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and
appurtenances comprising a wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of
the antenna itself, shall not cumulatively exceed 25 cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunication demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services. Applicant shall provide written
proof by way of design drawings and details at time of application submittal
that show the volume limitation has been met.
      (4)   Mounting requirements. The base of the equipment, antenna or
appurtenances of a wireless telecommunication facility collocated on a
structure shall be located no lower than ten feet above grade and at a location
and height that meets the requirements of the American Disabilities Act (ADA)
and the clearances set forth in the Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility
Guidelines (PROWAG) or the subsequent regulations on accessibility in public
rights-of-way. Collocation on county-owned infrastructure shall also not
interfere with or obscure existing traffic control devices including signal
heads and signage. For traffic signals or street lights, no elements of a
wireless telecommunication facility shall be mounted onto the signal mast arm
or lighting luminaire arm.
      (5)   Landscape screening. In the event that a wireless telecommunication
facility is proposed to be installed at grade, landscape screening shall be
installed to minimize the visibility of the wireless telecommunication
facility, at the discretion of the county.
      (6)   Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the
remainder of the facility shall be installed in accordance with the version of
the National Electric Code and National Electrical Safety Code in effect at the
time of application. In no event shall wiring and cabling serving the facility
interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television or video
service operator, electric utility or telephone utility. The applicant shall be
required to provide written sign-off by each owner/operator that a proposed
collocation will not adversely impact their existing facilities. Said sign-offs
must be provided at the time of application submittal.
      (7)   Grounding. The wireless telecommunication facility shall be
grounded in accordance with the requirements of the most current edition of the
National Electrical Code currently in effect.
      (8)   Guy wires. No guy or other support wires shall be used in
connection with a wireless telecommunication facility unless the facility is
proposed to be attached to an existing structure that incorporated guy wires
prior to the date that an applicant has applied for a permit.
      (9)   Pole extensions. Extensions to structures utilized for the purpose
of collocating a wireless telecommunication antenna and its related wireless
telecommunication equipment shall be fabricated from material similar to the
structure, and shall have a degree of strength capable of supporting the
antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of withstanding
wind forces and ice loads in accordance with the structural loading standards
set forth as noted below. An extension shall be securely bound to the structure
in accordance with applicable engineering standards for the design and
attachment of such extensions.
      (10)   Structural loading. The wireless telecommunication facility,
including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment shall be
designed to withstand wind forces and ice loads in accordance with applicable
standards established in Chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety Code for
structures, Rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading
forces on structures, in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in
TIA/EIA Section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel
structures and the applicable industry standard for other existing structures.
The applicant shall provide the county with a structural evaluation of each
specific location affirming that the proposed installation passes the standards
described above. The evaluation shall be prepared by a professional structural
engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
      (11)   Electrical disconnect. The wireless telecommunication facility
shall include an electrical service disconnect switch to allow county personnel
and agents to shut off power in the event of an incident or other abnormal
conditions. The switch shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the wireless
telecommunication facility and accessible to county and emergency response
personnel without restriction.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.05 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Applications for the collocation or installation of wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be required to include the following.
   (A)   General permitting requirements.
      (1)   A site specific structural integrity analysis prepared by a
professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
      (2)   An exhibit showing the location where each proposed wireless
telecommunication facility would be installed.
      (3)   A line-of-sight analysis to ensure that wireless telecommunications
equipment, either pole or ground mounted, does not obscure the safe visibility
of/by motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
      (4)   Photographs taken within six months of application submittal of the
location and its immediate surroundings depicting the land uses and structure
(s) on which each proposed wireless telecommunication facility would be
mounted.
      (5)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, for
each proposed wireless telecommunication facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed, with height and offset dimensions shown as well
as volumetrics (cubic feet) of each of the wireless telecommunication facility
components.
      (6)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
wireless telecommunication facility covered by the application, if approved.
      (7)   Certification that the collocation complies to the best of the
applicant's knowledge, with the frequency interference requirements in § 122.04
(D).
      (8)   Restoration. Upon completion of the work authorized by permit under
this chapter, all disturbed or damaged areas of the right-of-way shall be
restored to their original condition or better. Said restoration shall include,
but is not limited to, repairs to shoulders, ditches, parkways, curbs, and
pavements and/or any special landscaping, hardscaping, or enhanced areas that
existed in the rights-of-way prior to the commencement of the permitted work.
The county shall bear no responsibility for costs associated with such
restoration. The applicant shall provide a performance bond in the amount of
$20,000 or 125% of the engineer's estimate of probable cost, whichever is
greater. An engineer's estimate of probable cost shall be submitted to the
county for approval prior the provision of a bond.
      (9)   Service connections. Other related improvements including, but not
limited to, buried electrical service, and buried fiber optic or cable
connections that are needed to service the wireless telecommunication facility
and are installed within county rights-of-way beyond the physical pole or
structure require additional and separate permits. These types of connections
shall be applied for concurrently by the respective utility provider providing
that service or connection.
   (B)   County-owned infrastructure.
      (1)   Pole attachment agreement. In addition to the required permit, a
separate pole attachment agreement between the wireless services provider and
the county is required prior to the county authorizing the placement of
wireless telecommunication facilities on county-owned infrastructure.
      (2)   Replacement of county-owned infrastructure. If the county
determines that applicable codes or public safety requires the county's
infrastructure to be replaced to support the requested collocation, the county
shall require the wireless services provider to replace the county's
infrastructure at no cost to the county. If the proposed installation requires
replacement of the county's infrastructure, no property rights will be
conferred on the applicant by the replacement of such infrastructure.
      (3)   Make ready analysis. When a wireless services provider is seeking a
permit to collocate a wireless telecommunication facility on county-owned
infrastructure a make ready analysis prepared by a professional structural
engineer licensed in the State of Illinois shall be required.
   (C)   Alternative antenna structure: permission to use alternative antenna
structure. When the applicant of a wireless telecommunication facility submits
an application, the applicant shall submit to the county a copy of the written
approval from the owner of an alternative antenna structure, to mount the
wireless telecommunication facility on that specific alternative antenna
structure. Approval by the alternative antenna structure owner to allow the
installation of a wireless telecommunication facility shall also include a
guarantee by the alternative antenna structure owner that it will either remove
abandoned equipment in accordance with § 122.11 or cause the removal of the
equipment. Approval by the alternative antenna structure owner shall also
include a determination by the alternative antenna structure owner that the
alternative antenna structure is structurally capable of supporting the
wireless telecommunication facility.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.06 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permits for placement of wireless telecommunication facilities are
required. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the procedures for the
application for, approval of and revocation of such a permit shall be those
required in the Will County Department of Highways Permit Regulations and
Access Control Regulations, Will County Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
Ordinance and/or Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. All applications
shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. All
applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable application fee according to the following schedule: single
wireless telecommunication facility on an existing structure - $450.
   (B)   Annual recurring rate. The wireless services provider shall pay to the
county an annual recurring rate for each permitted location of $200 per year or
an amount equal to the county's direct costs, whichever is greater, to
collocate telecommunication facilities on county-owned infrastructure. Initial
payment shall be received prior to permit issuance by the county. Thereafter,
payment shall be received annually beginning on the second March 1st following
the initial payment. (Example: If initial payment is on January 1, 2019, the
next payment is March 1, 2020, and the third payment is March 1, 2021.)
   (C)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to
comply with any requirements thereof, or who constructs, alters, repairs,
disconnects, removes any facility within the county highway rights-of-way in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the County Engineer or his
designee, or fails to apply for or obtain a permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine equal to the
greater of:
         (a)   Seven hundred and fifty dollars;
         (b)   Twice the assessed application fees under this chapter; or
         (c)   An amount sufficient to correct any deficiencies or maintain the
proper movement and safety of the county highway users.
      (2)   Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. The imposition of any fine shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.07 ADJUSTMENTS OR RELOCATIONS OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   The wireless services provider shall be responsible for making adjustments,
relocations and/or removal of its facilities within the county rights-of-way
due to highway construction, reconstruction or maintenance work within 90
calendar days of receipt of written notification as directed by the County
Engineer or the duly authorized designee. If such facility is not removed or
relocated as directed within 90 days of such notice, the county may remove or
cause the removal of such facility through whatever actions are provided by law
for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.08 DAMAGE TO WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.
   If the structure or attached wireless telecommunications facility is
damaged, the wireless telecommunications facility operator shall make the
equipment safe or clear the equipment from the right-of-way within one hour of
notification to the wireless services provider designee.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.09 DAMAGE TO COUNTY INFRASTRUCTURE OR PROPERTY.
   The wireless services provider shall be financially responsible for any
damage to county infrastructure or property caused by the installation,
maintenance, or operation of wireless telecommunication facilities.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.10 VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each location of a wireless telecommunication facility within county right-
of-way shall meet all of the requirements of the chapter. The variance process
shall follow the guidelines as outlined in the Will County Department of
Highways Permit Regulations and Access Control Regulations, Section 1.8.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.11 ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Any wireless telecommunication facility located within the right-of-way of a
county highway that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months, shall
be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall remove same within
90 days of receipt of written notice from the county notifying the owner of
such abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return-receipt-requested, by the county to such owner at the last known address
of such owner. In the case of wireless telecommunication facilities attached to
county-owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within 90 days of
such notice, the county may remove or cause the removal of such facility
through the terms of the applicable pole attachment agreement or through
whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.12 COUNTY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   This chapter shall not apply to wireless telecommunication facilities owned
by the county.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.13 NO IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
   As to county-owned infrastructure onto which wireless telecommunications
facilities are to be considered for installation upon, no implied or expressed
warranty is given, granted, or inferred as to its capability to accept,
support, and/or provide for the needs of the wireless telecommunication
facility installation. The complete responsibility for assuring the support
element's ability will rest and lie entirely with the permit applicant. In the
event the permit applicant's selected county-owned infrastructure is deemed
inadequate by the permit applicant or the applicant's consultant, the county
will be under no obligation to augment or create a new element for the
installation of the wireless telecommunication facility.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
§ 122.14 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   It is recognized that the system being created by the wireless
telecommunication facilities network requires an interconnection and complete
coverage for the system to function. It is also recognized that during events,
weather conditions, traffic accidents and maintenance and construction
operations sometimes cause damage to roadway facilities within rights-of-way
including county-owned infrastructure. Although replacement, reconstruction or
re-installation of this infrastructure is typically accomplished in as
efficiently, timely and economically a manner as possible, there is no defined
timeframe in which this repair work is completed. In the event such incidents
occur causing damage to county-owned infrastructure which have wireless
telecommunication facilities mounted or otherwise attached to them, and in the
event such accidents or occurrences cause elements of or the complete wireless
telecommunication facility to be incapacitated, rendered inoperable, made
irreparable, or destroyed, the county and its affiliated and associated
departments and divisions, elected and appointed officials, employees, and
agents shall be held harmless and under no obligation to replace, reconstruct
or re-install the roadway facilities within a certain time frame or to the same
configuration or condition, nor shall there be any obligation by the county to
repair, reconfigure or replace any elements of the wireless telecommunication
facility. Such duties and responsibilities for the repair, reconfiguration or
replacement of the wireless telecommunication facility shall rest solely and at
the expense of the wireless services provider.
(Ord. 18-226, passed 8-16-2018)
TITLE XIII: OFFENSES AGAINST COUNTY REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST COUNTY REGULATIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
      
132.   DRUG OFFENSES
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST COUNTY REGULATIONS
Section
Curfew
   
130.01   Curfew
   
130.02   Parental responsibility
Graffiti Banning
   
130.15   Short title
   
130.16   Intent and authority
   
130.17   Definitions
   
130.18   Duties
   
130.19   Prohibitions
   
130.20   Removal of graffiti
   
130.21   Exemptions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
CURFEW
§ 130.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at
or upon any public assembly, building, business, street, highway, or other
public place or way at the following times.
      (1)   For persons less than 16 years of age, between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. the following day on any day of the week.
      (2)   For persons at least 16 years of age, but not yet 17 years of age,
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day on any day of the week.
   (B)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence.
      (3)   Accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age approved by the
child's parent, guardian, or custodian.
      (4)   Participating in, going directly to, or returning directly from:
         (a)   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than 17 years of age to perform;
         (b)   A school recreational activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois,
or both;
         (f)   An activity conducted by a non-profit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the
supervision of one or more adult.
   (C)   A citation for violation of division (A) may be issued by a police
officer only if he or she reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and
none of the defenses enumerated in division (B) apply.
(1980 Code, § 130.01) (Res. 95-60, adopted 3-16-1995; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, custodian, or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate the
provisions of §
130.01. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person has violated this
section if someone under 17 years of age of whom such person has custody or
control is present upon any public assembly, building, business, street, or
highway, or other public place or public way in violation of §
132.01, and none of the defenses enumerated in this section apply. The parent
or legal guardian having custody of a minor subject to this section shall be
liable for any and all costs incurred by the county for providing personnel to
remain in the company of a minor who has been arrested as a curfew violator if
said parent or guardian does not pick up the minor within one hour after
receiving notice from the county that said minor is being detained for curfew
violation.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
130.99
GRAFFITI BANNING
§ 130.15 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and referred to as the Will County Graffiti
Banning Code.
(1980 Code, § 130.10) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 130.16 INTENT AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Intent. This subchapter is adopted to provide for the health, safety
and welfare and the best interests of the county and its residents, these rules
and regulations provide for prompt removal of graffiti, and provide for
suitable penalties for the violations established by state law since the county
recognizes that certain criminal activity may occur within the county relating
to the defacement of private and public property; and, the presence of graffiti
on property within the county offends the aesthetic sensibilities of its
residents, decreases property values, is often an incitement to crime, is an
act destructive to property, and the placement of graffiti is a form of
criminal activity.
   (B)   Authority. The county has the power by law, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 5-1078-5 to have the County Board ban graffiti within the county,
except within the corporate limits of a municipality, and may establish
penalties.
(1980 Code, § 130.11) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 130.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the words and terms defined in this section
shall have the meanings therein given, unless the context otherwise clearly
requires.
   COUNTY. The County of Will, Illinois.
   GRAFFITI. Any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram,
sketch, picture or letter placed, without the express written permission of the
owners and the obtaining of a properly issued sign permit by the owner if
required by the Will County Zoning Ordinance, upon the real or personal
property of said owner.
(1980 Code, § 130.12) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 130.18 DUTIES.
   (A)   It is the duty of the Will County Sheriff to provide written notice of
the graffiti code violation to the property owner, to provide a written
incident report of the graffiti incident and forward the report to the Will
County Executive or his or her designee.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Will County Executive or his designees to
conduct inspections of buildings, structures, both of real and personal
property, to determine compliance with this subchapter, and to notify in
writing the person responsible for the removal of the violation indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
(1980 Code, § 130.13) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 130.19 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon real or
personal, public or private property of another.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of fixed, real or
personal property, which is in public view, to place, maintain, or give
permission for the placement of any graffiti on such property without having
first obtained a properly issued sign permit if required by the Will County
Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while in any public
building or public facility or while on private property, a spray paint
container, paint, ink, marking pen which contains a non-water soluble fluid,
brush, applicator, or any other material for marking, scratching, or etching
with the intent to use such material in violation of divisions (A) and (B) of
this section.
(1980 Code, § 130.14) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.20 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   The county hereby declares graffiti as defined in §
130.17 to be a nuisance, and as a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided
herein:
   (A)   The county shall notify the property owner of the violation that
graffiti has been placed upon their property, located in unincorporated Will
County, and that the graffiti shall be removed within 60 days from the date of
notification to the land owner.
   (B)   Upon written notification by the county, the owner of the property
upon which the graffiti has been illegally placed, shall remove the graffiti
within ten days from the date of notice. If property owner does not remove the
graffiti within the time specified, the county, through its agents is
authorized to enter upon the property of the owner and remove the graffiti, and
the owner shall be subject to the reasonable costs of removal of the graffiti
by the county. If these reasonable costs are not paid within two weeks of the
receipt of the bill, a lien will be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds
against the property upon which the structure is located.
   (C)   The county shall remove graffiti from the exterior of private property
if the owners inform the county of the presence of the graffiti, and of their
inability to remove the graffiti from their property. The owner of the private
property will be required to pay the county for the reasonable costs associated
with the removal of graffiti. Owners must sign a statement authorizing the
removal of the graffiti by the county, and must sign a release holding the
county harmless from any claims or suits brought or damages pursuant to any
adverse or injurious effects of chemicals, or from the actions of the county,
or its employees to remove the graffiti.
   (D)   An extension of ten additional days in which graffiti must be removed
may be granted by the County Executive or his or her designees upon request of
the property owner.
(1980 Code, § 130.15) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 130.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Public officials and utilities.  The prohibitions of this section
shall not apply to governmental officials and employees or employees or
official representatives of any public or private utilities with respect to the
posting or labeling of tags, notices or markings on buildings or other property
while in the course of their employment or in the performance of their official
duties.
   (B)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to the
alleged violation of the foregoing provision if such activity was undertaken
with the prior written consent of the owner of the property, who has a valid
sign permit if required by the Will County Zoning Ordinance, demonstrating that
the owner was aware of the content or method of the inscription to be placed on
the structure or wall.
(1980 Code, § 130.17) (Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-
2011)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of §
130.01 or §
130.02 shall be fined not less than $75.00 and not more than $500.00 for each
curfew violation, plus the administrative fee, unless that person is a ward of
the court and then there shall be no mandatory fine. Additionally, any person
found in violation of §
130.01 may be required to perform community service work or attend a class and/
or program as approved by the presiding judge or hearing officer.
(Res. 95-60, adopted 3-16-95)
   (B)   The penalty for violation of §
130.19(A) shall be not less than $50 nor more than $1,000, plus the
administrative fee. In addition to said fine, the offender may be ordered by
the court to pay restitution to the property owner for the costs of restoring
the property to its condition prior to the application of graffiti.
   (C)   The penalty for violation of §
130.19(B) shall not be less than $50 nor more than $1,000, plus the
administrative fee, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Additionally, a judge
or Hearing Officer may authorize the County to remove or cause to be removed
the graffiti and may order the cost for removing to be paid by the defendant;
if the defendant fails to pay for the removal the cost may be a lien against
defendant's property.
   (D)   The penalty for violation for §
130.19(C) shall not be less than $50 nor more than $ 1,000, plus the
administrative fee.
   (E)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
130.19(B) and (C), who is also found to have been a member of a street gang, as
defined under the Illinois Streetgang Terrorism Omnibus Prevention Act, ILCS
Ch. 740, Act 147, §§ 1 et. seq., at the time the offense was committed and who
is found to have violated said section in conjunction with gang-related
activities, shall be subject to a fine or not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000, plus the administrative fee, in addition to other penalties provided in
this section or any other local, state or federal laws.
(1980 Code, §130.99) (Res. 95-60, adopted 3-16-1995; Res. 00-231, passed 5-18-
2000; Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSE INVOLVING MINORS
Section
Unlawful Possession, Consumption or Purchase of Alcoholic Liquor; Truancy
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Unlawful possession and consumption by underage persons
   
131.03   Permitted possession and consumption by underage persons
   
131.04   Truancy
 
   
131.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Curfew, see §
130.01
   Parental responsibilities, see §
130.02
UNLAWFUL POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OR PURCHASE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR; TRUANCY
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any person who is less than 21 years of age.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
§ 131.02 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION BY UNDER AGE PERSONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
131.03, it shall be unlawful for any underage person to consume, purchase or
accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession within unincorporated Will County.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
131.03, it shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
an underage person.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 PERMITTED POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION BY UNDER AGE PERSONS.
   The following activities are excluded from §
131.02 and may lawfully be engaged in by underage persons:
   (A)   The possession and dispensing or consumption of wine in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony; and
   (B)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor under the direct supervision and
approval of the underage person's parent(s) or guardian(s) in the privacy of
the parent's or guardian's home, provided, that this exception shall not apply
if the underage person leaves the parent's or guardian's home while still under
the influence of alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   The possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors in the course of a
person's employment when otherwise allowed by the Illinois Complied Statutes.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Truancy prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of
age or younger who is required by law to attend school and who is subject to
the compulsory attendance requirements of the Illinois School Code and/or
enrolled in a public, private (including a home school) or parochial school
within the corporate limits of the city, to absent him or herself from
attendance at school during the hours in which she or he is enrolled without
parental or school permission. Any person who shall so absent him or herself
shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties
hereinafter set forth in this section. Emergency absences due to illness or
other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting him or herself from
school without parental permission shall not constitute truancy if permission
for such absence has been obtained from the parent and such permission is
submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within 24 hours of such
absence.
   (B)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other person to permit a person in his or her custody or control to
commit the offense of truancy.
   (C)   Contributing to truancy. It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years
of age or older to perform any act of commission or omission which act
encourages or contributes to the truancy of any person.
   (D)   Defenses to truancy. Those defenses and/or exceptions as set forth in
the Illinois School Code for compulsory attendance or enrollment in school
shall apply as defenses to this section.
   (E)   Authority to issue citation. The Will County Sheriff's Department and
any agent thereof, including School Resource Officers and Truancy Officers
employed by the Regional Superintendent of Schools are hereby authorized to
write and issue citations for violation of this section.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of §
131.02(A) or (B) shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $500, plus
the administrative fee.
   (B)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of §
131.04(A) shall be fined not less than $200 and not more than $500, plus the
administrative fee, and may be ordered to perform up to 25 community service
hours at a program or facility approved by the Administrative Hearing Officer
or presiding Judge.
   (C)   Any person found to be in violation of any §
131.04(B) may be fined not less than $200 and not more than $500, plus the
administrative fee, and/or required to participate in a program approved by the
presiding judge or hearing officer.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011)
CHAPTER 132: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Possession of Cannabis
   
132.03   Possession of drug paraphernalia
   
132.04   Exempt items
   
132.05   Seizure and forfeiture
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   CANNABIS.  Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, ILCS 720, Act 570, § 102.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of any kind,
other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 646,
Article §§ 5 et seq., which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in
violation of the Cannabis Control Act, ILCS 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq., the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act, ILCS 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq., or the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, ILCS 720, Act 646, §§ 5
et seq. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      (2)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      (3)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
cannabis or controlled substances;
      (4)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      (5)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body including, where applicable, the following items:
         (a)   Water pipes;
         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks:
         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (e)   Carburetor pipes;
         (f)   Electric pipes;
         (g)   Air-driven pipes;
         (h)   Chillums;
         (i)   Bongs; or
         (j)   Ice pipes or chillers.
      (6)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described, is for use in
violation of this section.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 POSSESSION OF CANNABAIS.
   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess
between 2.5 grams and ten grams of cannabis.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly
possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the
human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 EXEMPT ITEMS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Items marked for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale or personal
use; or
   (B)   (1)   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in
connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
      (2)   Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to,
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette-rolling
papers.
   (C)   Items described in §
132.01 which are marketed for decorative purposes, where such items have been
rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used as an item of drug
paraphernalia.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE.
   All items of drug paraphernalia shall be seized and forfeited as contraband
to the county.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   A person found to be in violation of §§
132.02 or section
132.03 shall be fined no less than $250 and no more than $ 1,000, plus the
administrative fee.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
133.01   Mob action
   
133.02   Gambling
   
133.03   Discharge of air rifles
   
133.04   Noise Restrictions in residential areas
   
133.05   Enforcement of fireworks
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 MOB ACTION.
   (A)   Mob action is declared a public nuisance and consists of any of the
following:
      (1)   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two or
more persons acting together and without authority of law;
      (2)   The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful act;
      (3)   The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for
the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to
have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purposes of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
   (B)   Any participant in a mob action who does not withdraw on being
commanded to do so by any peace officer shall be in violation of this section.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   Public nuisance. Gambling as defined herein is declared a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Defined. A person commits gambling when he or she plays a game of
chance or skill for money or other things of value on a public sidewalk,
street, road, highways or public lands within unincorporated Will County;
   (C)   Any money or other thing of value integrally related to acts of
gambling shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to the county.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 DISCHARGE OF AIR RIFLES.
   (A)   Public nuisance. Possessing or discharging any air rifle in violation
of this section is a public nuisance.
   (B)   Defined. Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun,
pellet gun or any other implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard material of less than
.18 inch in diameter with a force that reasonable is expected to cause bodily
harm is an air rifle.
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to
carry any air rifle on the public streets, roads, highways or public lands
within unincorporated Will County unless such person under 18 years of age
carries such rifle unloaded.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to
discharge any air rifle within unincorporated County of Will except as provided
in this section.
   (D)   Exceptions.  Notwithstanding anything in this section, it is lawful
for any person under the age of 18 to have in his possession any air rifle if
it is
      (1)   Kept within his house of resident or other private enclosure; or
      (2)   Used by the person and he is duly enrolled member of any club, team
or society organization for educational purposes and maintain a part for its
facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range
under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a responsible adult and then
only if said air rifle is actually being used in connection with the activities
of said club, team or society under the supervision or a responsible adult; or
      (3)   Used in or any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when such air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to
endanger persons or property , domesticated or wild animals or other wildlife
or any type of birds, and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent
the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the limits of
such grounds or residence.
   (E)   Seizure and removal. The Will County Sheriff's Department shall seize,
take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air rifle
used in any manner in violation of this section. Following seizure, the seized
air rifle shall be inventoried and held by the Will County Sheriffs department
as evidence for any hearing, administrative or court proceeding relating
thereto, and will be released to the owner only upon full completion of such
proceedings including orders of disposition and in conformation with the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 NOISE RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      CONSTRUCTION TRADES.  Any type of home repair, including but not limited
to construction, repair, and/or maintenance of a new or existing structure and
its appurtenances. This shall also cover landscaping construction but not
landscaping maintenance.
      EMERGENCY RELATED SOUND.  Any type of sound rendered on an intermittent,
emergency basis, including but not limited to sounds associated with snow
removal, flood water removal, and/or storm debris removal, emergency generators
that are used during electrical storms, as well as alarms and other emergency
warning sounds.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  Any area within the city limits in which
properties are in the residential zoning district as provided by official Will
County Zoning Map.
      NOISE.  Sounds associated with the repairs of vehicles or engines, music,
or the operation of mechanical equipment other than vehicles, which may be
heard 75 feet beyond the property line of the property from which the sounds
originate.
   (B)   In all residential districts within unincorporated Will County, no
electronically amplified sound may be emitted from a property such that it may
be heard 75 feet beyond the property line of the property from which said sound
originates.
   (C)   In all residential districts, and all business districts immediately
adjacent to residential districts, within unincorporated Will County, no noise
as defined may be emitted from a property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Construction trades as defined herein.
      (2)   Emergency related sounds are defined herein.
      (3)   Athletic events held on park or school property or events which
have been approved by the county or other relevant jurisdiction.
      (4)   Any church, temple, synagogue, mosque or similar place of worship,
only with regard to exception from division (B) hereof for interior sound.
      (5)   Any person operating a farm tractor or implement of husbandry as
defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code while engaged in an agricultural activity.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 ENFORCEMENT OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Public nuisance. It is hereby declared that the possession, explosion,
firing, igniting, use or discharge of any display fireworks, flame effects and
consumer fireworks without a permit from Will County is a public nuisance.
   (B)   Intent. The purpose of this section is to give authority to the Will
County Sheriffs Department to enforce restrictions on fireworks within the
limits of unincorporated Will County. This section shall be enforced by the
Will County Sheriffs Department. This section shall not apply to the pubic
exhibition or sale of fireworks previously approved by the Will County.
   (C)   Fireworks and pyrotechnics violation. It shall be a violation of this
section to possess, explode, fire, ignite, use or discharge any display
fireworks, flame effects and consumer fireworks within unincorporated Will
County. For purposes of this section, display fireworks, flame effects and
consumer fireworks shall be as defined in ILCS Ch. 425 Act 35 et seq.,
Definitions.
   (D)   Confiscation of fireworks. The Will County Sheriffs Department shall
have the authority to immediately confiscate any display, fireworks, flame
effects, and consumer fireworks in violate of this section and to promptly and
safely destroy said items.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person found to be in violation of any provision of §
133.01 shall be fined not less than $200 and not more than $1,000.
   (B)   A person found to be in violation of any provision of §
133.02 shall be fined not less than $150 and not more than $500.
   (C)   A person found to be in violation of any provision of §
133.03 shall be fined not less than $150 and not more than $500.
   (D)   A person found to be in violation of any provision of §
133.04 shall be fined not less than $150 and not more than $500.
   (E)   A person found to be in violation of any provision of §
133.05 shall be fined not less than $150 and not more than $1,000, plus the
administrative fee.
(Ord. 11-287, passed 8-18-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODE
      
151.   (RESERVED)
      
152.   (RESERVED)
      
153.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
155.   ZONING CODE
      
156.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY
      
157.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
158.   LAND USE FEE SCHEDULE
      
159.   CONTRIBUTIONS TO LIBRARY DISTRICTS
      
160.   SCHOOL SITE CONTRIBUTION
      
161.   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
      
162.   STREET NAMING AND STREET SIGNS
      
163.   COUNTY LAND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN
      
164.   WATER RESOURCE ORDINANCES
      
165.   (RESERVED)
      
166.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Short title
   
150.002   Adoption of codes
   
150.003   Permits and scope of regulations
   
150.004   Agricultural exemptions
   
150.005   Rules adopted by reference
   
150.006   Enforcement
   
150.007   Relief from responsibility
   
150.008   Fees
   
150.009   Regulations for administration of building ordinance
   
150.010   Inspection of pre-fabricated structures
   
150.011   Alternative materials, design and methods of construction
   
150.012   Notice of violation
Editor’s Note:
   For Building Code Fee Schedule, see §
158.02
Minimum Building Requirements
   
150.030   Building requirements
   
150.040   Wood frame construction requirements
   
150.050   Roofing requirements
   
150.060   Fire resistant construction requirements
   
150.070   Concrete requirements
   
150.080   Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) requirements
   
150.110   Electrical requirements
   
150.114   Demolition requirements
   
150.115   Single family residences, duplex and townhouse existing building code
   
150.116   Building Code requirements for temporary structures and requirements
associated with zoning temporary use permits
International Building Code 2018
   
150.120   Amendments to the International Building Code
Illinois Energy Efficient Building Act
   
150.130   Illinois Energy Efficient Building Act
International Fire Code 2018
   
150.140   Amendments to the International Fire Code
International Fuel Gas Code 2018
   
150.150   Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code
International Mechanical Code 2018
   
150.160   Amendments to the International Mechanical Code
International Property and
Maintenance Code 2018
   
150.170   Amendments to the International Property and Maintenance Code
International Residential Code 2018
   
150.180   Amendment to the International Residential Code
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2018
   
150.190   Amendments to the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2018
 
   
150.999   Fines; penalties; costs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference,
is entitled the "Will County Building Ordinance". The "number" and/or "letter"
designation used to set off or identity its various parts refer to paragraphs
of the text. Reference to any one of these paragraphs may be by such number
and/or letter designation alone. For the purpose of this ordinance the word
"shall" constitutes a mandatory requirement and must be complied with. Where
there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement,
the specific requirement shall apply.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.002 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   (A)   The following shall be adopted by reference with additional amendments
described throughout the remainder of this ordinance:
      (1)   International Building Code 2018.
      (2)   International Existing Building Code 2018.
      (3)   International Residential Code 2018.
      (4)   International Fire Code 2018.
      (5)   International Mechanical Code 2018.
      (6)   International Property and Maintenance Code 2018.
      (7)   International Fuel Gas Code 2018.
      (8)   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2018.
      (9)   2017 National Electric Code.
      (10)   International Green Construction Code 2018 on a voluntary basis
only upon applicant's request.
   (B)   State of Illinois adopted codes.
      (1)   Illinois Accessibility Code (state code in effect since Oct 23,
2018).
      (2)   NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2015 edition (state code adopted by the
State Fire Marshal in effect since January 1, 2020).
      (3)   2014 Illinois Plumbing Code (state code in effect since 2014).
      (4)   Illinois Energy Conservation Code 2018, (state code in effect since
July 1, 2019).
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18-115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-
116, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.003 PERMITS AND SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A permit must be obtained in advance and all other requirements of the
Building Ordinance must be complied with whenever a building or parts of
appurtenance thereof, such as water supply, sewage disposal, plumbing
installation, electrical installation and heating equipment located outside the
limits of cities, villages and incorporated towns of this county and regulated
by the Building Ordinance, is erected, installed, altered, converted,
remodeled, re-roofed, structurally repaired, moved or changed, except as
provided hereafter.
   Exception: Emergency repairs as long as the building permit is applied for
on the next business day.
      (1)   Construction of "process components" (piping, vessels, equipment,
etc.) shall only require a manufacturing exempt permit and follow the
applicable fee schedule for such permits. These permits shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner and shall conform to the Occupational Safety and
Health Act (OSHA) and/or Nuclear Regulatory Commission Regulations and/or other
applicable laws, codes and standards. All occupiable buildings in a
manufacturing facility shall require a building permit and are subject to the
requirements of the Will County Building Ordinance, inspection requirements and
applicable fee schedule.
      Exception: The below grade portion of process components shall not
require a permit.
         (a)   Any owner or authorized agent who wishes to exercise this
exemption must submit to the Building Official, prior to construction written
certification that the proposed construction will be in compliance with the
OSHA rules and regulations and/or Nuclear Regulatory Commission Regulations
and/or other applicable industry codes and standards and pay the applicable
manufacturing facility process component exemption fee.
   (B)   These rules and regulations set forth requirements considered
reasonable and are in every instance to be the minimum to safeguard life or
limb, health and public welfare.
   (C)   No building permit as required by this ordinance shall be issued for a
building to be constructed on any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land that does
not conform with provisions of ILCS Chapter 765. Requirements of the Will
County Health Department or other applicable agencies concerning sewage
disposal and water supply and other applicable ordinances in force in Will
County at the time including the Zoning Ordinance for Unincorporated Will
County, Illinoi, Water Resource Ordinance for Unincorporated Will County, the
Will County Subdivision Ordinance, et. al.
   (D)   No new building permits shall be issued until all previous building
permits that are subject to a notice of violation recording are resolved.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18- 223, passed 8-16-2018; Am. Ord.
21-102, passed 8-19-2021) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Agricultural exempt permits are no fee permits unless electrical or
plumbing is installed as part of the permit. See agricultural exemptions in the
Will County Zoning Ordinance (155-1.50). Any plumbing or electrical will
require a permit and shall meet all codes for these installations. These
buildings are not required to meet other building code requirements for
construction or plan submittals.
   (B)   Qualified farmers who can demonstrate their ability to perform such
work, to the satisfaction of the Building Division, may work on his/her own
agricultural and personal use structures located upon their personally owned
property. This shall apply to any personally owned remote parcels
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21- 102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.005 RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The codes have numerous references to standards by other organizations that
are used to provide requirements for materials, products and methods of
construction. These standards are part of this code to the extent to the
references to the standard.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21- 102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   The position of Chief Building Official is hereby created and authorized to
enforce the provisions of this code as assigned by the Will County Executive
and the Will County Board. The Chief Building Official is meant wherever the
term "Building Official" is used.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21- 102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.007 RELIEF FROM RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Chief Building Official charged with the enforcement of this code, while
acting for the county, shall not thereby render himself personally liable and
is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue
to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his/her official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer
because of an act performed by him/her in the lawful discharge of his/her
duties and under the provisions of the Will County Building Ordinance shall be
defended by the legal representative of the county until the final termination
of the proceedings. In no cases shall the Chief Building Official or any of
his/her subordinates be liable for costs in any action, suit, or proceedings
that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the county ordinances
and resolutions, and any officer of the Department of Will County Land Use,
acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of his/her official duties in connection thereto.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 150.008 FEES.
   All fees established by resolution of the Will County Board shall be
collected by the Land Use Director or designated representatives and deposited
regularly with the County Treasurer.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.009 REGULATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATION OF BUILDING ORDINANCE.
   The following requirements apply to the administration and enforcement of
this Building Ordinance, other pertinent ordinances and laws applicable to any
regulated building, structure, part, or appurtenance thereof. The provisions of
this ordinance shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or
federal law. For the purpose of this ordinance the word "shall" constitutes a
mandatory requirement and must be complied with. Where this ordinance has a
conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall apply.
   (A)   Application for a permit.
      (1)   Building permit application, signed by the owner or authorized
agent shall be in writing on forms provided by the Will County Land Use
Department except as approved by the Building Official.
      (2)   May only be amended during course of work as authorized by the
Building Official.
      (3)   Alterations, repairs and additions performed after permit scope has
been completed, inspected and closed shall require another building permit.
   (B)   Application requirements. All permit applications shall include:
      (1)   Descriptive material, in drawn and written form, as to location and
design of building, structures, water supply systems, sewage disposal system,
plumbing electrical installations and exterior window schedule as required by
the Building Official to assure compliance with the rules and regulations.
      (2)   For construction, alterations, and other work: Submit one copy of
construction plans (more if required by the Building Official), electronic copy
in pdf format, and specifications (if needed), in order to show compliance with
codes and regulations. Scale of plans must not be less than 1/8 inch per foot
and may need to be 1/4 inch per foot based on plan clarity.
      (3)   Plans may be waived for minor alterations not involving structural
changes.
      (4)   If trusses are used, a truss diagram must be stamped by an Illinois
Registered Architect or Structural Engineer. Depending on the number of
different truss diagrams a truss placement plan may be required.
      Exception: The truss diagram need not be signed and sealed when the truss
width is 14' or less between structural supports and the building is less than
300 square feet.
      (5)   All documents and plans submitted for permit(s) shall be signed and
sealed by a registered design professional or as required and approved by the
Chief Building Official.
      (6)   Where construction is to occur near a designated flood plain area,
see the Water Resource Ordinance for Unincorporated Will County, §
164.060.
      (7)   All contractors shall comply with the contractor licensing,
registration, and bonding requirements as required by the Building Official and
Will County Land Use.
      (8)   All contractors listed shall be registered and approved prior to
the permit issuance except as allowed for phased approvals.
      (9)   Soil report shall be required for new commercial/industrial
applications unless waived by the Building Official.
   (C)   Fees. See Fee Schedule.
   (D)   Examination of application and plan. Initial review shall be made
within a maximum of 15 business days or under direction of the Building
Official.
   (E)   Action on permit after filing and examination of application.
      (1)   Permit shall be denied if plans or proposed work does not conform
to requirements of this Building Ordinance, or other pertinent laws and
ordinances. Plan review comments shall be forwarded to the contact person upon
completion of the plan reviews.
      (2)   If proposed work conforms to requirements of this Building
Ordinance and other pertinent laws and ordinances, a permit shall be issued in
writing allowing work to proceed. One approved set of plans and/or
specifications shall remain in Building Division file. One approved set of
plans and/or specifications shall be made available to Will County inspectors
on site.
      (3)   A list of contractors shall be required to be submitted to check
for proper licensing, registration and insurance prior to permit issuance
except as allowed for phased approvals where only the contractors part of the
phased work would have to be up to date.
      (4)   Permit is to be conspicuously posted on site, visible from the road
right-of-way for the duration of the project.
      (5)   Permit lapses:
         (a)   Permit application may be void after six months if responses to
plan review comments and communications are not received at the discretion of
the building official.
         (b)   If a start is not made in six months, the permit lapses, and may
be required to be renewed at the discretion of the building official.
         (c)   Permits expire one year after the date of issuance and shall be
renewed or extended prior to work continuing as required by the building
official.
      (6)   Permits issued for demolition shall lapse if not completed within
60 days from the date of issuance.
      (7)   The Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy
following final inspection approval indicating compliance with adopted codes
and ordinances on specified permit types. Approval letters from the local fire
protection district, Will County Health Department, and Highway Department
shall be required if applicable except for fire department approval for
townhouses, one and two family dwellings and duplex construction.
      (8)   Each occupant of an industrial or commercial building shall obtain
an occupancy permit issued by the Building Division of the Will County Land Use
Department. The commercial or industrial occupancy permit is valid only with
respect to the occupant to whom it was issued. (Per ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-
1063).
      (9)   Temporary occupancy permit may be issued under the direction of the
authority having jurisdiction for a building or portion thereof if it is found
that the condition of the building (lighting, heating, water supply, sewage
disposal, other sanitary facilities, etc.) is available to the occupant and
there are no health or safety violations. Permit may be revoked and occupancy
discontinued if work is not completed in the allotted time.
      (10)   Permit that has expired shall require reapplication at 100% of the
initial fee. The discretion of the Building Official may allow a prorated fee
based on time needed to complete work.
   (F)   Nonconforming building or structure.
      (1)   Definition: An existing building or structure or part of
appurtenance thereof not in conformance with this Building Ordinance.
      (2)   Repair work requires a written application and permit. The permit
is for the scope of work area only unless the work creates other parts of the
building to be noncompliant with the requirements of this ordinance or any
other codes, standards or laws.
      (3)   Altering or enlarging shall be done in a manner conforming to the
Zoning, Engineering and Building Ordinances.
   (G)   Duties and authority of the Building Official and the Building
Director.
      (1)   The administration of adopted codes and other applicable ordinances
and laws..
      (2)   Keep careful, systematic records of business and work of office,
including permit applications, survey plats and building plot plans, all
construction plans and specifications, copies of permits and certificates
issued, affidavits and certificates received, a record of inspections, copies
of notices and orders issued, and reports of tests made.
      (3)   Keep plans and specifications of residential structures, commercial
and industrial structures, and accessory structures in accordance with State of
Illinois retention of public record statutes. Survey plats and building plot
plans, and those parts of plans for other buildings which may be useful for
future periodic inspections shall be kept in accordance with State of Illinois
retention of public record statutes.
      (4)   Make inspections, and for that purpose may enter building
structures, and premises as allowed by law.
      (5)   Stop work orders for work being done contrary to the building
permit or this ordinance shall be posted on structures in writing. Such written
order posted on premises involved shall not be removed except by order of the
Building Official. Removal without such order shall constitute a violation of
this ordinance.
      (6)   A permit shall be revoked on approvals issued contrary to this
ordinance or based upon a false statement or misrepresentation in the
application.
   (H)   Spot surveys. Spot surveys are required for all new construction and
must be submitted after the foundation is completed and prior to any framing or
any other work being constructed upon the foundation or site. The spot survey
shall depict all lot lines, building lines, side yard lines, easements and top
of foundation elevation for the entire perimeter of the foundation as
referenced to U.S.G.S. Datum. The survey must also bear the seal and signature
of a registered land surveyor of the State of Illinois. No work shall proceed
beyond backfill until spot survey approval is issued by the Will County Land
Use Department.
Exception: Structures that are exempt from obtaining a site plan per §
164.080(A) of the Water Resource Ordinance for Unincorporated Will County need
not comply with the required spot survey above but shall comply with all other
requirements of the code and this ordinance. Agricultural exempt structures are
not exempt from zoning and engineering requirements.
   (I)   Required inspections and notice for inspection. The following listed
inspections are required to be made when applicable to the permitted project.
The owner or contractor shall request the designated inspection 48 hours in
advance. (Phone 815-727-8634) Safe access (ladder or temporary stairs) shall be
provided as per OSHA rules and regulations. If someone needs to be present for
the inspection it must be an individual over the age of 18. Approved plans
shall be on site for inspections. Progression of inspections - work shall not
be done on any part of the building or structure beyond the point indicated in
each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the
Building Official. Such written approval shall be given only after an
inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction as
indicated by each of the inspections required above. This approval shall take
the form of the inspector's sticker posted and signed on the premises.
      (1)   Footing before pour—inspection of the footings and/or isolated
column footings shall be made after excavation with forms erected and required
reinforcing steel in place (prior to placement of concrete). See cold weather
pouring requirements in this ordinance.
      (2)   Slabs (interior slab below grade and interior slab at grade before
pour)—concrete slab inspection for all residential, commercial, industrial and
multifamily structures and their accessory structures; garage and basement
slabs and interior slabs shall be inspected prior to the placement of concrete
with required reinforcing steel and vapor barrier in place. Underground
plumbing and/or electrical shall be inspected and approved prior to the slab
inspection (if applicable).
      (3)   Foundations and pier before pour and trench foundations—inspection
of the foundation and/or pier on top of isolated footings and trench
foundations shall be made prior to the concrete placement with all forms and
reinforcements in place. Reinforcement shall maintain proper clearances and be
installed per the approved plans tied in place.
      (4)   Posthole before pour—inspection to take place after holes have been
excavated and any reinforcing is tied in place.
      (5)   Stair before pour—inspection shall take place after all forms are
in place and reinforcement tied in place. Inspector to check proper rise
(height) and run (tread depth) whether inside or outside of the home.
      (6)   Electric service—inspection includes the meter socket panel board,
temporary power, temporary receptacle on a minimum 20 amp breaker (must be GFI)
and grounding.
      (7)   Backfill—inspection shall be made after drain tile with silt sock
fabric is properly installed adjacent to footing on the exterior, covered with
stone prior to placing any backfill adjacent to the foundation. Insulation,
egress window and well (if applicable), dampproofing and/or waterproofing (if
applicable) of foundation shall be checked at the time of the backfill
inspection.
      (8)   Rough building—inspection shall be made after mechanical,
electrical and plumbing rough-in work has been completed prior to the
application of any interior finish or the installation of any insulation
material.
      (9)   Drainage plane—inspection shall take place after all weather
resistive barriers (housewrap) has been installed and integrated with all
flashings (kickout flashing, brick flashing, window/door flashing and flashing
at any other penetrations). Traditional stucco, E.I.F.S (exterior insulated
finish system) and similar finishes have specific requirements. Two layers of
weather resistive barrier may be required, and proper starter strip with
drainage screen at the bottom (it must have holes in it for drainage). Tie down
straps and narrow wall bracing shall be checked at this time as well.
      (10)   Final grade—inspection shall take place after final dirt has been
spread and proper pitch away from the home has been established.
      (11)   Bonding—inspection to take place prior to pouring concrete around
a pool.
      (12)   Masonry firebox—inspection to take place prior to the first flue.
      (13)   Rough mechanical grid—inspection to take place when the grid for a
dropped ceiling is installed and after all work above a dropped ceiling is
complete so the panels can be installed (inspection takes after grid
installation but prior to the individual panels are installed).
      (14)   Underground electrical and/or mechanical—inspection shall be made
prior to placement of concrete. These inspections can also be outside
underground where concrete will not be placed. Direct burial wiring or conduit
shall be in place firmly in contact with the bottom of the trench.
      (15)   Rough plumbing—inspection shall be made when the plumbing is
completely roughed in, before insulation or any other material is applied to
floor, wall or, ceiling.
      (16)   Underground plumbing—inspections shall be made prior to placing
concrete and all plumbing and radon piping have been installed with stone
completely removed from above and the side of piping. This inspection could
also be outside underground. Piping shall be in place firmly in contact with
the bottom of the trench..
      (17)   Insulation inspection is required prior to installation of drywall
or any other wall coverings and after the structure is insulated and all air
sealing is completed. Blown in attic insulation will be inspected on the final.
Rim joist and interior foundation wall insulation can be inspected at final
inspection.
      (18)   Final building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing inspections,
Health Department, highway, and fire districts (if applicable)—shall be made
after building is completed and prior to occupancy. Townhouses, duplex's and
one and two family dwellings will not need any fire department approval prior
to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. All permits shall require a final
inspection.
      (19)   In addition to the above stated inspections the Building
Department may make or require other inspections necessary to ascertain
compliance with this Building Ordinance and other laws enforced by the Building
Department. These inspections may include but are not limited to: Drywall
inspection, roof underlayment inspection, grade beam inspection, and fire wall
inspections.
      (20)   Commercial structures that require fire and smoke damper
installation shall have periodic inspections; inspections shall be conducted
upon said units every four years. Inspections shall certify compliance with
International Building Code, Section 717. Inspections shall be conducted by
individual(s) certified by the International Certification Board (ICB) and
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.010 INSPECTION OF PRE-FABRICATED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Applicants for permits for construction shall state the name of the
general contractor or other individual who is wholly responsible for the
conduct of construction on the site.
   (B)   A "Master Plan" for each single or multi-family building, commercial
or industrial building must be filed in this office incorporating all off-site
constructed aspects of the structure as well as its final site assembly down to
the foundation.
   (C)   The foundation plan shall include all work proposed including any
additions or porches to the structure. The basement or crawl space area shall
have detailed drawings specifying sizes, depths and reinforcement of
foundations and not be limited to only those items provided by the modular
home/office manufacturer. Additionally, this plan is not to be a "typical"
foundation plan, but rather one prepared for the particular site to be occupied
by the home/office.
   (D)   All sections of this ordinance herein are applicable to prefabricated
construction.
   (E)   The contractor or other individual obtaining the permit for the
transportation into the county and the erection and/or installation of a
prefabricated unit will be held responsible once the unit arrives in the county
for its total disposition including the arrangement for its immediate removal
from the right-of-way once the unit arrives at the site. It is incumbent upon
this individual to make adequate arrangements with the manufacturer and/or
carrier to assure that roads and other property are not damaged while the unit
is in transit through the county to the site, and further make arrangements for
the immediate deposition of the unit at the construction site.
   (F)   Every manufactured or mobile home/office shall contain a State of
Illinois Certification affixed to the building. All manufactured, modular and
mobile homes must be properly labeled. An Illinois Registered Design
Professional shall seal, sign, and date the document(s).
   (G)   All modular units shall comply with the Will County Building
Ordinance. The manufacturer shall provide documentation of said compliance.
   (H)   Wrap on the underside of a modular home shall be removed unless a
flame-spread rating of 25 or less or the basement or crawl space is a
conditioned space with insulated foundation walls.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.011 ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, DESIGN AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically
presented by this ordinance, provided any such alternate is approved prior to
being used. The Chief Building Official may approve any such alternate provided
he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
accepted design criteria. The Chief Building Official may require that
substantial evidence and/or testing be submitted to substantiate any claims
that may be made regarding its use.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-21)
§ 150.012 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Notice of violation. Whenever the authority having jurisdiction
determines that there has been a violation of this ordinance, notice shall be
given to the owner and/or the person or persons responsible for said violation.
   (B)   Methods of notice. Such notice prescribed above shall be in accordance
with all of the following:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate (current street address
and pin number).
      (3)   Include a statement that states the defects that constitute the
violation of the Code and prescribe the action to be taken by the owner of the
building to comply with the Code and the time within which compliance must be
accomplished. Such time shall be fair and reasonable and subject to reasonable
extension when requested in writing, for reasons that the authority having
jurisdiction may consider as justifying an extension of time. All extensions of
time shall be given by the authority having jurisdiction, in writing.
      (4)   Inform owner or person or persons responsible of their right to
file an appeal with the authority having jurisdiction.
   (C)   Methods of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if it is:
      (1)   Delivered personally or posted in a conspicuous place on the site;
or
      (2)   Sent by first-class mail, electronic mail or facsimile addressed to
the last known address. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was
not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure or equipment affected by such notice.
   (D)   Recording of notice of violation.
      (1)   If the owner of the property has not complied with the requirements
as stated in the notice of violation within the time specified, the authority
having jurisdiction may file an appropriate instrument in the office of the
clerk of the circuit court, to be recorded in the public records of the
jurisdiction in which the violation occurred, indicating that violations of
this ordinance exist upon the property involved.
      (2)   The recording of the notice of violation shall constitute legal
notice to all concerned, as well as to any subsequent purchasers, transferees,
grantees, mortgagees, lessees and all persons claiming or acquiring interest in
the property. When the violation specified in the notice of violation has been
corrected and the authority having jurisdiction has determined that all fees
have been paid, the authority having jurisdiction shall file a certificate
attesting that the violation has been corrected.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18-223, passed 8-16-2018; Am. Ord. 21-
102, passed 8-19-2021)
MINIMUM BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.030 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Special conditions and tests. When special conditions exist or arise
during construction which necessitate additional precautions, the Building
Official may require work and testing in excess of these requirements at the
expense of the owner.
   (B)   Site preparation. No excavation, stripping of organic material or
removal of vegetable matter shall be performed prior to building permit
issuance unless a site development permit has been issued by Will County
Development Review Division. Soil erosion control measures shall be installed
and inspected prior to permit issuance. This inspection is carried out by the
engineering department.
   Exception: Tree removal not associated with any building permit activity.
   (C)   Effective erosion control practices shall be followed during all earth
moving, storage and placement operations so as to prevent sediments from
leaving the site and as required by the Development Review Division. In
addition, the construction process shall be organized and conducted so as to
prevent equipment from dragging or carrying mud or dirt onto public streets.
Where this may accidentally occur, the builder or his responsible agent shall
immediately clean the road surface. Silt fence, when required, shall be
maintained until final site work is complete and vegetation is established. If
a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted without established
vegetation the erosion control shall remain until such time as permanent
vegetation has been established.
   (D)   At least one portable bathroom shall be placed on the job site to
insure public safety, health and welfare per the adopted Illinois State
Plumbing Code when work begins. If a builder has multiple job sites within a
subdivision, portable bathroom spacing of one unit per 500 lineal feet of
roadway is permitted. Builders sharing portable bathroom facilities shall
provide the county with a "letter of agreement to share such" for approval by
Will County.
   (E)   Dumpsters shall be placed on the job site prior to framing of
structure. These dumpsters shall be emptied when full.
   (F)   Address: Each structure to which a street number has been assigned
shall have the permanent numbers displayed directly on the structure in a
position easily observed from the public right-of-way. The minimum size of the
numerals shall be 6" by 1/2". Block numerals only, not script. If the address
is not visible from the public right-of-way they shall be displayed at the
street in a permanent manner as well as on the building.
   (G)   In no case shall drywall or gypsum board be allowed to be installed
beneath exterior finished material unless specifically designed by the
manufacturer for that purpose.
   Exception: Where a fire rated wall or barrier is required or manufactures
specifications specifically require the product.
   (H)   Spark arrestor shall be installed for all solid fuel burning
fireplaces or stoves and constructed in accordance with R1003.9.2 and IBC
2113.9.2.
   (I)   Where fabric brick flashings are installed, the product shall be a
minimum of 20 mil thick.
   (J)   Shower enclosures shall be covered with approved cement board or equal
when installing new tile or wall panels.
   (K)   Modular offices shall have a minimum 12"x42" trench foundation below
grade.
   Exception 1: Construction Trailers
   Exception 2: Temporary Buildings.
   (L)   Class 1 vapor retarders and polyethylene of any kind shall not be
allowed in above grade wall assemblies where an interior finish material will
be installed.
   Exception: Pole Barn Construction with metal interior finishes.
   (M)   Mechanical insulation must be installed per manufacturer's
installation instructions. A weather resistive barrier shall not be required
for structures 200 square feet or less.
   (N)   In order to protect building materials a pan shall be installed below
2nd level washing machines, furnaces, water heaters or similar equipment per
M1411.3.1. The equipment shall be lifted out of the pan to allow more space for
the water.
   (O)   Ramps for single family homes, duplex's and townhouses shall have a 6"
curb to keep a wheelchair from falling off.
   Exception: Where a guardrail or wall is on each side.
   (P)   Openable windows shall have tightly fitting screens of at least 16
mesh per inch.
   (Q)   Townhouses and one and two family dwellings, the attached garages of
townhouses and one and two family dwellings and any bonus rooms or attic areas
that will have interior finishes installed in unconditioned spaces must have
insulated walls of at least R-13, insulated ceilings of at least R-30 and floor
cavities filled with insulation but shall not require more than R-30 for
floors.
   Exception: The reguired ceiling and floor insulation shall not be required
to be installed if there is sufficient access to add insulation at a later
date.
   (R)   Exterior doors for single family residences, duplex's and townhouses
other than the required egress door shall be allowed 3 risers (2 steps) without
a landing.
   (S)   Attic access shall be allowed in closets provided all other attic
access requirements are met.
   (T)   Installation of a material, product, or method not required by
building code shall meet pertinent code sections.
   Exception: Guardrails where the floor height is less than 12" from grade.
   (U)   It is the express intent of this code that flood-resistant
construction of the 2018 IRC section R322 not be adopted. Follow the
engineering department's requirements for flood-resistant construction.
   (V)   It is the express intent of this code that sprinkler requirements of
2018 IRC section R313 not be adopted and any structure allowed to be built
under the 2018 IRC shall not be required to have sprinklers. Please check with
state agencies and local fire districts.
   (W)   It is the express intent of this ordinance to remove all accessibility
requirements from the 2018 International Codes and use the 2018 Illinois
Accessibility Code and any federal standards.
   (X)   It is the express intent of this ordinance to remove all references in
the 2018 International Codes to the 2018 International Electrical Code and use
the 2017 National Electric Code (NEC).
   (Y)   It is the express intent of this ordinance to remove all references in
the 2018 International Codes to the International Plumbing Code and
International Private Sewage Disposal Code and use the 2014 Illinois State
Plumbing Code and Will County Health Department requirements.
   (Z)   It is the express intent of this ordinance to remove all references in
the 2018 International Codes to the International Zoning Code and use the Will
County Zoning Ordinance.
   (AA)   When determining the required number of bathrooms the Illinois State
Plumbing Code shall be used and not the 2018 International Building Code (IBC).
   (BB)   Live/work dwellings. The work area shall be allowed to be up to 15%
of the dwelling size with a maximum of 450 square feet when complying with the
International Residential Code. If either of these numbers is exceeded Section
419 of the 2018 International Building Code shall be used for compliance.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18-115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-
116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.040 WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Joist hangers shall be installed for floor joists with a span greater
than 4' or when it carries any other loads.
   (B)   Joist hangers shall be installed at ceiling joists with a span greater
than 8' or when it resists the outward thrust of the rafters.
   (C)   Joist hangers shall be installed for roof rafters with a span greater
than 8' or if it carries other roof rafters.
   (D)   Joist hangers or 90 degree clips shall be installed for rafters when
framed into the side of a ridge beam where ceiling joists are not installed.
   (E)   When a knee-wall is supporting two stories and a roof, the knee-wall
shall be constructed with minimum 2x6 studs with structural sheathing not less
than 7/16" thick.
   (F)   Beams shall not rely solely on bolts attaching beam members to the
side of posts.
   Exception 1: Minor loads of less than 200 pounds.
   Exception 2: A treated 2 x 4 may be nailed to the post directly below the
beam members and extend to the concrete.
   Exception 3: A mechanical support bracket designed to carry the load may be
installed directly to the post below each beam member.
   Exception 4: Existing portions of existing decks where work is not
performed.
   (G)   The minimum bottom chord dead load of trusses shall be 4 p.s.f. but
not less than the actual dead loads.
   (H)   Two feet of the 3' landing required at the bottom stairs shall be
prior to a door.
   Exception: Existing conditions will be taken on a case by case basis
depending on configuration but maximum distance shall be provided.
   (I)   Structures are required to have a complete load path from the roof to
the sill plate attached to the foundation. Trusses are required to have tie
downs at each truss to the above grade wall assembly. Rafters are required to
have tie downs 4 feet on center to the above grade wall assembly. The minimum
tie-down for walls shall be 18 gauge straps installed on both sides of corners
and every 25' for single story structures. For 2-story structures or single
story structures with knee walls the minimum tie-down shall be 18 gauge wall
straps installed on both sides of corners and every 20'. These straps attach
from 2nd floor stud to first floor stud and first floor stud to basement knee
walls or sill plate. Plywood can also achieve the tie down if it extends from
sill plate to 1st floor studs and 1st floor studs to 2nd floor studs or creates
a joint at the rim joist or 1/2 way on a 2 x 4 plate.
   (J)   Double top plates in above grade wall construction shall overlap 4'.
   (K)   Rafter ties installed 4' on shall be allowed to resist the outward
thrust of the rafters provided this span table is used. This span table is not
designed for storage or for the attachment of any interior finishes.
 
2 x 4  12' max span
2 x 6  18' max span
2 x 8  24' max span
2 x 10 27' max span
2 x 12 30' max span
 
   (L)   Exterior posts shall have a post/pier bracket protecting them from
moisture.
   (M)   Exterior posts shall have a connection from beam to supporting post.
Toe nails shall not provide the only connection.
   (N)   Double floor joists shall be required at the ends of decks parallel
with the floor joists for guardrail attachment. This double floor joist shall
be allowed to be separated by the post for the guardrail.
   Exception: Posts that extend from concrete to top of guardrail.
   (O)   When deck guardrails are installed to the floor framing of the deck
the minimum floor joist size shall be 2 x 8.
   (P)   A double window sill framing member shall be installed when a framed
opening is more than 7' for 2 x 4 wall construction and 9' for 2 x 6 wall
construction.
   (Q)   Bridging shall be required at mid-span of floor joists with a span
greater than 10'. X bracing or solid blocking of any kind is acceptable.
   (R)   Stiff backs, a 2 x 4 framing member nailed perpendicular to ceiling
joists, shall be required at mid-span for ceiling joists with a span greater
than 10'.
   (S)   Roof sheathing must be 5/8" thick plywood or OSB if supporting framing
member is spaced at 24" on center, 1/2" thick plywood or OSB if supporting
framing member is spaced at 19.2" on center or 7/16" thick plywood or OSB if
supporting framing member is spaced at 16" on center. Roof sheathing shall be
repaired or replaced if damaged when shingles are removed during reroofing
operations. If more than 50% of an existing roof plane requires replacement
that roof plane must meet these roof sheathing requirements.
      Exception 1: Lumber sheathing (planks) in compliance with R803.1 and
Table R803.1 of the 2018 International Residential Code.
      Exception 2: Alternative methods and materials in the 2018 International
Building Code (IBC).
   (T)   SR-102 (APA simplified wall bracing method using wood structural panel
continuous sheathing) shall be allowed to be used for wall bracing
requirements.
   (U)   Ladder framed gable end roof overhangs shall be limited to a total of
12". Whenever this is exceeded a design must be submitted.
   (V)   Handrails for single family homes, duplex's and townhouses installed
separately from a guardrail may be installed anywhere between 30" to 38" above
the outer most portion of the stair tread. If the handrail also acts as the
guardrail it must meet the 34" minimum height requirement for guardrails
   (W)   A 2 x framing member attached to the top of the ceiling joists shall
be an approved method to prevent rotation of open ended ceiling joists.
   (X)   Seven-sixteenth inch wood structural panels (plywood or OSB) shall be
used to brace exterior wood frame walls. Drywall shall not be an approved
method of wall bracing.
      Exception: Existing structures undergoing remodeling activities will be
allowed to use let in bracing for wall bracing on exterior walls.
   (Y)   Where plywood is installed on floor joists it shall not be less than
3/4" tongue and groove floor sheathing.
      Exception: Where matching the existing floor sheathing is desired.
   (Z)   Above grade wood frame wall construction carrying roof and ceiling
loads only shall be allowed to have 19' stud lengths provided they are
construction grade 2 x 6 framing members (#2 or better) spaced at 16" on
center, have 2 x 6 solid blocking at all plywood joints and have 7/16"
continuous structural sheathing.
   (AA)   Above grade wood frame wall construction carrying one floor, roof and
ceiling loads only shall be allowed to have 18' stud lengths provided they are
construction grade 2 x 6 framing members (#2 or better) spaced at 16" on
center, have 2 x 6 solid blocking at all plywood joints and have 7/16"
continuous structural sheathing.
   (BB)   Above grade wood frame wall construction carrying one floor, roof and
ceiling loads only shall be allowed to have 12' stud lengths provided they are
construction grade 2 x 4 framing members (#2 or better) spaced at 16" on
center, have 2 x 4 solid blocking at all plywood joints and have 7/16"
continuous structural sheathing.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.050 ROOFING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Gutters and down spouts must be provided on all buildings.
   Exception #1: Existing structures that have never had gutters and does not
have any foundation damage or grading issues (grade must pitch away the home).
   Exception #2: Structures less than 300 square feet.
   Exception #3: Pole barns on properties greater than 1 acre and 20' or more
from the lot line.
   Exception #4: Greenhouses
   Exception #5: A surface drainage system installed around the entire
structure.
   (B)   Drip edge must be installed at all roof edges of asphalt shingle roofs
per R905.2.8.5 of the 2018 IRC and 1507.2.8.3 of the 2018 IBC which states to
install drip edge below underlayment at the eaves (gutter line) and install
drip edge above underlayment at rakes (gable ends).
   Exception 1: When using ice and water shield it can be run behind the gutter
if another layer of underlayment (roofing felt) is installed over the drip edge
(gutter apron).
   Exception 2: Stripping in another piece of ice and water shield can also be
used to achieve compliance and allow the ice and water shield to run behind the
gutter. This can be achieved by attaching another piece of ice and water shield
to the main layer that runs behind the gutter. This piece would then run over
the top of the drip edge. This method is not allowed when using granular top
coated ice and water shield products as it does not adhere well.
   (C)   Two layers of felt cemented together shall not be allowed on roofs in
place of ice and water shield.
   (D)   Gable end flashing (ODE) shall not be re-used during tear off and re-
roof operations.
   (E)   A repair to roofs with two existing layers shall not be allowed.
   (F)   Kickout flashing shall be required to be installed during re-siding
operations. During re-roofing operations the kickout flashing may be waived if
the existing siding is installed close to the roof and the existing baby tins
are to remain.
   (G)   Provide accessory structure roof ventilation per roofing
manufacturer's specifications.
   Exception 1: Structures less than 300 square feet.
   Exception 2: Open air structures where a ceiling will not be installed.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.060 FIRE RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All conditioned spaces shall have all interior wall and ceiling
surfaces covered with a minimum of one-half inch gypsum wallboard or approved
equal. One inch nominal solid paneling shall not be required to have a drywall
backing.
   Exception 1: Three-season rooms that do not contain conditioned space
   Exception 2: Screened porches
   Exception 3: Unfinished crawl spaces unless required by R302.13
   Exception 4: Unfinished basements and unfinished areas of basements except
as required by R302.13 or another area of this ordinance.
   Exception 5: Ceilings of finished basements unless required by R302.13
   Exception 6: Commercial & Industrial structures complying with 2018 IBC
   Exception 7: Detached accessory structures as long as they are covered with
plywood and sealed per energy code reguirements.
   Exception 8: Greenhouses
   (B)   In all commercial, industrial multi-tenant buildings, and residential
multi-tenant buildings, a minimum one hour fire wall shall be provided between
tenant spaces.
   (C)   Fire blocking compounds shall have a flame spread rating no greater
than 50 and comply with ASTM E-84. Approved fireplace caulk, noncombustible
mineral wool or rock wool is acceptable but in no case shall fiberglass or
cellulose insulation or drywall compound be used as a fire or draft stop.
   (D)   A mansard roof must be fire blocked at the corners to prevent fire
from engulfing the perimeter of the building. Access panels shall be provided
for inspection.
   (E)   All manufactured fireplace shaft-walls and ceilings shall be covered
with 5/8" fire rated drywall taped with at least one coat of joint compound
facing the fireplace. A false ceiling can be installed at 8' for the
installation of the fire rated drywall. The fire rated drywall at the ceiling
shall leave a 2" clearance to the chimney with a fire caulked metal collar.
Manufactured fire boxes shall be. The chimney shaft wall of a manufactured
(pre-fab) fireplace shall be separated from any attic areas with not less than
7/16" structural sheathing.
   (F)   An attached garage shall be completely separated from the residence
and the residence attic areas by a minimum 5/8" fire rated drywall applied to
the garage side with joints properly taped and sealed with at least one coat of
joint compound, or equivalent. Structural members shall not protrude thru this
fire protection. A 2 x member shall be considered equivalent to the 5/8" fire
rated drywall if fire caulked above and below for the purpose of this section.
The drywall shall be installed on the wall and the ceiling of the attached
garage or on the wall only from concrete to roof sheathing. Detached garages
less than 3' from the single family residence, duplex or townhouse shall have
5/8" fire code drywall on the garage side of the wall and on the ceiling. Walls
more than 3' and perpendicular walls need not have any protection. Eave
protection shall not be required if the distance from eave to eave is 5'.
   (G)   Accessory structures greater than 10' from homes and 5' from lot lines
can use an ignition barrier for spray foam insulation.
   (H)   Stair treads and risers shall have 1/2" drywall finish on the
underside when accessing a 2nd floor or a basement less than 5' below grade.
   (I)   Fire walls for three season rooms within 5' of an assumed lot line
between townhouses and duplex's shall only be required for the first 4'
projection from the residence as long as built of non-combustible material or
1/2" drywall finishes are installed at all portions of the room.
   (J)   Spray foam insulation and rigid foam insulation shall be allowed to be
left exposed at rim joists of unfinished crawl spaces and basements and above
attic access panels without drywall covering or ignition barriers.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.070 CONCRETE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Cold weather concrete practice: The I.C.C. Council and the American
Concrete Institute ACI-318 have established thresholds for placement of
concrete when cold weather conditions exist. The following information is from
various excerpts of the applicable code sections as they apply to the placement
of concrete in cold weather conditions.
      (1)   Footings.
         (a)   Footings can be poured when the temperature is 20 degrees
Fahrenheit or above, however the following precautions must be adhered to: When
temperature falls below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, ACI-318 cold weather
requirements shall be followed.
         (b)   Concrete shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than
50 degrees Fahrenheit for a minimum of three consecutive days after placement
of concrete.
         (c)   Insulated blankets must protect the concrete and forms left in
place during the three day period.
         (d)   The excavation shall not be left open for more than 24 hours.
Protection must be provided to keep soil from freezing with insulated blankets.
      (2)   Foundation walls.
         (a)   Foundation walls may be poured when the temperature is 40
degrees Fahrenheit or above. When temperature falls below 40 degrees
Fahrenheit, ACI-318 cold weather requirements shall be followed.
         (b)   Concrete shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than
50 degrees Fahrenheit for a minimum of seven consecutive days.
         (c)   Insulated blankets shall completely cover and be securely
fastened to both sides and the forms must be left in place for a period of no
less than three days. ACI-318
      (3)   Flatwork.
         (a)   After the first frost, it is the discretion of the Building
Official if flat work can continue. Flat work is allowed if the temperature of
the concrete is maintained at 50 degrees for seven consecutive days after
concrete placement.
         (b)   The use of salamanders, or other equipment that exhaust flue
gases into the area above
concrete floors must be avoided, because of the danger of carbonation to the
fresh concrete.
         (c)   The I.C.C. Code Council and American Concrete Institute ACI-318
provides for alternates for the above. High early strength may be used to
substitute the following guidelines. An increase in the amount of cement to a
minimum of a six-bag mix and maintaining the concrete at 50 degrees for three
consecutive days provides an option for the builders. Additionally, admixtures
for high early strength may be added in accordance with the manufactures
requirements.
         (d)   The use of visqueen and straw are not an acceptable means of
protection, insulated blankets only.
         (e)   Please contact the Building Department prior to scheduling
concrete.
   (B)   Drain tile shall be installed around the outside of the foundation
adjacent to the footings where encompassing any below grade space. Drain tile
shall be connected to a sump pump, which shall discharge into an approved
drainage facility or to a point a minimum of ten feet away from the structure
and must not cause a nuisance. Drain tile shall be installed between porch
areas and basements/crawl spaces, between garages and basements/crawl spaces
and between basements and crawl spaces. As a general rule where the area needs
dampproofing it needs drain tile run to the sump pump. With the prior approval
of the Building Official, drain tile may be "day-lighted" if existing contours
allow.
   (C)   In no case shall footing drains and/or sump pumps be connected to any
sanitary sewer system, or septic system.
   (D)   Rebar shall be provided to connect existing concrete and new concrete
together. Where the bottom of the footing for the new structure does not extend
to the bottom of the footing for the existing structure a minimum of 6 - #4
rebars shall be installed. Two of which are required in the bottom half of the
footing depth (if a footing is proposed as part of the design).
   (E)   Bottom of footings/foundations for all structures shall be not less
than three feet, six inches below finished grade. Minimum size of footings
shall be 10" x 20" with standard "keyway", or as approved by the building
official.
   Exception 1: Where placed on verified solid bed rock
   Exception 2: Accessory structures 1,000 square feet or less.
   (F)   Postholes for decks shall be a minimum of ten inches in diameter and
shall extend a minimum of three feet, six inches below finished grade.
Postholes shall be sized to carry the loads applied.
   Exception #1: Decks can be installed on an existing slab as long as the
point loads are less than 750 pounds and the slab is in good condition.
   Exception #2: Postholes supporting smaller loads may be allowed to be 8" in
diameter around pools and for stair support (entire post must rest on
concrete).
   (G)   Foundation shall be backfilled with clean fill. Do not use debris for
backfilling.
   (H)   All column footings supporting beams must bear centrally on a minimum
36" x 36" square x 12" deep concrete column footing or a continuous strip
footing with at least 2 - #4 rebars 12" thick x 24" wide. Rivet, weld or bolt
top of steel column to steel girders (or lag screw to wood girders) and anchor
bottom by bolts or embed in concrete (on interior of structures). Column
footings shall be protected from frost where exposed to the exterior
environment.
   Exception 1: Columns supported by exterior foundation walls that have
horizontal rebar in order to spread out the load.
   Exception 2: Smaller column footings may be allowed for smaller loads not
associated with the main support beams of the home and for structures other
than single family residences, duplex's and townhouses.
   (I)   All structures shall be required to provide a minimum of four inch
thick concrete floor slab. All slabs shall have a minimum of four-inch
compacted stone base.
   Exception 1: Accessory structures less than 200 sq. ft.
   Exception 2: Pole barn construction on one acre parcels or larger provided a
4" stone floor is installed.
   Exception 3: Decks
   Exception 4: Three season rooms that can show at least 12" of air flow below
the structure provided a 6 mil vapor barrier is installed and 4" of pea gravel.
   Exception 5: Buildings used for agricultural needs.
   Exception 6: Greenhouses.
   Exception 7: Crawl spaces with a minimum 2" slush coat of concrete and 4" of
stone.
   (J)   Concrete landings for single family homes, townhouses and duplex's and
stairs adjacent to doors of structures shall have wing walls with at least #4
rebar within 3" to 6" from each end and every 2' on center.
   Exception: Concrete landings that have foundation walls on all sides
surrounding the landing.
   (K)   All new detached structures 201 square feet to 1,000 square feet that
do not extend down to the frost line shall have an 18" deep (12" below finished
grade and 6" above) by 12" wide thickened edge. Porches and any other areas
shall be included in the square footage.
   Exception: Additions to existing accessory structures shall be taken on a
case by case basis once existing conditions are determined.
   (L)   The minimum trench foundation wall thickness shall be 12" in width and
extend 42" below grade. Trench foundations shall be allowed for slab on grade
construction only.
   (M)   Wood foundations below grade are prohibited.
   Exception: Pole Barn Construction.
   (N)   The minimum concrete or masonry foundation wall must have an eight
inch nominal thickness, minimum foundation wall thickness, 12 inches for trench
foundation.
   (O)   When concrete cannot be placed on undisturbed virgin ground concrete
shall be placed only on clean compacted fill (compacted to 95% Proctor density)
stone fill or virgin clay free from any vegetation, debris, or organic soils.
   Exception: The portion of an addition adjacent to an existing foundation
with rebar doweled into existing foundation (see section (D) of this section)
   (P)   All commercial/industrial structural pier drawings shall be designed,
sealed, signed, and dated by a registered design professional.
   (Q)   Foundation walls with an unsupported length greater than 50 feet and a
height greater than 4' but less than 8' shall have a minimum of 1 - #4 vertical
rebar at 24" on center for 8" walls and 1 - #4 vertical rebar at 30" on center
for 10" walls with rebar placed within 1 1/4" to 2" of the inside face of the
wall.
   (R)   Openings in foundation wall for windows shall have at least 1 - #4
rebar on all 4 sides within 12" of the window frame.
   (S)   The support of a building shall extend around the entire building.
   Exception: Postholes designed to carry the loads applied.
   (T)   Ten inch wide concrete foundation walls with an unsupported length
less than 20' shall not require vertical rebar if 9' or less in height as long
as 2 - #4 rebar are installed at top, middle and bottom where the floor
diaphragm is attached to the sill plate on top of the foundation wall.
   (U)   Eight inch wide concrete foundation walls with an unsupported length
less than 15' shall not require vertical rebar if 8' or less in height as long
as 2 - #4 rebar are installed at top, middle and bottom.
   (V)   The minimum concrete slab thickness shall not be less than 4". The
minimum amount of stone below the concrete slabs shall not be less than 4".
Piping of any kind shall not run horizontally inside the slab depth.
   Exception: Piping is allowed to run in the slab where structural concrete
supports such as footings prohibit running the piping below the slab.
   (W)   Each plate section attached to a foundation shall have at least 2 code
compliant anchor bolts.
   (X)   Window wells shall have stone and drains at least 2" below the window
run to a sump pump.
   (Y)   Foam sill sealer shall be required below all sill plates attached to
foundations.
   (Z)   Structures shall not be allowed to have some sections capable of
moving with frost and other sections protected from frost (foundation
insulation can be added to protect shallow portion).
   (AA)   Structures that require a permit shall have concrete support.
   Exception 1: Sheds less than 200 square feet.
   Exception 2: Structures where a structural engineer from the State of
Illinois has designed an alternative and all manufacturer and research report
requirements have been met.
   (BB)   Structures built under the International Residential Code (IRC) will
only be required to submit a soil test if questionable soils are encountered
during excavation as determined by the building inspector. It is recommended
that areas near a designated flood plain or wetland area perform soil testing.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-21) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.080 HEATING, VENTILATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC) REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permits. A permit must be obtained for the installation of any
mechanical work.
   Exceptions: Any portable equipment, minor repairs, self-contained
refrigeration systems, range hoods or ductwork less than 30' length.
   (B)   Licenses. All mechanical contractors engaged in the performance of
HVAC work shall be licensed per the Illinois Municipal Code 11-32-1.
   (C)   Alteration of equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter,
disturb or change any equipment or to permit any equipment to be altered,
disturbed, or changed unless done in conformity with the regulations in this
code.
   (D)   Exhaust systems.
      (1)   Every bathroom containing a shower shall be ventilated by a
mechanical ventilation system directly to the outside atmosphere. All exhaust
vent(s) shall terminate in an approved fitting at the exterior of the building
in order to help locate the termination point.
      (2)   Clothes dryer vents shall be a minimum .016" thick rigid metal duct
and shall be sealed with approved metallic tape (not duct tape or screws). A
flexible vent connector shall not be installed in walls or lengths greater than
6 feet.
      (3)   All ductwork in an unconditioned space shall be insulated ductwork.
   (E)   Equipment installation.
      (1)   HVAC equipment shall not be installed in attic or crawl space areas
unless listed and labeled for installation in such spaces.
      (2)   Attic: Where equipment is installed in an attic, a permanent
stairway or an approved pull down stair assembly shall be installed along with
a walkway to the equipment. All walkways to the equipment shall be a minimum of
24 inches wide.
      (3)   Crawl space: All equipment located in a crawl space shall be raised
at least eight inches above the slab. Any equipment suspended from the floor
above shall have a ground clearance of at least eight inches.
      (4)   Interior installations: All interior installations other than in
crawl spaces (see item (3) above) shall be raised a minimum of three inches
above the adjoining floor.
   Exception: Downflow furnaces.
   (F)   HVAC Amendments.
      (1)   All buildings shall have a readily accessible, visible external
shutoff valve located on the building for liquid or vapor fuels.
      (2)   All vents for combustible fuel appliances shall terminate a minimum
of 35 inches above final grade.
      (3)   High efficient furnace and water heaters with sealed combustion
chambers shall take combustion air from the outside.
      (4)   Flexible gas line connectors shall not be permitted for furnace and
water heater installations.
      (5)   Corrugated stainless steel tubing shall not be permitted in any
application.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.110 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   National Electrical Code 2017 Edition. The National Electrical Code
2017 edition has been adopted by Will County and apply to all electrical
installations as though fully written and set forth herein, except as
specifically noted otherwise in this code.
   (B)   License. All electrical contractors engaged in the performance of
electrical work shall be licensed per the Illinois Municipal Code 11-33-1. The
contractor shall file with the Will County Building Department a copy of the
valid license and said license shall reflect the scope of the work.
   (C)   Permits. Permits are required for all electrical work. Permits for
electrical work shall be issued only when a duly licensed and bonded electrical
contractor is listed on the permit application.
   Exception #1: Work that does not alter the wiring of the building
(replacement of light fixtures, exhaust fans, smoke detectors, outlets or
similar)
   Exception #2: Qualified homeowners who can demonstrate their ability to
perform such work, to the satisfaction of the Building Department, may work on
their own place of residence as long as they reside on site for a period of at
least six months after issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
   (D)   Electrical amendments.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, disturb or change any
electrical wiring or equipment or to permit any electrical wiring or equipment
to be altered, disturbed, or changed unless done in conformity with the
requirements of county adopted codes and ordinances.
      (2)   Where rework or rewiring of any building or structure exceeds 50%,
all wiring in the entire structure shall be installed per the currently adopted
electrical code and Will County Building O rdinances.
      (3)   All electrical wiring on the load side of the meter shall be
copper.
      Exception: Aluminum wiring may be allowed outside underground.
      (4)   Electrical metallic tubing (EMT, conduit and sometimes called thin
wall) shall be required throughout all structures, however, it shall not be
installed underground or in concrete.
      Exception 1: Wiring to equipment where vibration is present,
      Exception 2: Existing wiring may remain in place when certified by a
licensed electrical contractor as long as it is safely installed and proposed
work does not exceed the 50% threshold that triggers rewiring the entire
structure.
      Exception 3: Flexible metallic conduit (FMC) shall be allowed in whips
not greater than 6' to connect can lights and areas difficult to install EMT
      (5)   All electrical services shall be installed in rigid metal conduit,
or intermediate metal conduit.
      Exception 1: The underground portion of services may include Schedule 40
PVC with a properly sized ground per table 250-122 NEC
      Exception 2: Direct burial service conductors with rigid or intermediate
conduit sweeps Schedule or Schedule 40 PVC sweep shall be permitted (from the
elbow below grade to the termination point above grade). Schedule 40 PVC shall
be protected above grade inside of structures by a rigid material (plywood or
similar).
      (6)   No more than ten feet of service entrance conductor shall be
permitted inside a building or structure without providing an exterior
disconnect.
      (7)   The electrical outlet for an above ground swimming pool shall be at
least 5' from the inside walls of the pool.
      (8)   A grounding electrode conductor complying with NEC 250.52(A)(3)
shall be installed in footings. A supplemental ground rod, pipe, or plate type
shall be installed per NEC 250.56. All grounding electrodes present at each
building or structure served shall be bonded together to form the grounding
electrode system. Where technically infeasible to install the grounding
electrode in footings 2 ground rods 6" apart shall be installed.
      (9)   If required by the authority having jurisdiction a diagram showing
service and feeders wire sizes, type of conductors, calculated loads, the area
in square feet being supplied, and demand factors shall be submitted. Required
panel schedules shall show connected loads, total connected loads per phase.
      (10)   The receptacle outlet for refrigeration equipment shall be
supplied from an individual branch circuit rated 15 amperes or greater.
      Exception: Refrigeration equipment located in an area other than a
kitchen unless required by other parts of any adopted codes or ordinances and
electrical can meet the load.
      (11)   Sizing of electrical services for dwellings: (All measurements
shall be taken from the outside of the walls of the dwelling unit.)
         (a)   Dwelling units 2,500 square feet to 3,500 square feet shall have
a minimum size electrical service of 200 amperes or greater.
         (b)   Dwelling units over 3,500 square feet shall have electrical
services rated at least 350 amperes or greater.
      Exception: Load calculations may be presented to the Will County Building
Department for review. The authority having jurisdiction determines the proper
size electrical service based on the load calculation submitted. At no time
shall the total calculated load exceed 80% of the service size.
      (12)   Unfinished storage spaces five square feet or more shall be
illuminated. Finished storage spaces (closets) with a depth greater than 3' and
a total square footage exceeding ten square feet shall be illuminated and
follow the 2017 National Electric Code (NEC) for such installation.
      (13)   All rough-in electrical installations shall be completed before
the rough inspection is scheduled (including attic and crawl spaces). Pull
chain or wall switched attic light fixtures at or near attic access point are
required.
      (14)   All light fixtures shall have at least one lamp installed and all
receptacles intended to be used for switched lighting shall be marked for the
final inspection.
      (15)   Attached garages, detached garages and pole barns with power are
required to be on a separate 20 ampere circuit. The 20 ampere circuit is a
minimum requirement, more circuits may be added or required as needed.
      (16)   All ½ horsepower or larger motors and all appliances rated at
1127VA or greater shall be on its own dedicated circuit.
      (17)   Every panel box must have each circuit labeled.
      (18)   All electrical panels must be located a minimum of three feet from
sump pump pits, ejector pits, laundry (mop) sinks, and laundry tubs.
      Exception: Existing installations
      (19)   All three phase 120/240 volt services shall have phases marked (A)
Black (B) Red and (C) Blue.
      (20)   All three phase 277/480 volt services shall have phases marked (A)
Brown (B) Orange (C) Yellow with the neutral being of a gray color. Junction
boxes shall be marked 277/480 volts with a permanent marker or approved sticker
type products.
      (21)   In commercial and industrial installationsall switches for fire
alarms, security alarms, exit signs, and emergency lighting shall be equipped
with mechanical lockouts to prevent an accidental turnoff of the circuits.
Emergency lighting shall be connected to a light circuit or equipped with a
transfer switch in the event of a power failure.
      (22)   In addition to the low proximity exit signs required by 1013.2 of
the 2018 International Building Code, low level exit signs shall be required in
all occupancies of the International Building Code where the ceiling height is
less than 9'.
      Exception: Existing structures need only comply in areas where work is
proposed.
      (23)   Above ground swimming pools, on ground swimming pools, in-ground
swimming pools, hot tubs, or recreational equipment capable of holding water
shall not be permitted under any overhead wiring.
      (24)   All commercial/industrial parking facilities shall require
intermediate metallic conduit (IMC), rigid metallic conduit (RMC) or Schedule
80 PVC under the paved areas for all power and lighting installations.
      (25)   Continuity of the grounding path or bonding connection to interior
piping shall not rely on water meters, water softeners, water heaters, water
filtering devices or other similar equipment.
      (26)   Lighting switches shall be installed at each entrance to a room or
hall where there is more than eight feet between such entrances.
      (27)   Provide a single, dedicated plug for sump pump and ejector pump
(without GFI protection) with a GFI protected outlet within 10' or provide code
required GFI protection for the sump pump and/or ejector pump outlet.
      (28)   Compression fittings shall be used for electrical installations in
masonry walls or similar damp areas.
      (29)   Electrical outlets shall not be placed behind sliding surface
mounted doors.
      (30)   Any electrical junction box in an attic shall be installed at
least 24" above the drywall to keep it above the insulation line.
      Exception: Existing installations.
      (31)   Electrical outlets shall be of the self-grounding type or a green
wire (pig tail) shall be run from the green screw on the outlet to the metallic
electrical box.
      (32)   Floor outlets that face up shall be GFI protected.
      (33)   Where solar panels on a roof provide areas for animals to make
nests. Critter guards shall be installed.
      (34)   Whirlpool motor access panels shall be a minimum of 18" x 14" or
22" x 12".
      (35)   Any room meant to be a living space in single family residences,
duplex's and townhouses (study, office, hobby room and similar spaces) that
have privacy doors shall require a smoke detector in the room and outside of
the room within 20'.
      Exception #1: Three and four season rooms.
      Exception #2: Single Family Residences, duplex's and townhouses with a
fire suppression system.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.114 DEMOLITION REQUIREMENTS.
   The deliberate destruction of a structure.
   (A)   
Table 150.114 shall be used to determine if a demolition permit is reguired.
Wherever a permit for demo is not required a permit application shall be
submitted for the rebuild prior to the demolition.
TABLE 150.114
ACTIVITY DEMOLTION PERMIT REQUIRED
TABLE 150.114
ACTIVITY                               DEMOLTION PERMIT REQUIRED
Deliberate destruction of a building   Yes. Exception: Sheds less than 200
regardless of square footage           square feet.
Removal of finishes for the purpose of No but a permit for rebuild must be
remodeling a structure.                submitted prior to removal. Permit must
                                       be issued prior to any repair work.
Removal of a mobile home from a site
without demolition of the mobile home  Yes
and not immediate replacement home
Removal of a mobile home from a site
without demolition of the mobile home
and a replacement mobile home permit   No see a below.
filed with our office for immediate
replacement
Removal of mobile home with demolition Yes
on site
Removal of debris from a natural       No
disaster. Clean up only
Controlled burn by Fire Protection     Yes
District
Above around pool                      No see a below.
Inground pool                          Yes
Desassembly of cellular tower          Yes
Decks single family dwellings          No see a below.
Decks commercial                       No but a permit for rebuild must be
                                       submitted prior to demolition.
 
a.   A permit can be issued at the request of the customer.
   (B)   If the demolition consists of a home on a property, in which the
intended use will be commercial in the future, an asbestos study must be
performed by an IDPH Licensed Asbestos Inspector. If the demolition consists of
a structure, with four or more units, an asbestos study must always be
conducted.
   (C)   If the demolition consists of a building, which had previous use or a
current use as a commercial entity, an asbestos study must be conducted and
performed by an IDPH Licensed Asbestos Inspector. If asbestos is identified in
the study, it must be removed by an IDPH Licensed Asbestos Abatement
Contractor.
   (D)   Ten day notification must be submitted to the IEPA prior to
demolition. A payment fee of $150 must also be submitted to the IEPA and is
subject to change without notice (only for commercial/industrial or properties
that have been or are going to be commercial/industrial).
   (E)   Documentation must be submitted to the county for the above items
prior to initiating demolition activities. Copies of the asbestos study, ten
day notification form, and a copy of the U.S. Postal Service mail receipt.
   (F)   During the demolition process, if foundation materials are unpainted
and consists of no protruding rebar they are considered clean construction
debris, which can be buried as clean fill on the property as long as it is
covered at least six inches of soil and seeded unless a roadway or other
structure is constructed in the location of burial. Any painted foundation
materials of a business or homestead must be disposed at an IEPA permitted
site.
   (G)   Concrete from in-ground pools can be buried on the property as long as
one side is crushed so the structure can no longer hold water as long as the
concrete meets the requirements and is buried as described above.
   (H)   If any electronics, tires, landscape waste and/or any other waste
prohibited from landfills is removed from the property receipts must be
maintained as proof of proper disposal.
   (I)   All receipts regarding proper disposal of demolition wastes shall be
maintained. Documentation may be requested at any time regarding disposal.
   (J)   Parcels that undergo demolition activities shall have the grading
returned to its original state as long as it does not cause a nuisance to
adjacent property owners.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.115 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCES, DUPLEX AND TOWNHOUSE EXISTING BUILDING
CODE.
   (A)   The purpose of these provisions is to encourage the continued use or
reuse of legally existing buildings and structures. Compliance with these
provisions shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this ordinance and the
2018 IRC.
   (B)   Alterations, renovations, repairs or reconstruction shall not cause
the structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the
building; shall not cause an existing mechanical or plumbing system to become
unsafe, hazardous, unsanitary or overloaded; and unless expressly permitted by
these provisions shall not make the building any less compliant than it was
before the work was undertaken.
   (C)   Newly constructed elements, components and systems shall comply with
the requirements of the 2018 IRC and IPMC except as provided in this ordinance.
   (D)   The work shall not increase the extent of noncompliance with code
requirements or create nonconformity to those requirements that did not
previously exist.
   (E)   New windows shall meet the Illinois Energy Code.
   (F)   Smoke detectors shall be upgraded per R314 of the 2018 IRC.
   (G)   New windows shall meet the safety glazing requirements per R308 of the
2018 IRC.
   (H)   Existing windows are not required to have safety glazing unless new
work performed triggers safety glazing. In such a case a film shall be
installed over the window to achieve compliance of a Grade A safety glazing.
   (I)   New tile or panels installed in shower enclosures shall have cement
board installed.
   (J)   The building official shall have the authority to require an existing
building to be investigated and evaluated by a registered design professional.
The evaluation shall determine the existence of any potential non-conformities
to these provisions, and shall provide a basis for determining the impact of
the proposed changes on the performance of the building.
   (K)   A structural member shall be replaced where the stresses in any
member, the condition of the building, or any of its components or elements or
attachments; or other condition that results in an overload exceeding 150% of
the stress allowed for the member or material in this code. Structural elements
that are uncovered during the course of the alteration that are found to be
dangerous shall be made to comply with the applicable requirements of the 2018
IRC and this ordinance.
   Exception 1: Plumbing shall follow the 2014 Illinois State Plumbing Code
   Exception 2: Electrical shall follow this ordinance and the 2017 NEC
   (L)   Interior finishes shall be 1/2" drywall or 1" nominal solid paneling
or equivalent except existing areas not being altered, repaired or modified.
   (M)   Existing stair openings can remain and stairs can remain in place or
reconstructed to the same configuration unless the floor on which the opening
for the stairs is being remodeled. Stair code compliance shall be determined
based on existing conditions and the extent of the remodel.
   (N)   The remodel of any structure or the buildout of a basement shall not
require the installation of egress windows unless a new window is being added,
a new bedroom is being added, the location of the bedroom is being changed or
any exterior wall is being replaced.
   (O)   Where compliance with these provisions or with this code as required
by these provisions is technical infeasible or would impose disproportionate
costs because of construction or dimensional difficulties, the building
official shall have the authority to accept alternatives. These alternatives
include materials, design features and operational features.
   (P)   Re-roofing shall follow the reroofing section of Chapter 9 of the 2018
IRC. Roof ventilation shall be installed per roofing manufacturer's
specifications at eaves and openings thru roof sheathing or gable ends. Removal
of roof sheathing shall not be required to comply with ventilation
requirements.
   (Q)   Firewalls between townhouses and a duplex shall be repaired or
replaced to their original condition. A minimum of 5/8" fire code drywall or
equivalent shall be added to the side where remodel work is taking place where
no firewall exists.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.116 BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND REQUIREMENTS
ASSOCIATED WITH ZONING TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.
   (A)   A building permit is required for a temporary building or the use of
any building associated with a special event in which the public, volunteers
and/or employees of such special event will occupy.
   Exception 1: Tents on residential properties for personal use associated
with townhouses, a duplex, single family residences and multifamily
residential.
   Exception 2: Enclosed Tents 400 square feet or less that have a clearance of
12' from all structures and other tents.
   Exception 3: Tents less than 700 square feet that are open on all sides
except a single 20' section and a clearance of 12' from all structures and
other tents.
   (B)   Temporary wiring shall be installed per the 2017 National Electric
Code (NEC). Electrical services and permanent wiring shall be installed per the
requirements of the electrical section of this ordinance and the 2017 National
Electric Code (NEC).
   (C)   All temporary structures shall comply with Section 3103 of the 2012
IBC and membrane structures shall comply with Section 3102 of the 2018 IBC;
tents and membrane structures shall comply with Chapter 31 of the 2018 IFC.
      (1)   Provide a flame resistant certification for tent fabric; fabric
certification shall identify:
         (a)   Names and address of the owners of the tent.
         (b)   Date the fabric was last treated with flame resistant solution.
         (c)   Trade name or kind of chemical used in treatment.
         (d)   Name of person or firm treating the material.
         (e)    Name of testing agency and test standard by which the fabric
was tested (NFPA 701).
      (2)   Call J.U.L.I.E. prior to driving stakes at 1-800-892-0123.
      (3)   Tents, canopies, or membrane structures and their appurtenances
shall be adequately roped, braced, and anchored to withstand the elements of
weather and prevent against collapsing. Documentation of structural stability
shall be furnished. Do not use water barrels unless the plans signed and sealed
by an Illinois Structural Engineer specifically approve the use of the water
barrels.
      (4)   All tents shall conform to the means of egress requirements of IBC
Chapter 10 and shall have an exit access travel distance of 100 feet or less.
      (5)   Many of the tent manufacturer's often indicate that tents should
not be occupied when winds are greater than 40 mph and/or if there is rain or
lightening. It is the permit holder's responsibility to be aware of the usage
recommendations and to provide evacuation directions, if necessary.
   (D)   For enclosed or partially enclosed tents exits shall be clearly
marked: exit signs shall be installed at required exit doorways and where
otherwise necessary to indicate the direction of egress. Provide illuminated
exit signs and emergency lighting when operations will take place outside of
full daylight hours. All exiting shall meet compliance with Chapter 10 - Means
of Egress of the 2018 IBC including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Code calculated occupant load shall be determined by Table
1004.1.2.ii. The required egress width shall be determined by calculating the
occupant load served by such a component by a means of egress capacity of .2
inch per occupant but not less than 3' in width.
      (2)   Submit a floor plan showing compliance for means of egress (see
example table and chair layout plan from the National Fire Protection Agency).
      (3)   Table 1021.2(2): A minimum of two exits are required from a space;
one exit would be permissible with a maximum load of 49 occupants and minimum
75 feet travel distance (100 feet of travel distance is allowed when more than
49 occupants with the 2 exits).
      (4)   1008.1.9: All doors shall be readily open-able from the egress side
without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
      (5)   1008.1.2: Egress doors shall be of the pivoted or side-hinged
swinging type; doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel where
serving an occupant load of 50 or more persons.
   (E)   Submit a plat of survey showing the following (for review by building
and zoning departments of Will County):
      (1)   Location of all permanent and temporary structures.
      (2)   Location of any "roped" off areas.
      (3)   Location and number of bathrooms and hand washing facility units.
      (4)   Traffic flow plan with minimum 12' driving aisles.
      (5)   Emergency vehicle access per local fire district.
      (6)   Accessible parking area at the shortest accessible route to event.
      (7)   Main parking area.
      (8)   Over flow parking area.
   (F)   Compliance with the Illinois Accessibility Code is required including
but not limited to the accessible parking provisions and an accessible route
from the accessible parking area to the event.
   (G)   Total number of accessible and regular toileting and hand washing
facility units shall be based upon Appendix A 890, Table B, of the 2014
Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   (H)   Portable fire extinguishing equipment shall be furnished and
maintained including one rated fire extinguisher for every 3,000 sf of floor
area (IFC 906); review potential additional requirements with the local fire
protection district.
   (I)   Any inflatable attractions shall be adequately roped, braced, and
anchored to withstand the elements of weather and prevent against uplift and
collapse. The operator of the bounce house must meet compliance with the State
of Illinois Amusement Ride and Attraction Safety Act (ILCS Ch. 430, Act 85).
   (J)   All special amusement occupancies/haunted house/scare house/maze shall
meet the requirements of the 2018 International Fire Code:
      (1)   Definition: Special Amusement Building: a building that is
temporary, permanent, or mobile that contains a device or system that conveys
passengers or provides a walkway along, around, or over a course in any
direction as a form of amusement arranged so that the egress path is not
readily apparent due to visual or audio distractions or an intentionally
confounded egress path, or is not readily available because of the mode of
conveyance through the building or structure.
      (2)   FC 914.7: Special amusement buildings shall be equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 903.3.1.1; exception:
automatic sprinklers are not required where total floor area of a temporary
special amusement is less than 1,000 sf and travel distance from any point to
an exit is less than 50 feet. Provide a plan indicating that the above has been
met.
      (3)   IFC 914.7.2: Special amusement buildings shall be equipped with an
automatic smoke detection system (907.2.12).
      (4)   An emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be installed in
accordance with 907.2.12.2 and NFPA 72.
      (5)   The minimum width of aisles shall not be less than 36 inches clear
of all obstructions (maximum 180 occupants).
      (6)   At each location where there is a change in direction, a minimum
clear turning space 60 inches in diameter or T-shaped space is required.
      (7)   Exit signs and emergency lighting shall be maintained during
operations.
      (8)   Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dried
plant material, plastics, etc. shall not be used for decorations or
construction. Interior finish shall be Class A in accordance with section IBC
803.1 (Flame Spread 0-25; smoke developed 0-450.
      (9)   All wiring and electrical appliances must comply with the 2017
National Electric Code; the electrician needs to comply with the contractor
licensing, registration, and bonding requirements as required by Will County
Land Use.
   (K)   Follow all local, state and federal laws.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 2018
§ 150.120 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
IBC Section 101.1 Title
To read:
   These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Will County,
Illinois hereinafter referred to as "this code."
Section 101.2.1 Appendices
To read:
   Appendices A, H, and I are specifically adopted by Will County, Illinois and
shall apply.
IBC Section 101.4.3 Plumbing
   Delete International Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois Plumbing
Code 2014.
   Delete International Private Sewage Disposal Code and insert to read: Will
County Health Department
IBC Section 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit
   Building
   1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses, provided that the floor area is not greater than
200 square feet. Must follow zoning requirements.
IBC Section 107 Submittal Documents
To read:
   All multifamily, condominiums, apartments, commercial and industrial
documents shall be signed and sealed by a registered design professional and as
required by the Chief Building Official.
IBC Section 109.6 Refunds
Delete existing sentence in its entirety.
Addition to read:
   Requests for fee refund shall be submitted in writing to the Board of
Appeals and to the Land
   Use Director for consideration by the Will County Board.
IBC Section 305.2.3
   Twelve (12) or fewer children receiving such day care shall be classified as
a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code.
Change number of children from five (5) to twelve (12).
IBC Section 310.4.1 Care Facilities within a Dwelling
   Care facilities for six or fewer persons receiving care that are within a
single family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International
Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the International
Residential Code. See section 150.031 (V) that does not require a sprinkler
system for anything allowed to be constructed under the International
Residential Code. Check with fire protection district and State of Illinois
requirements.
Section 1608.2 Ground Snow Loads
   30 p.s.f. ground snow load shall be used when taking reductions and 25
p.s.f. ground snow load shall be used without reductions.
IBC Chapter 29 – Plumbing Systems
   Delete Chapter Twenty-Nine in its entirety and insert to read: all plumbing
refer to Illinois Plumbing Code 2014.
IBC Section 3003.2 Firefighter Emergency Operation
   All emergency elevator phones shall directly dial to the fire protection
districts emergency number and conform to the Illinois Accessibility Code 2018.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Res. 15-40, passed 2-19-2015; Am. Ord.
18–115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102,
passed 8-19-2021)
ILLINOIS ENERGY EFFICIENT BUILDING ACT
§ 150.130 ILLINOIS ENERGY EFFICIENT BUILDING ACT.
   The law does not apply to officially designated historic buildings,
buildings exempt from a local building code and buildings that do not use
either electricity or fossil fuel for comfort conditioning.
   Illinois amendments to the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code:
https://www2.illinois.gov/cdb/business/codes/IllinoisAccessibilityCode/
Documents/2018%20Illinois%20Specific%20Amendments.pdf
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 2018
§ 150.140 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
IFC Section 101.1 Title
To read:
   These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Will County, Illinois,
hereinafter referred to as "this code."
IFC Section 101.2.1 Appendices
To read:
   Appendix Chapter F is specifically adopted by Will County, Illinois and
shall apply.
IFC Section 103.1 General
To read:
   The Department of Fire Prevention is established within Will County and is
under the direction of each Will County fire protection district and the
building code official. Consistent with the provisions of this ordinance, the
Department of Fire Prevention shall not enforce fire suppression
   (sprinklering) in one and two family dwellings, duplex’s and townhouses or
any building allowed to be built under the 2018 International Residential Code.
The issuance of any county building or occupancy permit shall not be delayed or
denied due to a failure to meet any fire suppression requirements enacted by
another governmental body with jurisdiction in Will County.
IFC Section 103.2 Appointment
   Shall be deleted in its entirety.
IFC Section 103.3 Deputies
   Shall be deleted in its entirety.
IFC Section 110.4 Violation Penalties
End of first sentence to read:
   Shall be guilty of a petty offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.00 per violation. (Each day's violation shall constitute a separate
offense). Maximum by Illinois law imprisonment.
IFC Section 112.4 Failure to Comply
End of sentence to read:
   Shall be guilty of a petty offense punishable by a fine of $100 and not more
than $500.00 per violation. (Each day's violation shall constitute a separate
offense).
IFC Section 1103.5.1
   Delete section in its entirety.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18-115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-
116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 2018
§ 150.150 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
IFGC Section 101.1 Title
To read:
   These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of Will County,
Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
IFGC Section 101.3 Appendices
To read:
   Appendix A, B, and C are specifically adopted by Will County, Illinois and
shall apply.
IFGC Section 106.6 Fee Schedule
   Delete section 106.6.2.
IFGC Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds
   Delete existing sentence in its entirety.
Addition to read:
   Requests for fee refund shall be submitted in writing to the Board of
Appeals and to the Land Use Director for consideration by the Will County
Board.
IFGC Section 108.4 Violation Penalties
The following shall be inserted:
   (A)   "specify offense" = Petty Offense
   (B)   "amount" = $500.00 per violation
   (C)   "number of days" = Maximum allowed by State Law
IFGC Section 108.5 Stop Work Order
The following shall be inserted:
   (A)   not less than $100.00 dollars per violation
   (B)   or more than $500.00 dollars per violation
   (C)   Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
IFGC Section 301.2 Energy Utilization
   Change International Energy Conservation Code to Illinois Energy
Conservation Code
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18- 115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord.
18-116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 2018
§ 150.160 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
IMC Section 101.1 Title
To read:
   These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of Will County,
Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
IMC Section 101.2.1 Appendices
To read:
   Appendix A is specifically adopted by Will County, Illinois and shall apply.
IMC Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule
Delete section 106.5.2
IMC Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds.
   Delete existing sentence in its entirety.
   Addition to read:
      Requests for fee refund shall be submitted in writing to the Board of
Appeals and to the Land Use Director for consideration by the Will County
Board.
IMC Section 107.2 Required Inspections and Testing
Insert in section after its last sentence:
   Other inspections may be required by the code official at his discretion.
IMC Section 108.4 Violation Penalties
The following shall be inserted:
   (A)   "specify offense" = Petty Offense
   (B)   "amount" = $500.00 per violation
   (C)   "number of days" = Maximum allowed by State Law
IMC Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders
The following shall be inserted:
   "not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 per violation"
   Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18- 115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord.
18-116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY AND MAINTENANCE CODE 2018
§ 150.170 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY AND MAINTENANCE CODE.
IPMC Section 101.1 Title
To read:
   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of Will
County hereinafter referred to as "this code."
IPMC Section 103.5 Fees
Add after the last sentence:
   See Will County Land Use Adopted Fee Schedule.
IMPC Section 302.4 Weeds
First sentence to read:
   Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in excess of 10 inches.
IPMC Section 304.14 Insect Screens
Delete section in its entirety
IPMC Section 404.4.1 Room Area
   Change living room area from 120 square feet to 70 square feet.
IPMC Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies
To read:
   Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a
room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet
rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature of 0 degrees. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements
of this section.
IPMC Section 602.3 Heat Supply
Delete first sentence in its entirety, delete exceptions in their entirety and
insert the following.
To read:
   Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitory or guest rooms on terms, either
expressed or implied, shall furnish heat to the occupants and maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms from September 15th to April 30th
IPMC Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces
To read:
   Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during "habitable
working hours" of not less than 65°F (18°C).
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18-115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-
116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021; Am. Ord. 22-387,
passed 1-19-2023)
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 2018
§ 150.180 AMENDMENT TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
R101.1 Insert Will County, Illinois.
R102.5 The following Appendices shall be adopted:
   (A)   Appendix A Sizing and capacities of gas piping.
   (B)   Appendix B Sizing of venting, systems serving appliances equipped with
draft hoods, Category I Appliances and appliances listed for use and Type B
vents.
   (C)   Appendix C Exit terminals of mechanical draft and draft vent venting
systems.
   (D)   Appendix E Manufactured housing used as dwellings.
   (E)   Appendix H Patio Covers.
   (F)   Appendix K Sound Transmission.
R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit
   (A)   Delete Section One under "Building" in its entirety.
      10.   Exterior flatwork (pavers, slabs, etc.) where there is not any
proposed building exception: Stairs used as the means of egress shall require a
permit.
      11.   Storage cabinets less than 7' tall and less than 50 square feet.
      12.   Gutters and downspouts for one-and-two family dwellings and
townhouses.
      13.   Roof repairs of less than 100 sq. ft. for one-and-two family
dwellings and townhouses.
      14.   Siding repairs of less than 100 sq. ft. for one-and-two family
dwellings and townhouses.
      15.   Doors of any kind in one and two family dwellings and townhouses as
long as structural alterations are not needed.
      16.   Replacement of decking boards on an existing one-and-two family
dwelling or townhouse deck and/or stair decking as long as the deck is
structurally sound and decking meets the requirements of all codes and this
ordinance.
   Add additional projects exempt from permit under electrical:
      5.   Electrical work that does not alter the wiring of the building
(replacement of light fixtures, exhaust fans, smoke detectors, outlets or
similar)
   Add additional projects exempt from permit under mechanical:
      9.   Replacement of ductwork less than 30' of same code compliant
material in one-and-two family dwellings, duplex's and townhouses.
      10.   Replacement of a range hood for one-and-two family dwellings,
duplex's and townhouses where new electrical building wiring is not needed.
R106.1 Submittal Documents
To read:
   All new one-and-two family residences, town homes. Second story additions to
one-and-two family residences and townhomes and engineered buildings shall have
documents signed and sealed by a registered design professional and/or as
approved by the Chief Building Official. Res-check documents shall be signed by
the person performing the res-check paperwork.
R108.5 Refunds
   Delete existing sentence in its entirety.
Table R301.2(i)
   Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot when taking reductions or 25
pounds per square foot roof load (without reductions)
   Wind Speed: 115 m.p.h. (Uplift > 20 Lbs./Sq. Ft.)
   Topographic Effects: No
   Special Wind Region: No
   Windbourne Debris Zone: No
   Seismic: A
   Weathering: Severe
   Frost Line: 42"
   Termite: Moderate to heavy
   Winter Design Temperature: 0, 1 or -1 (6,155 Heating Degree Days)
   Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes
   Flood Hazards:
      a.   National Flood Insurance Program entry date 4-15-1982
      b.   Flood Insurance Study Date revised 2-15-19
      c.   126 Active Firm Panels Effective 2-15-19 (see water resource
ordinance)
   Air Freezing Index - 2000
   Mean Annual Temperature - 50.1
   Decay: Slight to Moderate
                                                Coincident Design Design Design
Daily
                                                Wet        Grains Grains Grains
Range
            Elevation Latitude Heating Coolin g Bulb       55%R H 50%R H 45%R H
(DR)
Design
Conditions:
Joliet
(Will       581       41       0       90       74         31     38     43 M
County)
Wheatland & DuPage Townships can use Aurora design temperature if desired (or
combination thereof).
Aurora, IL  706       41       -1      91       76         42     49     55 M
Wilmington, Florence, Wilton, Peotone, Will, Washington, Reed, Custer & Wesley
Townships can use Kankakee design temperature if desired (or combination
thereof).
Kankakee    629       41       1       90       74         31     38     43 M
 
R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
   Delete this section in its entirety
R320 Accessibility
   Delete entire section.
   Amend to read accessible dwelling units shall comply with the 2018 Illinois
Accessibility Code and all federal laws and standards.
R407.3 Structural Requirements
   Delete Exception only.
R703.1.1. Water Resistance
   Add Exception #3.
   Metal siding installed on detached accessory structures without insulation
and/or interior coverings. This exception cannot be used where a gas line is
run to the structure or where radiant heat is installed in a concrete slab.
Existing buildings undergoing alterations to install insulation and/or interior
coverings must take steps to limit water infiltration thru the metal siding.
R903.2.2 Crickets and Saddles
   A cricket or saddle shall be installed on the ridge side of all chimneys.
Cricket or saddle covering shall be any roof covering allowed by code.
Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32 of the 2018 IRC are to be deleted
and the 2014 State of Illinois Plumbing Code is to be added in its entirety.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 18-115, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-
116, passed 5-17-2018; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021; Am. Ord. 22-23,
passed 2-25-2022)
INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 2018
§ 150.190 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 2018.
101.1
To read:
   These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of Will
County hereinafter referred to as "this code."
105.6 Fees.
Delete Section 105.6 in its entirety
107.4 Violation penalties.
The following shall be inserted:
   (A)   "specify offense" = Petty Offense
   (B)   "amount" = $500.00 per violation
   (C)   "number of days" = Maximum allowed by State Law
107.5 Stop Work Orders.
The following shall be inserted:
   "not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 per violation"
   Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
108. Means of appeal.
Delete section 108 in its entirety
Chapter 2: Definitions
   Residential Swimming Pool. Add at the end of the definition. Pools capable
of holding 24" of water.
(Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 150.999 FINES; PENALTIES; COSTS.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions adopted by reference, or who refuses to remedy a violation of
any such provision or to remedy a hazard of fire explosion, collapse,
contagion, or spread of infectious disease found to exist and duly ordered
eliminated, shall be charged with a petty offense and fined not more than $500
for each offense. Each day upon which such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking
other lawful action as is necessary for the restraint, correction and abatement
of any violations.
   (B)   A person, firm, or corporation licensed or registered by the state, or
a subdivision thereof, to do work regulated by this ordinance or to render
professional architectural or structural engineering services in connection
herewith, who violates the law or ordinance under which licensed or registered,
or who violates this Building Ordinance while carrying out such work or
rendering service in connection therewith, shall be reported by the Building
Official to the licensing authority.
   (C)   Where a dispute arises regarding an engineering opinion furnished by
the owner of the property involved in any matter covered by this ordinance, the
county may engage the services of a qualified registered architectural or
structural engineer and the owner of the property involved shall reimburse the
county for the reasonable customary cost of such services. Where a permit is
issued, such engineering expense shall be added to the permit fee. Where no
permit is issued, such expense may be collected by civil action at law against
the owner.
(Ord. 14-103, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
CHAPTER 151: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 152: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 153: SWIMMING POOLS
Editor’s note:
   Swimming pools are regulated by the County Zoning Ordinance. See
Chapter 155.
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Legal Framework
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Effective date
   
154.003   Authority
   
154.004   Applicability
   
154.005   Purposes
   
154.006   Minimum requirements; compliance with other applicable regulations
   
154.007   Minimum standards
   
154.008   Conflicting provisions
   
154.009   Severability
General Rules of Language and Interpretation
   
154.020   Meanings and intent
   
154.021   Tenses and usage
   
154.022   Conjunctions
   
154.023   Fractions
   
154.024   Headings and illustrations
   
154.025   References to other regulations
   
154.026   Current versions and citations
   
154.027   Lists and examples
   
154.028   Delegation of authority
   
154.029   Public officials and agencies
   
154.030   Commentaries
   
154.031   Definitions
Transitional Provisions
   
154.045   Applications submitted before the effective date
   
154.046   Final plats approved before the effective date
   
154.047   Violations continue
   
154.048   Applications submitted on or after the effective date
Improvements Generally
   
154.060   Construction
   
154.061   Improvements required
   
154.062   Completion of improvements
   
154.063   Subdivision guarantees
   
154.064   As-built plans
   
154.065   Acceptance of dedication, improvements
   
154.066   Subdivision warranty
   
154.067   Construction and inspection of improvements
   
154.068   Property owners associations
General Design Standards and Guidelines
   
154.080   Applicable regulations and policies
   
154.081   Traffic movement and pedestrian circulation
   
154.082   Appearance
   
154.083   Open space
   
154.084   Natural hazards
   
154.085   Natural and cultural resources
   
154.086   Public sites
Lots and Blocks
   
154.100   Lot arrangement
   
154.101   Lot area and dimensions generally
   
154.102   Outlots
   
154.103   Street frontage
   
154.104   Side lot line orientation
   
154.105   General arrangement and layout of blocks
   
154.106   Block dimensions
   
154.107   Crosswalks
Streets
   
154.120   General arrangement and layout
   
154.121   State Department of Transportation standards
   
154.122   Street classifications
   
154.123   Private streets
   
154.124   Layout and alignment
   
154.125   Intersections
   
154.126   Access control
   
154.127   Reserve strips
   
154.128   Alleys
   
154.129   Half streets
   
154.130   Cul-de-sacs
   
154.131   Temporary T-turnarounds
   
154.132   Rights-of-way and pavement width
   
154.133   Curb and gutter
   
154.134   Improvements to and additional right-of-way for existing streets
   
154.135   Grades
   
154.136   Horizontal curves
   
154.137   Vertical curves
   
154.138   Reverse curves
   
154.139   Pavement material and construction
   
154.140   County highway entrances; curb and gutter and acceleration/
deceleration lanes
   
154.141   Guard rails
   
154.142   Street names
   
154.143   Street signs
   
154.144   Streetlights; where required
Sidewalks and Trails
   
154.155   When required
   
154.156   Width
   
154.157   Barrier-free ramps
   
154.158   Materials and construction
Easements
   
154.170   Utility easements
   
154.171   Drainage easements
   
154.172   Obstructions
   
154.173   Screen planting easements
Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater
   
154.185   Water supply
   
154.186   Wastewater
   
154.187   Stormwater management
Erosion and Sedimentation Control
   
154.200   Required
Parks
   
154.215   Parkland dedication
   
154.216   Interior parks
Landscaping
   
154.230   Street rights-of-way
   
154.231   Parkway or front yard trees
   
154.232   Screening
   
154.233   Landscape material
   
154.234   Landscape placement
   
154.235   Installation standards
General Provisions For Conservation Design Option
   
154.250   Purpose/description
   
154.251   General design principles
Determining Maximum Development Potential
   
154.265   Maximum number of dwelling units allowed
   
154.266   Yield plan
   
154.267   Yield formula
   
154.268   Density bonuses; calculations
   
154.269   Lot area and dimensional standards
Open Space
   
154.280   Determining minimum open space requirements
   
154.281   Use, location and design of open space generally
   
154.282   Special incentives for certain open space features
   
154.283   Limited credit for certain open space features
   
154.284   Ownership and management of open space
   
154.285   Legal instrument for permanent protection
   
154.286   Declaration of consent for maintenance special service area
Overview of Subdivision Approval Process
   
154.300   Exempt land divisions
   
154.301   Minor subdivisions
   
154.302   Major subdivisions
Common Provisions
   
154.315   Form of application
   
154.316   Application filing fees
   
154.317   Application completeness, accuracy and sufficiency
   
154.318   Application processing cycles
   
154.319   Burden of proof or persuasion
   
154.320   Conditions of approval
Pre-Application Meetings
   
154.335   Intent
   
154.336   Application filing
   
154.337   Application requirements
   
154.338   Distribution of application; scheduling of meeting
   
154.339   Pre-application meeting
Preliminary Plats
   
154.350   Intent
   
154.351   Applicability
   
154.352   Pre-application meetings
   
154.353   Application filing
   
154.354   Responsibility for preparation
   
154.355   Review and report; Chief Subdivision Engineer
   
154.356   Review and recommendation; Planning and Zoning Commission
   
154.357   Final action; Plat Committee
   
154.358   Approval criteria
   
154.359   Effect of approval
   
154.360   Phasing
   
154.361   Lapse of approval
Improvement Plans
   
154.375   Intent
   
154.376   Timing
   
154.377   Responsibility for preparation
   
154.378   Application filing
   
154.379   Review and final decision; Chief Subdivision Engineer
   
154.380   Construction schedule
   
154.381   Timing of improvements
   
154.382   Subdivision guarantees
   
154.383   Development in phases
   
154.384   Digital files
Final Plats
   
154.395   Intent
   
154.396   Prerequisites to final plat approval
   
154.397   Application filing
   
154.398   Review and recommendation; Chief Subdivision Engineer
   
154.399   Review and action; Plat Committee
   
154.400   Approval criteria
   
154.401   Notice of disapproval
   
154.402   Effect of approval
   
154.403   Lapse of approval
   
154.404   Digital files
Vacations
   
154.415   Intent
   
154.416   Authority to file vacation application
   
154.417   Review and approval process
   
154.418   Review and approval criteria
   
154.419   Liability
   
154.420   Recordation
   
154.421   Effect of vacation
Waivers and Modifications
   
154.435   Applicability
   
154.436   Minor waivers or modifications
   
154.437   Major waivers or modifications
Appeals of Administrative Decisions
   
154.450   Applicability; authorized appeals
   
154.451   Right to appeal
   
154.452   Application filing
   
154.453   Plat Committee review
   
154.454   County Board action
Review and Decision-Making Bodies
   
154.465   Summary of review and decision-making roles
   
154.466   County Board
   
154.467   Plat Committee
   
154.468   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
154.469   Planning and Zoning Division of the County Land Use Department
   
154.470   Chief Subdivision Engineer
   
154.471   County Highway Engineer or Road District Commissioner
   
154.472   County Health Department
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Typical Road Cross Sections
   
Appendix B:   Entrances
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   The official title of this chapter is the Subdivision Ordinance of Will
County, Illinois. For convenience, it is referred to throughout as this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.002 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective upon date of execution by all necessary
governmental entities.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.003 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations
imposed by state law, expressly including the statutory authority conferred by
ILCS Chs. 55 and 765.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.004 APPLICABILITY.
   The regulations of this chapter apply to any subdivision of land made within
the unincorporated area of the county, as provided by Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.005 PURPOSES.
   This chapter is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   Protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general
welfare;
   (B)   Implementing adopted plans and policies, specifically the County Land
Resource Management Plan;
   (C)   Enhancing residents’ quality of life;
   (D)   Promoting environmentally responsible development practices;
   (E)   Conserving, protecting and enhancing property values;
   (F)   Facilitating the provision of adequate public facilities and
improvements;
   (G)   Maintaining a range of housing choices and options;
   (H)   Providing for orderly growth and development;
   (I)   Safeguarding the public against flood damage, soil erosion and
sedimentation;
   (J)   Prescribing reasonable rules and regulations governing subdividing and
platting;
   (K)   Establishing clear and efficient procedures for the preparation,
submission, approval and recordation of subdivision plats; and
   (L)   Providing remedies for violations and reasonable means of enforcing
the chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.006 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are the minimum requirements deemed
necessary to carry out the chapter’s stated purpose and intent.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of the chapter, all uses and
development must comply with all other applicable municipal, county, state and
federal regulations.
   (C)   All references in the chapter to other municipal, county, state or
federal regulations are for informational purposes only and do not constitute a
complete list of the regulations. These references do not imply any
responsibility for the county to enforce municipal, state or federal
regulations unless they are required to do so by law.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.007 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The regulations and standards of this chapter are to be considered the
minimum requirements for subdivisions and subdivision improvements.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.008 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflicts with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the
more restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted by law. The
more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or more
stringent controls.
   (B)   Conflicts with other county regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the more
restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted by law. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or more
stringent controls.
   (C)   Conflicts with private agreements and covenants. This chapter is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. The county does not
enforce or maintain a record of private agreements.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.009 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be deemed severed from
the chapter, and in no way affects the validity of the remainder of the
chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
GENERAL RULES OF LANGUAGE AND INTERPRETATION
§ 154.020 MEANINGS AND INTENT.
   The language of the chapter must be read literally. Regulations are no more
or less strict than stated. Words defined in §
154.031 have the specific meaning assigned, unless the context expressly
indicates another meaning. Words that are not defined in §
154.031 have the meaning given in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster’s
Unabridged Dictionary.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.021 TENSES AND USAGE.
   (A)   Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse
is also true.
   (C)   The words MUST, WILL, SHALL and MAY NOT are mandatory.
   (D)   The word MAY is permissive, and SHOULD is advisory, not mandatory or
required.
   (E)   When used with numbers, “up to X”, “not more than X” and “a maximum of
X” all include X.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.022 CONJUNCTIONS.
   Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, conjunctions have the
following meanings.
   (A)   AND. Indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
   (B)   OR. Indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.023 FRACTIONS.
   The following rules apply to factional numbers unless otherwise expressly
stated.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. When a regulation is expressed in terms of a
minimum requirement, any fractional result of 0.5 or more must be rounded up to
the next consecutive whole number. For example, if a minimum requirement
calling for one tree to be provided for every 30 linear feet of frontage is
applied to a 50-foot dimension, the resulting fraction of 1.67 is rounded up to
two required trees.
   (B)   Maximum limits. When a regulation is expressed in terms of maximum
limits, any fractional result will be rounded down to the next lower whole
number. For example, if a maximum limit of one dwelling unit for every 5,000
square feet is applied to a 13,750 square foot lot, the resulting fraction of
2.75 is rounded down to two allowed dwelling units.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.024 HEADINGS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
   Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only
and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this chapter. In case
of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter,
and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text controls.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.025 REFERENCES TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All references in the chapter to other county, state or federal
regulations are for informational purposes only, and do not constitute a
complete list of the regulations.
   (B)   These references do not imply any responsibility by the county for
enforcement of county, state or federal regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.026 CURRENT VERSIONS AND CITATIONS.
   (A)   All references to regulations, plans and studies refer to the most
current version and citation for those regulations, unless otherwise expressly
stated.
   (B)   When the referenced documents have been repealed and not replaced by
other regulations, plans or studies, chapter requirements for compliance will
be interpreted as applying to the last adopted version of the referenced
regulation, plan or study.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.027 LISTS AND EXAMPLES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items or examples that
use “including”, “such as” or similar terms are intended to provide examples
only.
   (B)   They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.028 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another
officer or employee of the county to perform an act or duty, that provision
will be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate
that responsibility to others over whom they have authority.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.029 PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND AGENCIES.
   All employees, public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are
made are those of the county unless otherwise expressly stated.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.030 COMMENTARIES.
   Commentaries are sometimes included in the chapter as a means of clarifying
certain provisions or providing supplemental information. Text marked as
“Commentary” has no regulatory effect. It is intended solely as a guide for
administrative officials and the public. Commentaries may be added to the
chapter by the County Board or the County Board’s Plat Committee without the
need for a formal ordinance amendment.
Commentary:
   When commentaries are provided, they will appear in this manner.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views and/or decrease noise.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets,
railway rights-of-way, waterways or limits of subdivision.
   BOARD. The County Board of Will County.
   BUFFER. A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as
plants, berms, fences or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen
incompatible land uses from each other.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls for the
shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel; and when
separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each
portion of the building shall be deemed as a separate building.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The minimum distance required to be provided by the
County Zoning Ordinance between a street right-of-way or the center of the
street in noted situations and the nearest supporting member of any structure
on the lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2771.jpg]
 
   CLUBHOUSE. A building used year-round that meets all applicable building
codes for a commercial structure that is owned and operated by the property
owner’s association to hold events and other activities by residents of the
subdivision.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets,
rights-of-way and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents of a planned unit development. COMMON OPEN SPACE may
contain structures for recreational use.
   CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
      (1)   A legal agreement between a landowner and a public agency or not-
for-profit conservation organization that permanently restricts current and
future uses of a property. It is a recorded easement that restricts use of the
land for all future owners of the property.
      (2)   The CONSERVATION EASEMENT AREA is monitored by the holder of the
easement who enforces the restrictions of the easement. Funding for monitoring
and enforcement of the CONSERVATION EASEMENT is required and is typically
provided through an endowment to the not-for-profit organization.
      (3)   Funding for any work to be performed in the CONSERVATION EASEMENT
is typically provided by the owner of the property (the developer, individual
property owner or property owners association).
   CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. A plan prepared by an state professional engineer
that outlines the time line for construction, the construction traffic routing
to the site and any signs that are deemed appropriate.
   CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision other than one approved as a
planned unit development.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having one open end and being permanently terminated at
the other end by a vehicle turnaround.
   DEAD-END. Having only one outlet.
   DECIDUOUS. A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
   DECLARATION OF CONSENT. A declaration, in form acceptable to the Plat
Committee, executed by all record owners of property within the subdivision,
consenting to the establishment of the maintenance special service area and to
the levy of a special tax pursuant thereto for the purposes set forth herein
and containing all other consents or representations required by the County
Board.
   DEED RESTRICTION. A restriction placed on a parcel or lot that protects open
space or natural areas and restricts future development on that land. It is
recorded and applies to all future owners of the property. Typically, no
special monitoring of the property is required and enforcement of the DEED
RESTRICTION would be provided by private citizens, the property owners
association or the county. Funding for any work to be performed in a deed
restricted area is typically provided by the owner of the property (the
developer, individual property owner or property owners association).
   DENSITY, GROSS. A calculation that is used to describe the number of
dwellings that can be constructed on a parcel of land. The numerical value is
obtained by dividing the area of a parcel by the lot size.
   DESIGN STANDARDS or DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. The requirements and regulations
relating to design and layout of a subdivision.
   DETENTION BASIN. A constructed structure for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff with a controlled release rate.
   DEVELOPER. Same as SUBDIVIDER.
   DEVELOPER’S HANDBOOK. A document prepared by the County Land Use Department
for informational purposes, including but not limited to, outlining procedures
for the preparation, submittal, review and consideration of zoning map
amendment, special use permit, variance, subdivision plat and building permit
applications.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building
or any addition to a building;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use;
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of streets,
bridges or similar projects;
         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; or deposit of
solid or liquid waste; and
         (g)   Any other human activity that might change the direction, height
or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or resurfacing of streets when there is no
increase in elevation or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices
that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   DRIVEWAY. The portion of a lot used to provide access from the street to a
place of residence or business.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a parcel of land by the
general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
   EMERGENCY WARNING SIRENS. Sirens located within a subdivision or development
designed to alert residents of impending danger. EMERGENCY WARNING SIRENS in
the county are regulated in terms of location and decibel level by the County
Office of Emergency Management.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE. Geographic areas consisting of all lakes and
streams shown on the USGS quadrangle maps and adjacent shoreland buffer areas,
delineated wetlands and all wetlands shown on the wetland inventory maps and
floodplains as delineated on the official Federal Emergency Management
Administration flood insurance rate maps and any other environmental features
currently regulated or identified under federal, state or local environmental
laws or plans.
   EVERGREEN. A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round.
   FINAL ACCEPTANCE OF THE SUBDIVISION. The formal act of transference of
public improvement to a specific subdivision or development from private
ownership and control to that of the appropriate public agency pursuant to
conditions, procedures and terms set forth in this chapter. This act shall take
place after all improvements are acknowledged, completed, and accepted by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer and the Road District Commissioner.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN. Typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. FLOODPLAINS may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas and the like. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-tenth of a
foot due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage.
   FRONTAGE. The property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets (crossing or termination) measured along the line of the street; or
with a dead end street, all property abutting one side of the street measured
from the nearest intersecting street and the end of the dead end street.
   FRONTAGE, LOT. The portion of the frontage that lies between the side lot
lines of a single lot.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A public or private marginal access roadway generally
paralleling and contiguous to a street or highway and designed to promote
safety by eliminating unlimited ingress and egress to the street or highway
providing points of ingress and egress at more-or-less uniformly spaced
intervals.
   GRASSLANDS. Used to encompass all native, restored and reconstructed areas
that contain native grassland species, including prairies and savannas.
   GREENWAY SYSTEMS. A corridor of undeveloped land, as along a river or
between urban centers that is reserved for recreational use or environmental
preservation.
   HALF STREET. A street bordering one or more property lines of a subdivision
tract to which the subdivider has allocated only a portion of the ultimate and
intended street width.
   HEDGE. A landscaped barrier consisting of a continuous, dense planting of
shrubs.
   IMPROVEMENTS. All facilities constructed or erected by a subdivider to
permit and facilitate the use of lots or blocks for a principal residential,
commercial or industrial use.
   LAND CONSERVATION AGENCY. A public agency or not-for-profit conservation
organization whose primary purposes include the conservation of land, natural
areas, open space or water areas or the preservation of native plants or
animals. In the case of a not-for-profit conservation organization, it must
have adopted the land trust alliance’s standards and practices.
   LANDSCAPING. Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover,
shrubs, vines, hedges or trees) and nonliving landscape material (such as
rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences or decorative paving materials).
   LEED. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design.
   LOT. A building site shown on a plat of subdivision recorded with the
appropriate county office and identifiable by reference to a plat of
subdivision rather than by metes and bounds.
   LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the
midpoint of the rear lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2775.jpg]
 
   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two
or more streets (also known as a THROUGH LOT). For purposes of this definition,
an alley shall not be considered a street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2773.jpg]
 
   LOT LINE. A boundary line of a lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines of
a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot depth at the
minimum building setback line as established for each tract.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2777.jpg]
 
   MAINTENANCE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA (MSSA). A special service area established
pursuant to the Special Service Area Tax Law and §
154.284(D) hereof, providing for the levy of a special tax against a
subdivision in the event that a property owners association fails to adequately
carry out its duties as determined by the Plat Committee with respect to any
open space not otherwise dedicated or conveyed to a governmental agency or
body.
   MSSA APPLICATION. An application requesting the establishment of a
maintenance special service area which has been executed by all record owners
of the property within the subdivision and all electors residing within the
subdivision, requesting the establishment of a maintenance special service
area, in the form provided by the Plat Committee which, at a minimum shall set
forth:
      (1)   The name and legal status of the parties executing the SSA
application;
      (2)   The nature of the special services to be provided;
      (3)   The boundaries of the proposed maintenance special service area;
      (4)   A representation that the proposed maintenance special service area
forms a contiguous body located within the county;
      (5)   The estimated amount of funding required;
      (6)   The maximum allowable annual special tax levy;
      (7)   The stated need and local support for the proposed Maintenance
Special Service Area; and
      (8)   A representation that all record owners of property within the
proposed maintenance special service area and all electors within the proposed
maintenance special service area consent to the establishment of the proposed
maintenance special service area and waive any right to object to the
establishment of the proposed maintenance special service area under the
Special Service Area Tax Law.
   MSSA HEARING. The public hearing established by the proposing ordinance and
required pursuant to § 35 of the Special Service Area Tax Law. This does not
include the non-binding public hearing referenced in §§
154.280 through
154.286.
   MSSA OBJECTION PERIOD. The period during which owners of record of property
within the proposed maintenance special service area and electors residing
within the proposed maintenance special service area may file a petition
objecting to the formation of the proposed maintenance special service area
pursuant to § 55 of the Special Service Area Tax Law. This does not include the
non-binding public hearing referenced in §§
154.280 through
154.286.
   MANAGEMENT PLAN, INITIAL. A written plan of developed actions that provides
for proper care and establishment of natural areas during the establishment
period or ecological management required to obtain a prescribed Floristic
Quality Assessment Index (FQI).
   MANAGEMENT PLAN, LONGTERM. A written plan of developed actions to address
operation and maintenance needs of a designated area for an extended period of
time.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than five lots not
involving any new streets or extension of municipal facilities; and not
adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property; and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the County Land
Resource Management Plan or any functional element thereof, the county, chapter
or official map relating thereto.
   MINOR WAIVER OR MODIFICATION. A request to deviate from any of the
subdivision application submittal requirements of this chapter.
   MULCH. Nonliving organic and synthetic materials customarily used in
landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture.
   NATURAL PRESERVE. A contiguous area within or adjacent to a subdivision in
which native plants are maintained or planted, non-native plants are removed,
and a maintenance plan and approved funding mechanism is in place for perpetual
maintenance of the area.
   NEIGHBORHOOD POOL. A human-made body of water with a capacity of 100 people
with a variety of depths, a slide and a diving board for recreational swimming
purposes. A concrete walkway of a minimum of ten feet in width must surround
the entire pool.
   NEIGHBORHOOD SPLASH PAD. A concrete surface with water jets shooting from
one or more sides in summer in order to provide recreational relief for a
minimum of 20 children.
   OPEN SPACE. An area that is intended to provide light and air and may
include, but is not limited to, meadows, wooded areas, floodplains, wetlands
and grassed or planted waterways, and that is restricted from further
development by appropriate easements or deed restrictions.
   OPEN SPACE (PRIVATE). An area labeled as private on a plat of subdivision
that is intended to provide light and air and may include, but is not limited
to, meadows, wooded areas, floodplains, wetlands and grassed or planted
waterways, and that is restricted from further development by appropriate
easements or deed restrictions.
   OPEN SPACE (PUBLIC). An area labeled as public on a plat of subdivision that
is intended to provide light and air and may include, but is not limited to,
meadows, wooded areas, floodplains, wetlands and grassed or planted waterways,
and that is restricted from further development by appropriate easements or
deed restrictions.
   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A deciduous tree planted primarily for its ornamental value
or for screening purposes; tends to be smaller at maturity than a shade tree.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2779.jpg]
 
   OUTLOT. A platted lot which is intended as open space or other use that is
held in common ownership by a property owners association or which is
transferred to a public agency or utility.
   PARCEL. A lot, tract or any other piece of land.
   PATHWAYS. May be paved or unpaved, and is physically separated from
motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and is either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent tract or easement. Multi-use
path activities may include walking, hiking, jogging, horseback riding,
bicycling and roller skating.
   PAVILION. A structure found in a common open space area that utilizes a
solid floor of concrete material and has a sheltered roof. The structure must
provide electrical connections for neighborhood gatherings and be able to
accommodate 200 people seated.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land developed under the planned
development procedure of the County Zoning Ordinance (§
   PLAT. A subdivision as it is represented as a formal document by drawing and
writing.
   PLAT COMMITTEE. The committee of the County Board that has primary authority
for reviewing and taking action on subdivision plat applications.
   PROPOSING ORDINANCE. An ordinance proposing the establishment of a
maintenance special service area which also sets forth a date and form of
notice for the SSA hearing
   SCREENING. Decorative fencing or evergreen vegetation maintained for the
purpose of concealing from view the area behind the fencing or evergreen
vegetation.
   SHADE TREE. Usually a deciduous tree, rarely an evergreen, planted primarily
for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2781.jpg]
 
   SHRUB. A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems
from the ground or small branches near the ground; may be deciduous or
evergreen.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2783.jpg]
 
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR PERMIT. A plan prepared by a state registered
professional engineer that shows the method, control and implementation of
erosion measures, storm runoff and/or grading of lands for the construction of
improvements and shall be in compliance with the County Zoning Ordinance (see §
9 of the County Zoning Ordinance).
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to flooding
from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other identified channel
or ponding, and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate
map as Zone A, A0, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH with existing elevations less than the
BFE (base flood elevation).
   SPECIAL SERVICE AREA TAX LAW. ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   SPECIAL USE. A specific use of land or building or both, subject to special
provisions and that because of its unique characteristics cannot be properly
classified as a permitted use under the County Zoning Ordinance.
   STEEP SLOPE. Consist of all land areas with a grade at or exceeding 25%.
   STREET. An area that primarily serves or is intended to serve as a vehicular
and pedestrian access for the public to abutting land or to other streets. The
word STREET refers to the width of the street right-of-way or easement, and
will not be considered as the width of the roadway or paving or other
improvement on the street right-of-way. The term STREET includes the following
commonly used terms AVENUE, ROAD, DRIVE, CIRCLE, LANE, BOULEVARD or WAY.
   STREET, PRIVATE. An area that primarily serves or is intended to serve as a
vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting land or to other streets that is
not and will not be dedicated to public use and that is owned and maintained by
the property owners who use it.
   SUBDIVIDER. Same as DEVELOPER. The owner, or any other person, firm or
corporation, authorized by the owner, undertaking proceedings under the
provisions of these regulations for the purpose of subdividing land.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of a parcel of land into two or more parts, any one of
which is less than five acres for the purpose of transfer of ownership or
possession, or building development, or any division of land where new easement
of access or a new street is created, including, but not be limited to, the
MSSA. The term also includes any division of land that attempts to avoid the
requirements of this chapter. Where appropriate to the content, the term shall
relate to the process of both subdivision and the development of land, to the
land subdivided and/or developed, and shall include a resubdivision.
      (2)   The following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
         (a)   A division of land which may be ordered or approved by a court
or affected by testamentary or intestate provisions;
         (b)   Conveyances of land or interest therein for use as right-of-way
for railroad or other public utility facilities and other pipelines which do
not involve any new streets or easements of access;
         (c)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of
adjoining and contiguous land if additional lots are not thereby created, and
the land from which the parcel is sold or exchanged is not reduced below the
minimum size required by this chapter or other applicable law or ordinance;
         (d)   The division of land into tracts or parcels of five acres or
more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
         (e)   The sale is of a single lot of less than five acres from a
larger tract, the dimensions and configurations of the larger tract having been
determined on October 1, 1973, and no sale prior to this sale of any lot or
lots from the larger tract have taken place since October 1, 1973, and a survey
of the single lot has been made by a registered land surveyor;
         (f)   A conveyance made to correct errors in prior conveyances;
         (g)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with public use;
         (h)   The conveyance of land owned by railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access; and
         (i)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
   TRAIL. A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians and cyclists
using non-motorized bicycles.
   TRAIL (PRIVATE). A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians and
cyclists using non-motorized bicycles designated as private on the plat of
subdivision.
   TRAIL (PUBLIC). A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians and
cyclists using non-motorized bicycles designated as public on the plat of
subdivision.
   TREE. A large, woody plant having one of several self-supporting stems or
trunks and numerous branches. May be classified as deciduous or evergreen.
   TURNAROUND. An area at the closed end of a dead-end street or cul-de-sac
within which vehicles may reverse their direction without any backing up.
   UNDERSTORY. Assemblages of natural low-level woody, herbaceous and ground
cover species that exist in the area below the canopy of the trees.
   WETLAND. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances
do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions.
   WETLAND, REGULATED. A wetland that is subject to development restrictions
imposed by any government agency, including the county.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.045 APPLICATIONS SUBMITTED BEFORE THE EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Complete applications that are pending approval before the effective date
must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the chapter in effect
immediately before the effective date. Incomplete applications filed before the
effective date will not be reviewed until they are complete. Once complete, the
application must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the subdivision
regulations in effect at the time that the application is deemed complete.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.046 FINAL PLATS APPROVED BEFORE THE EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Any development for which a final plat was approved before the effective
date, may be completed in conformance with the approved final plat and other
applicable permits and conditions applicable at the time the original final
plat was approved, even if the development does not fully comply with
provisions of this chapter. If construction is not commenced and diligently
pursued within the time allowed under the original final plat approval or any
extension granted, then the development must be constructed, completed and
occupied only in accordance with the standards of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.047 VIOLATIONS CONTINUE.
   Any violation of the previous chapter will continue to be a violation under
this chapter and be subject to penalties and enforcement under §
154.999. If the use, development, construction or other activity that was a
violation under the previous ordinance complies with the express terms of this
chapter, enforcement action will cease, except to the extent of collecting
penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date specified in §
154.002. The adoption of this chapter does not affect nor prevent any pending
or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous
ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in §
154.002.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.048 APPLICATIONS SUBMITTED ON OR AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All development applications completed on or after the effective date, must
be reviewed under the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY
§ 154.060 CONSTRUCTION.
   All improvements covered by this chapter must be constructed in accordance
with, and materials used must be in compliance with the State Department of
Transportation’s (IDOT’s) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, including Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions, IDOT’s Bureau of Design and Environment Manual and IDOT’s Highway
Standards, and/or Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in
Illinois.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.061 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Developers (subdividers) are responsible for the construction,
installation and maintenance of the following improvements in accordance with
the standards of this chapter in addition to any applicable federal, state,
county or municipal standards:
      (1)   All streets within the subdivision and improvements to existing
streets required for safe and adequate access to the subdivision as may be
required by this chapter;
      (2)   Street signs;
      (3)   Sidewalks and pedestrian facilities;
      (4)   Water supply and wastewater systems, other than individual wells
and individual sewage disposal systems;
      (5)   Surface drainage, storm sewers and drainage easements;
      (6)   Stormwater management devices and easements;
      (7)   Erosion and sedimentation control devices;
      (8)   Utilities and utility easements;
      (9)   Survey monuments (at all lot corners and points of curvature in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205 (Plat Act));
      (10)   Street lights;
      (11)   Landscaping; and
      (12)   Any other on- or off-site improvements required by this subchapter
or required at the time of plat approval.
   (B)   If the subdivider files a final plat for only a portion of the
subdivision for which a preliminary plat was approved, the improvements
required to be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with that
final plat must be those improvements that the Chief Subdivision Engineer deems
necessary to serve the lots shown on the final plat.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.062 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   A final plat may not be approved until:
      (1)   All required improvements have been completed; or
      (2)   A subdivision guarantee has been provided in accordance with §
154.063.
   (B)   An improvement will be deemed completed only after the appropriate
public agency certifies that the improvement has been installed in accordance
with the approved final plat and improvement plan. In lieu of certification
from a public agency, the Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized to accept
certification from the applicant’s registered professional engineer that the
improvements have been installed in accordance with all applicable standards.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.063 SUBDIVISION GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Purpose. Subdivision guarantees are required for the purpose of
ensuring that developers properly install all required subdivision improvements
in a timely manner, in accordance with approved plats and improvement plans.
Subdivision guarantees must be posted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §
5-1123; a letter of credit is the preferred method of guarantee.
   (B)   Timing. Subdivision guarantees must be posted before final plat
approval.
   (C)   Term.
      (1)   The term of a subdivision guarantee may not exceed two years. A
filing fee in the amount of $50 or 0.1% of the total subdivision guarantee,
whichever is greater, must be paid by the developer to file the initial
subdivision guarantee.
      (2)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized to allow up to two
extensions of the term for no more than one additional year per extension. No
extension may be granted until the developer has provided and the Chief
Subdivision Engineer has approved a revised total cost of the remaining
estimated construction, engineering, surveying and fees for the required public
improvements, plus 25% of the original completion guarantee. Extension
requests, if granted, must be accompanied by an extension fee equal to:
         (a)   Five percent of the remaining guarantee for the first extension;
and
         (b)   Ten percent of the remaining guarantee for the second (final)
extension.
   (D)   Form and amount of subdivision guarantee.
      (1)   Subdivision guarantees must be in the form of cash escrow, a letter
of credit from a local bank or local savings and loan association or other
financial security approved by the county. The subdivision guarantee must be
conditioned upon the subdivision of all work necessary to complete the required
subdivision improvements within the time period specified at the time of
preliminary plat or improvement plan approval.
      (2)   The amount of the subdivision guarantee must equal at least 125% of
the estimated cost of all required improvements, including project management
costs.
Commentary:
   Subdivision guarantees must include all improvement costs, including right-
of-way improvements, storm sewer system, grading of overflow swales through the
subdivision, stormwater detention facilities, the cost of protection and repair
of existing field tiles, sanitary sewer and/or water main extensions, erosion
control, stake out of all lots with iron pipe at all lot corners and the cost
of required off-site improvements.
      (3)   The estimated cost of required improvements, including project
management costs, must be itemized by improvement type and certified by the
applicant’s registered professional engineer. Cost estimates must be based on
industry norms within northeastern Illinois.
   (E)   Default.
      (1)   The subdivision guarantee shall be considered in default and may be
foreclosed upon by the Chief Subdivision Engineer if the developer:
         (a)   Fails to complete the improvements in accordance with the
approved improvement plans and construction specifications;
         (b)   Fails to complete the improvements within the time frame
prescribed in this subdivision chapter;
         (c)   Performs the work unsuitably, as determined by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer, the Road District Commissioner or other affected agency;
         (d)   Fails to provide a subdivision warranty in an acceptable form to
the county and Road District Commissioner; or
         (e)   Fails to provide an extension for the subdivision guarantee as
prescribed in this subdivision chapter.
      (2)   When a subdivision guarantee is found to be in default, the Chief
Subdivision Engineer, following approval by the Plat Committee, shall give
notice by registered mail to the developer and to the issuer of the subdivision
guarantee of the County’s intent to foreclose on the subdivision guarantee.
      (3)   If upon receipt of the notice of default, the developer fails to
honor the terms and conditions specified in the notice, the Chief Subdivision
Engineer shall deliver a demand for payment on the subdivision guarantee. The
foreclosed funds shall be delivered to the County Treasurer for deposit into an
account designated for the funds.
      (4)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer shall utilize these foreclosed funds
to complete and/or maintain the improvements in accordance with the approved
improvement plans. All costs, including the county’s administrative expenses
associated with causing compliance, shall be deducted from the funds on deposit
with the County Treasurer.
      (5)   When compliance with the terms of the subdivision guarantee has
been achieved, the Chief Subdivision Engineer, following approval by the Plat
Committee, shall authorize the County Treasurer to return to the developer or
approved beneficiary of the funds all remaining funds from the subdivision
guarantee, if any.
   (F)   Release of subdivision guarantee.
      (1)   Once the conditions of the subdivision guarantee have been
completed to the satisfaction of the appropriate agencies and any required
subdivision warranty has been provided, the guarantee may be released.
      (2)   All improvements must be completed in accordance with §
154.062(B). No financial guarantee may be released until all required
certifications of completion have been provided.
      (3)   At least 60 days before the expected release of a subdivision
guarantee, the developer’s engineer must submit:
         (a)   A letter to the Chief Subdivision Engineer stating that they
have inspected the subdivision and that all improvements are complete in
accordance with the improvements plans;
Commentary:
   This will allow adequate time for inspection of the improvements.
         (b)   A letter from the Road District Commissioner accepting
improvements for inclusion into the township system of the streets and drainage
facilities;
         (c)   A letter of acceptance by the appropriate utility agency
operating the sanitary sewer and water distribution facilities;
         (d)   Two sets of “as-built” drawings of the subdivision improvements,
certified by the developer’s engineer; and
         (e)   A letter of acceptance of improvements on other lands by the
owner of the property.
      (4)   If improvements are not complete at the time of a requested
inspection, the subdivider will be responsible for payment of a re-inspection
fee, in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of re-
inspection.
   (G)   Partial reduction of subdivision guarantee.
      (1)   Subdivision guarantee may be amended to reflect a reduced amount,
provided that:
         (a)   The partial improvements are acknowledged by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer, Road District Commissioner and appropriate utility
agency; and
         (b)   A revised current estimate of the cost to complete the work is
submitted by the developer’s engineer to the Chief Subdivision Engineer and
Road District Commissioner.
      (2)   The revised estimate must show all the original estimated items
with the appropriate items reduced.
      (3)   Twenty-five percent of the original cost estimate must be added to
the revised estimate to determine the amount of the amended subdivision
guarantee.
      (4)   If, in the opinion of the Chief Subdivision Engineer, the current
amount of the subdivision guarantee is not adequate to cover the cost of the
uncompleted work, the subdivision guarantee must be amended to reflect an
increased amount.
      (5)   The revised estimate must be accompanied by a letter from the
developer’s engineer stating that they have inspected the improvements and that
they are complete in accordance with the improvements plans.
      (6)   A reduction of subdivision guarantee does not imply acceptance of
those improvements included in that reduction; acceptance of improvements does
not occur until all improvements are complete and inspected by Chief
Subdivision Engineer and Road District Commissioner and the subdivision
guarantee is released as outlined in division (F) above.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009; Ord. 11-87, passed 3-17-
2011)
§ 154.064 AS-BUILT PLANS.
   After completion of all public improvements, and at least 60 days before the
final acceptance of the subdivision, the developer must submit plans showing
the actual location and elevation of all valves, manholes, stubs, services,
sewer and water mains, storm sewer with rim and invert elevations, elevation of
overflow routes in critical locations, street lights and wiring, storm sewers,
centerline of streets, ditches, overflow routes, detention/retention basins
(including notations of any deviations from design) and other facilities as the
Chief Subdivision Engineer requires. These plans must be printed on 24 inch by
36 inch paper and clearly labeled “as-built” and provided in a digital form (on
CD or other approved media) utilizing the latest version of AutoCAD, or other
software approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer. The plans must bear the
signature and seal of a state registered professional engineer. Submittal of
these plans is a prerequisite to final acceptance of the improvements and to
final release of the subdivision guarantee.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.065 ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION, IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The developer is solely responsible for maintenance and upkeep of all
public areas, common areas, easements and improvements until final acceptance
by the Chief Subdivision Engineer and Road District Commissioner.
   (B)   Final acceptance of the dedication of an open space or other public
area, including rights-of-way, may not occur until after improvements are
acknowledged and accepted by the Chief Subdivision Engineer and the Road
District Commissioner and proof of responsibility for the maintenance of all
community improvements is submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
   (C)   A subdivision warranty must be provided in exchange for final
acceptance, at which time the subdivision guarantee may be released upon
written notice from the Chief Subdivision Engineer to the County Clerk.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.066 SUBDIVISION WARRANTY.
   (A)   The developer must post a subdivision warranty with the Road District
Commissioner after final acceptance of the public improvements. The warranty
amount must equal at least 10% of the initial subdivision guarantee for the
improvements. Subdivision warranties must be in the format provided in the Will
County Developers’ Handbook.
   (B)   The subdivision warranty must cover a period of at least two years.
   (C)   Subdivision warranties must be in the form of cash escrow, a letter of
credit from a local bank or local savings and loan association, or other
financial security approved by the county and applicable road authority.
   (D)   Subdivision warranties are not required for improvements not contained
in and specified under the original subdivision guarantee.
   (E)   The subdivision warranty may be used to replace any faulty materials
or workmanship and warrant the integrity of the improvements during the life of
the warranty.
   (F)   At least 18 months after final acceptance of the improvements, the
developer must request an inspection of the improvements by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer and Road District Commissioner. Before release of the
warranty, the developer must perform any warranted work. The work must be
completed and inspected by Chief Subdivision Engineer and Road District
Commissioner at least 30 days before the warranty expires.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.067 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Before starting any work covered by approved improvement plans and
construction specifications, written authorization to start the work must be
obtained from the Chief Subdivision Engineer. The written authorization must be
in the form of a site development permit (application form available from Chief
Subdivision Engineer) for the subdivision.
   (B)   The site development permit must cover required public improvements,
including right-of-way, drainage improvements, floodplain/wetland requirements
and the like.
   (C)   The site development fee must be calculated based on the area within
the right-of-way, the portion of the subdivision to be utilized for stormwater
management purposes, 100-year overflow routes and any floodplain/wetland area
to be enhanced as a part of the subdivision.
   (D)   Authorization to begin work will be given upon receipt of all
necessary permits from other regulatory agencies, including all culvert permits
required when proposed new or changed subdivision streets intersect any
existing street.
   (E)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer and the appropriate Road District
Commissioner must be notified three working days before any work commences so
that appropriate inspectors may be present.
   (F)   Inspection fees for public improvements must be paid by the developer
before construction of the improvements commence.
   (G)   Any work without proper inspection will not be acknowledged.
   (H)   No funds may be released from the subdivision guarantee unless the
improvements covered by the subdivision guarantee have been inspected by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer and the Road District Commissioner.
   (I)   During the course of construction, inspection of the work must be made
by the design engineer employed by the developer to ensure compliance with the
approved improvements plans and construction specifications.
   (J)   The design engineer must provide weekly field reports to the Chief
Subdivision Engineer in a form as provided in the Will County Developers’
Handbook. These inspection reports must be signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer. The Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized to issue a
stop work order if weekly field reports are not submitted. Any delegation of
construction observation duties must be approved by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer.
   (K)   Construction of all improvements (with the exception of the final
surface course of asphalt on dedicated streets) required by this chapter must
be completed within two years of the date of final plat approval unless good
cause can be shown for granting an extension of time.
Commentary:
   Phasing of large subdivisions is encouraged so that projects can be
completed within two years. Completion of a subdivision includes required
sidewalks.
   (L)   Building permits may not be issued until all required improvements are
completed and operable, with the exception of the final surface course of
bituminous asphalt if a two-layer construction is used. The final surface
course of asphalt must be completed before acceptance of the subdivision.
   (M)   Until final acceptance of improvements by the Road District
Commissioner, the developer is solely responsible for:
      (1)   Maintaining all improvements;
      (2)   Keeping all public ways, sewers and drains free from soil, debris
and trash;
      (3)   Installing and maintaining appropriate erosion control measures;
and
      (4)   Providing for snow removal on all streets within the subdivision.
   (N)   The developer is required to provide snow removal on all streets
within the subdivision until acceptance of improvements by the Road District
Commissioner. However, if the developer does not promptly remove snow, the Road
District Commissioner may clear the snow and submit the invoice for this work
to the developer for payment. If the developer does not pay this invoice, the
subdivision guarantee may be utilized to pay the costs.
   (O)   The final lift of bituminous asphalt (surface) must be installed
within three years from the date final plat approval or when individual
buildings are completed on 80% of the lots in the subdivision, whichever comes
first. When the lift of asphalt is placed before 80% of the lots are built out,
the subdivision warranty will not expire until two years after the completion
of 80% of the lots.
   (P)   Material testing for all public improvements must comply with State
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. Load tickets and core samples may be required by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer and/or the Road District Commissioner.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.068 PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATIONS.
   (A)   Establishment. If a property owners association is assigned
responsibility for the maintenance and control of streets, drainage easements/
facilities, open space, recreational facilities or other common areas and
facilities within a subdivision, that association must have legal authority to
maintain and exercise control over the common areas and facilities, including
the power to compel contributions from residents or property owners to cover
their proportionate share of the costs associated with the maintenance of the
common areas and facilities.
   (B)   Documentation.
      (1)   Documents providing for the establishment of a property owners
association must be submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer before approval
and recordation of a final plat. The documents establishing the association
must be in a form as provided in the Will County Developers’ Handbook.
      (2)   The county’s review is limited to ensuring that the property owners
association has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the
common areas and facilities, including the power to compel contributions from
residents and property owners to cover their proportionate share of the costs
associated with the maintenance of the common areas and facilities.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
§ 154.080 APPLICABLE REGULATIONS AND POLICIES.
   Subdivisions must be designed and laid out in accordance with:
   (A)   All applicable county ordinances, including this chapter;
   (B)   The County Land Resource Management Plan and its functional elements;
   (C)   The County Zoning Ordinance; and
   (D)   Applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state and its duly
constituted agencies; and
   (E)   When a subdivision lies within one and one-half miles of the corporate
limits of a municipality having a comprehensive plan, the subdivision must also
comply with all applicable ordinances of the subject municipality.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.081 TRAFFIC MOVEMENT AND PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION.
   (A)   Subdivisions should be designed to create an integrated system of
lots, streets, trails and infrastructure that provides for efficient movement
of people, bicycles and automobiles within the subdivision and to and from
adjacent developments.
   (B)   Subdivisions should provide for the efficient movement of through
traffic by providing a completely interconnected hierarchy of streets in order
to avoid isolation of residential areas and over-reliance on federal, state and
county roadways.
   (C)   All subdivisions should be designed to provide safe and attractive
pedestrian routes to nearby commercial centers, as well as nearby public/civic,
employment and recreation uses.
   (D)   Street layouts should be uncomplicated, so that emergency services,
public services and visitors can find their way to their intended destinations.
   (E)   Subdivision designs must avoid the proliferation of private streets
and driveways with access onto major streets.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.082 APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Subdivision perimeter areas should include adequate landscaping and
buffering to protect future residents of the subdivision and adjacent
developments from adverse impacts caused by significant differences in use,
development intensity or building height.
   (B)   Lot and street designs should be designed to avoid extended distances
of back yard frontage on major streets. When back yard frontages cannot be
avoided, the Plat Committee is authorized to require additional lot depth,
additional landscaping, fences, walls or any combination of the techniques to
help reduce the negative visual and noise-related impacts associated with the
platting patterns.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2785.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.083 OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Open spaces should be integrated into and throughout subdivisions,
should be connected with one another and with open spaces in adjacent
developments, and should include trails that connect to pedestrian routes in
the subdivision and to regional trail systems.
   (B)   Open spaces anticipated for use as active or developed parks should be
located on relatively flat, well-drained terrain.
   (C)   Open spaces not anticipated for use as active or developed parks
should be located on prominent high points with significant views, or along
significant and interesting geological features or wooded areas or along
significant drainages.
   (D)   Open spaces that are anticipated to serve as trail corridors
(pedestrian, bicycle or equestrian) should be continuous with anticipated trail
corridors on adjacent properties.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.084 NATURAL HAZARDS.
   (A)   Lands subject to flooding, high water table, excessive erosion and
subsidence because of soil types or groups, water courses and other
drainageways, steep slopes or other natural hazards may not be platted for
residential or other uses in a way as to present a danger to life or property,
or to the public health, safety or general welfare.
   (B)   The recommendations of the Will County Soil Manual must be followed
with respect to the land plan and construction details of proposed
subdivisions.
   (C)   Soil borings must be made to confirm the soils map information
included in the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Soil Survey of the county. Representative
soil borings must be taken to a depth at least five feet below the lowest
proposed foundation, two feet below the lowest proposed sewer or the point of
refusal. At least one boring must be made per ten acres or more if necessary to
confirm the soil survey.
   (D)   Two copies of a soils report prepared by a qualified soil professional
must be submitted with the preliminary plat. The report must include, at a
minimum, soil classifications, water level observations, blows per foot and an
assessment of the suitability of existing soils for the proposed development.
For developments in which rain gardens, bio-infiltration, bio-swales or other
groundwater infiltration best management practices (BMPs) are proposed,
permeability data is also required.
   (E)   Developments in which structures will be constructed within, or
adjacent to floodplains, or areas prone to flooding, must comply with the
requirements of Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Technical Bulletin
10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built on Fill In or Near Special Flood Hazard
Areas Are Reasonably Safe From Flooding.
   (F)   The developer shall be required to provide and install emergency
warning sirens in subdivisions when deemed necessary following the guidelines
as set forth by the County Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.085 NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Subdivisions should be designed and laid out in a manner that creates
the least damage to the natural environment, avoids to the maximum extent
feasible, significant natural resources such as prime agricultural lands,
wooded areas and wetlands.
   (B)   Subdivisions should be designed to preserve and enhance woodlands,
water bodies, streams, rivers, hillsides and other natural resources that exist
on a site.
   (C)   Subdivisions should be designed to preserve cultural and historic
resources.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.086 PUBLIC SITES.
   Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown on an
official map of the county, local park district, forest preserve district of
the county, or of a municipality within the county is located in whole or in
part in a subdivision, appropriate public agencies and governing bodies must be
given an opportunity to negotiate the acquisition of property for the use for
one year from the date of recording of the final plat.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
LOTS AND BLOCKS
§ 154.100 LOT ARRANGEMENT.
   Lots must be laid out and arranged in a way that presents no foreseeable
difficulties in securing permits to build on the lots in compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations. Subdivisions may not contain leftover pieces,
corners or remnants of land.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.101 LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   All lots must comply with minimum depth, width and area requirements
of the County Zoning Ordinance. Lots must also comply with all requirements of
the County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance, as administered and
enforced by the County Health Department.
   (B)   The size, shape and orientation of lots must be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision, and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
   (C)   Excessive lot depth in relation to lot width is prohibited. A ratio of
two and one-half to one (depth to width) is the recommended maximum.
   (D)   Lot width must be measured at the minimum building setback line.
Minimum lot width may be reduced 10% for lots fronting on the bulb of a cul-de-
sac, provided that the lot complies with minimum area requirements of the
County Zoning Ordinance and County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance.
   (E)   The minimum depth of any lot may not be less than 90 feet, measured
from any point on the front lot line to any point on the rear lot line.
   (F)   Corner lots must be laid out to permit compliance with front building
setback requirements on all sides of the lot abutting a street.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.102 OUTLOTS.
   (A)   Any outlots intended for conveyance to a property owners association
or others must be included in the subdivision and be numbered consecutively.
   (B)   The subdivision plat and supporting documentation must designate the
intended use and ownership, as well as maintenance responsibilities for the
outlot.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.103 STREET FRONTAGE.
   (A)   All lots must front on or abut a public or private street. Alleys are
not considered streets for purposes of this provision.
Commentary:
   Private streets are allowed only if approved through the planned unit
development (PUD) approval process.
   (B)   Residential lots may not front onto state and county roadways or onto
any proposed major thoroughfare designated by the County Transportation
Framework Plan.
   (C)   (1)   Double-frontage (also known as “through” lots) lots are
prohibited except where necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation, and where a limited access highway, railroad right-
of-way, major street or similar situation exists, in which case double-frontage
lots may be allowed if a suitable landscape screen is provided in accordance
with the minimum standards of §
154.232 and placed within a non-access reservation adjacent to the right-of-
way.
      (2)   Double-frontage lots must have adequate depth to allow the
establishment of a front setback along all abutting streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2787.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.104 SIDE LOT LINE ORIENTATION.
   Side lot lines must be substantially at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines unless, in the opinion of the Chief
Subdivision Engineer, an alternative orientation will provide for a better
street and lot design.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.105 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT AND LAYOUT OF BLOCKS.
   The length, width and shape of blocks must be designed and laid out with due
regard for:
   (A)   Topographic conditions and drainage;
   (B)   Public convenience and safety;
   (C)   Allowing safe and adequate access for abutting parcels of land; and
   (D)   Proposed land use and density and intensity of development to be
served.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.106 BLOCK DIMENSIONS.
   The length, width and shapes of blocks must be appropriate for site
conditions and the type of development contemplated. A maximum block length of
660 feet is recommended, and block lengths of more than 1,500 feet are
prohibited. Blocks must have sufficient width to accommodate two tiers of lots
of appropriate depth between street lines, except that blocks accommodating one
tier of lots may be allowed, subject to the double-frontage lot requirements of
§
154.103(C).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2789.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2791.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.107 CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrian crosswalks at least ten feet in width may be required by Chief
Subdivision Engineer when blocks exceed 660 feet in width or length and
whenever deemed necessary to provide safe and adequate pedestrian circulation
or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation and other
community facilities.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
STREETS
§ 154.120 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT AND LAYOUT.
   Streets and street networks serving subdivisions must be designed and laid
out with due regard for:
   (A)   Topographic conditions and drainage;
   (B)   Public convenience and safety;
   (C)   Allowing safe and adequate access for abutting parcels of land; and
   (D)   Proposed land use and density and intensity of development to be
served by the streets.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.121 STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION STANDARDS.
   Streets must comply with the standards of this chapter and the State
Department of Transportation’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. The higher or more restrictive standard governs in the event of
conflict.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.122 STREET CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Major streets are those having inter-city or regional importance,
including all state marked routes and strategic regional arterial (SRA) routes.
Major streets must be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system
of major streets and highways.
   (B)   Secondary streets include all county highways. Secondary streets must
be properly related to special traffic-generating facilities such as schools,
churches, shopping and employment centers; to population densities; and to the
major streets into which they feed.
   (C)   Collector streets “collect” traffic from intersecting local and access
streets and move this traffic in the most direct route to major or secondary
streets. Collector streets, thus, form the intermediate link between local/
access streets and major and secondary streets in the roadway network. They
serve both a mobility and access function. Township roads are collector
streets.
   (D)   Local streets and access streets provide direct street access to lots
within subdivisions. Local and access streets must be laid out to:
      (1)   Conform as much as possible to topography;
      (2)   Discourage use by through traffic;
      (3)   Permit efficient drainage and sewer systems; and
      (4)   Require the minimum amount of street needed to provide convenient
and safe access to abutting property.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.123 PRIVATE STREETS.
   (A)   Private streets are prohibited unless expressly approved as part of a
planned unit development (PUD).
   (B)   A private street is not and may not be dedicated for public use, but
may be allowed to provide access to lots within a PUD when ownership and
maintenance of the street is guaranteed through a property owners association
established before the lots are sold.
   (C)   Private streets must be designed and constructed in accordance with
the same standards that apply to public streets unless a waiver or modification
of this requirement is approved by the County Board as a part of the County
Zoning Ordinance’s PUD approval process.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.124 LAYOUT AND ALIGNMENT.
   (A)   Streets must be laid out in conformity to street or highway plans
officially adopted by the state, county or township or any highway authority.
   (B)   If the subdivision lies within one and one- half miles of the
corporate limits of a municipality, the streets must be in conformity with the
street or highway plan officially adopted by the corporate authority of that
municipality.
   (C)   Wherever a street or highway shown on an officially adopted plan runs
through a proposed subdivision, it must be provided for in the place and with
the width indicated on the adopted plan. The Chief Subdivision Engineer is
authorized to require that the right-of-way specified on the officially adopted
plan be dedicated to the public on or as part of the final plat.
   (D)   Where streets are not a part of the official map or officially adopted
street or highway plans, the arrangement of subdivision streets must be
designed and located in proper relation to existing and proposed streets, to
the topography of the area, and to natural features such as streams, hills and
stands of trees.
   (E)   Proposed streets must be designed to coordinate with other existing or
planned streets contiguous to or within the general area of the subdivision or
within existing or future adjacent subdivisions as to location, width, grades
and drainage. Connections with existing or platted streets must be continuous
without offset.
   (F)   (1)   Stub streets must be platted, dedicated and constructed for
public use to the boundary line of the subdivision when necessary to afford
desirable and safe street access to adjoining properties.
      (2)   The following requirements apply to required stub streets.
         (a)   Stub streets must be clearly marked on plats and labeled “Future
Street Extension”. In addition, a sign must be posted on the stub street right-
of-way indicating that it is intended as a “Future Street Extension”.
         (b)   The following notation must be incorporated into any plat
showing a stub street:
This right-of-way is platted with the intent of being extended and continued in
order to provide ingress and egress to and from adjoining properties.
         (c)   Temporary T-turnarounds (§
154.131) must be provided at all stub streets.
   (G)   Where a stub street in an existing subdivision or development has been
platted to the boundary line of a proposed subdivision, it must be extended and
continued into the proposed subdivision unless a modification or waiver is
approved in accordance with the procedures of §§
154.435 through
154.437. The waiver or modification must be based on at least one of the
following findings.
      (1)   An extension would cause or contribute to a safety deficiency that
could not be corrected in a practical or economically efficient manner. In
these cases, the developer will be responsible for providing sufficient right-
of-way and constructing within that right-of-way an approved permanent
turnaround at the end of the existing stub street.
      (2)   The street right-of-way in the existing subdivision, although
platted, has not had a street constructed within it, is not contained in the
County Transportation Framework Plan, and it is unlikely that, in the
foreseeable future, a street will be so constructed. In these cases, the
developer will not be responsible for providing a permanent turnaround.
      (3)   The existence of significant environmental conditions that were not
known or adequately considered at the time the potential extension was platted.
The need for the installation of a permanent turnaround by the developer will
be determined on a case-by-case basis based on local site conditions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2793.jpg]
 
   (H)   In situations where waivers or modification to street connection
requirements are granted, an alternative means for bicycle, pedestrian or
equestrian access may be required to be provided in close proximity to the
otherwise required street based on local site conditions.
   (I)   All subdivisions of 25 or more lots must have at least two means of
ingress and egress.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.125 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Streets must be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles.
   (B)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street should
line up with existing intersections on the opposite side of the street. Street
jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2795.jpg]
 
   (C)   Intersections and driveways must be designed to comply with the vision
clearance requirements of § 8.5-6 of the County Zoning Ordinance and all
applicable requirements of the Road District Commissioner.
Commentary:
   The “vision clearance” requirements of the County Zoning Ordinance state
that “at the intersection of roads or at the point of ingress and egress onto
roads, no structure, parked vehicle or plant material shall obstruct a clear
path of motor vehicle drivers’ vision of approaching vehicles within a
triangular square determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured
75 feet equidistant from the point of intersection with the center lines of the
roads and the points of ingress and egress”.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2797.jpg]
 
   (D)   Where any street intersection will involve embankments or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer must cut or remove the ground and/or vegetation
(including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to
the extent deemed necessary to provide adequate sight distance.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.126 ACCESS CONTROL.
   (A)   Subdivision entrances for residential uses and major entrances for
commercial, industrial and institutional uses must be located a minimum
distance of 1,320 feet apart on state and county highways and arterial streets
designated by local governments, unless topography or already existing street
locations can be shown to dictate otherwise.
   (B)   Subdivision entrances for residential uses and major entrances for
commercial, industrial and institutional uses may not be located within 500
feet of an at-grade railroad crossing.
   (C)   If a subdivision borders on or contains a limited access street or
other major street, the Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized to require a
frontage road or lots that back onto the major street with a right-of-way with
a no-access reservation (See also §
154.103(C)).
   (D)   If a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the
Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized to require a frontage road located
approximately parallel to and at least one lot depth distance from each side of
the right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.127 RESERVE STRIPS.
   Right-of-way “reserve strips” or “spite strips” controlling access to
streets are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.128 ALLEYS.
   (A)   When required. Alleys must be provided in all commercial and
industrial zoning districts except that the Chief Subdivision Engineer may
waive this requirement where another definite and assured provision is made for
service access, such as off-street loading and parking consistent with, and
adequate for, the uses proposed. Alleys are allowed in residential zoning
districts.
   (B)   Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys are prohibited.
   (C)   Design and construction.
      (1)   Alleys serving commercial and industrial development must be at
least 24 feet in width.
      (2)   Alleys serving residential development must be at least 20 feet in
width.
      (3)   Alleys must be constructed in accordance with the pavement material
and construction standards that apply to local streets. See §
154.139.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.129 HALF STREETS.
   (A)   Half streets are prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with other requirements of these
regulations, and where the Chief Subdivision Engineer finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is developed.
   (B)   A minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet and a minimum pavement width
of 20 feet is required for any authorized half street.
   (C)   Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the
other half of the street must be platted and constructed within the developing
tract.
   (D)   In cases where half streets are allowed, the subdivider must grade and
improve the half street, the same as all other subdivision streets.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.130 CUL-DE-SACS.
   (A)   Cul-de-sacs may not exceed 1,200 feet in length, measured along the
center line. The County Board may approve a longer cul-de-sac length in low-
density subdivisions where no more than 15 lots will take access from the cul-
de-sac street. See the figure below.
   (B)   The closed (bulb) end of a cul-de-sac street must have a minimum
diameter of 130 feet. See the figure below.
   (C)   Cul-de-sac pavement width must comply with local street standards. The
pavement at the closed (bulb) end must be at least 100 feet in diameter
measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb in urban subdivisions and edge of
pavement to edge of pavement in rural subdivisions. Landscaping within the
middle of the cul-de-sac bulb is encouraged except when prohibited by the Road
District Commissioner. See the figure below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2799.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.131 TEMPORARY T-TURNAROUNDS.
   Temporary T-turnarounds may be required at the end of streets that are
intended for extension when a subsequent phase of subdivision is developed or
when the abutting parcel is developed. The terminus of a T-turnaround must
comply with the following minimum standards.
   (A)   The T must be at right angles to the main street.
   (B)   Each wing of the T must be at least 20 feet long, plus one-half the
main street pavement width, measured from the center of the right-of-way. See
the figure below.
   (C)   The right-of-way width must be at least as wide as the main street’s
right-of-way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2801.jpg]
 
   (D)   At the time that a street is connected or extended, temporary T-
turnarounds must be removed by the road authority or by the developer proposing
the connection or extension.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.132 RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PAVEMENT WIDTH.
   (A)   Major streets.
      (1)   Right-of-way. The minimum right- of-way width of a major street is
150 feet, unless the Chief Subdivision Engineer or road authority requires a
greater right-of-way width.
      (2)   Pavement. The Chief Subdivision Engineer or road authority is
authorized to establish minimum pavement widths and design standards for major
streets.
   (B)   Secondary streets.
      (1)   Right-of-way. The minimum right- of-way width of a secondary street
is 120 feet.
      (2)   Pavement. The Chief Subdivision Engineer or road authority is
authorized to establish minimum pavement widths and design standards for
secondary streets.
   (C)   Collector streets.
      (1)   Right-of-way. The minimum right- of-way width of a collector street
is 80 feet.
      (2)   Pavement. The minimum pavement width of a collector street or any
street serving industrial or commercial development is 36 feet (excluding curb
and gutter).
   (D)   Local streets.
      (1)   Right-of-way. The minimum right- of-way width of a local street is
66 feet.
      (2)   Pavement. The minimum pavement width of a local street in a
subdivision with open drainage is 24 feet. The minimum pavement width for
subdivisions with curb and gutter is 28 feet (excluding curb and gutter).
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.133 CURB AND GUTTER.
   (A)   Concrete curb and gutter must be provided along the outside edge of
all street pavements in all nonresidential subdivisions and in all residential
subdivisions where the average lot width at the front lot line is less than 120
feet; and/or where the degree of slope exceeds 5%.
   (B)   Curb and gutter must be Type B-6.12, in accordance with State
Department of Transportation (IDOT) highway standards or standards acceptable
to the appropriate Road District Commissioner. See the figure below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2803.jpg]
 
   (C)   The back of curbs must be depressed or cut in accordance with IDOT
standards, subject to the approval of the Chief Subdivision Engineer when the
final location for access to the public roadway for driveways, sidewalks and
other paths is determined.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.134 IMPROVEMENTS TO AND ADDITIONAL RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR EXISTING STREETS.
   (A)   All existing public and/or dedicated streets abutting a subdivision
must be improved to a standard established by the highway authority for the
subject street.
   (B)   If the property abutting a county highway is to be subdivided or
access is being requested to a county highway, the developer/owner must
dedicate, at no cost to the county, sufficient land area to satisfy the county
road’s right-of-way requirement, including corner clips required by the County
Highway Department and/or applicable highway authorities.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.135 GRADES.
   Streets must have a minimum grade of 0.5% and a maximum grade of no more
than 6%.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.136 HORIZONTAL CURVES.
   Horizontal curves measured along street centerlines must comply with the
following minimum radii.
   (A)   Major and secondary streets. The County Highway Engineer is authorized
to establish the minimum radius of horizontal curves on major and secondary
streets.
   (B)   Collector streets. Horizontal curves on collector streets must have
minimum radius of 300 feet.
   (C)   Local streets. Horizontal curves on local streets must have minimum
radius of 200 feet.
   (D)   Other streets. Horizontal curves on streets other than major,
secondary, collector or local streets must have minimum radius of 150 feet.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.137 VERTICAL CURVES.
   Vertical curve lengths must comply with IDOT’s Bureau of Design &
Environment Manual.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.138 REVERSE CURVES.
   A tangent of at least 100 feet in length must be introduced between reverse
curves on local streets. A tangent of at least 300 feet in length must be
introduced between reverse curves along all other (nonlocal) streets.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.139 PAVEMENT MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Asphalt pavement must comply with IDOT Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction for bituminous concrete binder and surface course
superpave and any special provisions applicable to IDOT District 1 standard
requirements.
   (B)   All subdivisions must have pavement designed to the soil conditions
actually found on the site in accordance with current IDOT design policy.
   (C)   Collector and local streets must comply with the cross sections of
Appendix A. On major streets, secondary streets, county highways and
developments intended for industrial or commercial use, projected traffic data
and special uses must be submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer for
evaluation, who has the authority to require additional width and thickness of
pavements.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.140 COUNTY HIGHWAY ENTRANCES; CURB AND GUTTER AND ACCELERATION/
DECELERATION LANES.
   County highway entrances must be constructed with curb and gutter returns
and acceleration and deceleration lanes, as specified by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer when proposed in conjunction with a subdivision, and must meet the
requirements of the County Freeway and Highway Access Regulation Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.141 GUARD RAILS.
   Steel plate beam guard rails must be installed in accordance with IDOT
standards along the shoulder of any street where roadside hazards exist.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.142 STREET NAMES.
   Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing
streets must bear the name of the existing streets; however, no other streets
may bear names that duplicate, or nearly duplicate so as to be confused with
the names of existing streets, within the same township, fire protection
district, police protection district. All street names must comply with the
Street Numbering and Street Sign Ordinance and be approved by the County 9-1-
1 Emergency Services office.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.143 STREET SIGNS.
   Street signs, identifying the street names shown on the approved final plat,
must be provided at all intersections and as otherwise required by the
applicable highway authority. Street signs must be installed in accordance with
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, published by the United States
Department of Transportation (Federal Highway Administration). Street signs
must be of a type approved by the applicable road authority and must be
installed at the northeast corner of each intersection.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.144 STREETLIGHTS; WHERE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Streetlights must be installed at all intersections and at closer
intervals if the gross density of the subdivision is three dwelling units per
acre or more.
   (B)   Streetlights must be of a type, style and spacing as required by the
applicable road authority.
   (C)   The subdivider must arrange for and pay all installation costs
required for erection of required streetlights.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS
§ 154.155 WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   Sidewalks or multi-purpose trails are required in all nonresidential
subdivisions and in all residential subdivisions that have an average lot width
of less than 120 feet.
   (B)   The requirement to provide sidewalks may be satisfied by:
      (1)   Installing concrete sidewalks one foot off the front property line
on both sides of subdivision streets; or
      (2)   If approved by the Plat Committee, by installing a pedestrian/
multi-use trail within a greenway that provides direct access to abutting lots.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.156 WIDTH.
   (A)   Sidewalks must be at least four feet in width, unless a greater width
is required by the Chief Subdivision Engineer or Road District Commissioner
based on anticipated usage.
   (B)   Trails must comply with the minimum width and construction
requirements of any applicable trail or bike plan on file with the County Land
Use Department.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.157 BARRIER-FREE RAMPS.
   Barrier-free ramps constructed in accordance with IDOT standards are
required at all intersections and street crossings where sidewalks or
pedestrian trails are provided.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.158 MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   All sidewalks must be air entrained (5-8% air content) portland cement
concrete and minimum 3,500 psi. Sidewalk pavement must be at least five inches
thick over five inches of grade CA-16 gravel or compacted CA-6 coarse
aggregate, or as required by the applicable road authority. Sidewalks must be
constructed in accordance with the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction.
   (B)   All trails must comply with the construction standards of a
comprehensive trail or bike plan on file with the County Land Use Department or
with IDOT standards. Regional trails must be open to and accessible by the
general public.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
EASEMENTS
§ 154.170 UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility easements must be provided in the rear of all residential
lots. The Chief Subdivision Engineer is also authorized to require easements
along front and side lot lines.
   (B)   Utility easement must be at least ten feet in width and normally
centered upon lot lines.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.171 DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where a subdivision contains a watercourse, drainageway, channel,
stream, creek, pond, embankment, floodplain or wetland, these features and any
required buffer area (as described in the County Water Resource Ordinances for
Unincorporated Will County) must be placed in an appropriate easement or deed
restriction to preserve the stormwater management function of the drainage
feature and protect the natural resource value of the drainage feature.
   (B)   The width of the drainage easement will be established by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer based on the area of land drained by the watercourse and
to allow access for construction and maintenance equipment.
   (C)   The 100-year flow path must be placed in an easement through the
subdivision large enough to accommodate the 100-year flow and any required
buffer area.
   (D)   Drainage easements with a minimum width of ten feet must be placed at
the rear of all lots.
   (E)   All constructed stormwater management facilities must be placed in
drainage easements. A minimum 15-foot wide access easement must be provided for
maintenance. The width must be measured from the closest public right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.172 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   No obstructions, including, but not limited to sheds, pools, berms and
planters, may be placed in any public utility or drainage easement in a manner
that will block or divert the flow of surface drainage. Any fences built in or
across a public utility or drainage easement must be either open to allow the
flow of surface water, or have the bottom of the fence or obstruction above the
ground level to allow the unobstructed flow of surface water.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.173 SCREEN PLANTING EASEMENTS.
   An effective screen-planting easement not less than 15 feet wide is required
between residential and commercial or industrial lots, or along lot lines to
discourage the undesirable development of residential lots fronting on major
streets. Required screening easements are in addition to any other easements
that may be required on the lot, such as drainage and utility easements.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
WATER SUPPLY, WASTEWATER AND STORMWATER
§ 154.185 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Public systems.
      (1)   A complete public water supply and distribution system, including
all appurtenances and stubs to each lot must be provided for all subdivisions
within 1,320 feet of an existing water main.
      (2)   Public water supply and distribution systems must comply with all
provisions of the Standardization of Fire Equipment and Apparatus (see the Will
County Developers’ Handbook) and the requirements of the State Environmental
Protection Agency and the State Department of Public Health.
   (B)   Wells. Individual water supplies may be permitted subject to all
applicable state and county regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.186 WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Public systems.
      (1)   A complete public sanitary sewer system including service
connections must be provided for all lots within 1,320 feet of an existing
sanitary sewer main, except those lots to which sanitary sewers are unable to
be extended due to State Environment Protection Agency restrictions or similar
hardships.
      (2)   A complete sanitary sewer system including service connections must
be provided for all lots that are unable to comply with the requirements of the
County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance.
   (B)   Individual wastewater disposal systems.
      (1)   In any subdivision that is not located within 1,320 feet of an
existing sanitary sewer, individual sewage disposal systems may be installed in
accordance with the County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance.
      (2)   Individual mechanical sewage treatment systems must discharge in
accordance with the County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.187 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   The stormwater management system must comply with the requirements of the
Water Resource Ordinances for Unincorporated Will County (formerly known as the
Flood Damage Prevention, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, Stormwater
Drainage and Detention and Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance) and the
County Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
§ 154.200 REQUIRED.
   Erosion control must be provided in accordance with the Water Resource
Ordinances for Unincorporated Will County.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Water Resource Ordinances, see
Ch. 164
PARKS
§ 154.215 PARKLAND DEDICATION.
   Compliance with the County Park Donation Ordinance is required.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.216 INTERIOR PARKS.
   Parks situated in the interior of blocks must have direct and public access
to surrounding streets by an easement at least ten feet wide and be covered by
a maintenance agreement for the easement. Lots adjacent to easements must be at
least ten feet wider than the otherwise required minimum lot width.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
LANDSCAPING
§ 154.230 STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All unpaved street right-of-way must be graded and seeded or sodded in
accordance with the County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
Grassed areas having slopes greater than 20% or five to one slopes or steeper
must be stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding or
approved equivalent. Seeding, sodding, matting and blankets must be in
accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road & Bridge Construction.
Provisions must be made to assure the growth of all required landscaping.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.231 PARKWAY OR FRONT YARD TREES.
   (A)   Parkway or front yard trees are required along all streets at a rate
of one tree per 40 feet of street frontage, provided that no lot is required to
have more than four parkway or street trees and all lots must have at least two
parkway or front yard trees.
   (B)   Existing trees or newly planted trees may be used to satisfy parkway
and front yard tree requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2805.jpg]
 
   (C)   No trees may be planted in the parkway unless written approval has
been received from the Road District Commissioner. Trees that are planted in
the parkway must be planted in accordance with the specifications of the Road
District Commissioner.
   (D)   When trees are not allowed to be placed in the parkway, required trees
must be placed in the front yard of the subject lot.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.232 SCREENING.
   (A)   Landscape screening must be provided in accordance with all applicable
county ordinances.
   (B)   In cases where lots have frontage along both an interior street and
another street (double-frontage) or abut a nonresidential use or zoning
classification, a landscaped earthen berm or fence must be constructed to the
following standards.
      (1)   Landscaping berms must be constructed with slopes not to exceed a
three to one gradient, with side slopes designed and planted to prevent erosion
and with a rounded surface a minimum of three feet in height and five feet in
width at the highest point of the berm, extending the length of the berm. Berm
slopes must be protected with sod, seed, shrubs or other form of natural ground
cover.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2807.jpg]
 
      (2)   A detailed landscape/berm plan must be submitted to show that
adequate vegetative plantings have been provided to create a screen.
      (3)   No screening may interfere with drainage patterns or intersection
visibility requirements. See §
154.125(C).
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.233 LANDSCAPE MATERIAL.
   (A)   A list of desirable tree and shrub species is contained in the Will
County Developers’ Handbook.
   (B)   No more than 25% of the total number of trees or shrubs in any
development may be of a single species provided in a development.
   (C)   Parkway and front yard trees must have a minimum trunk diameter of at
least two and one-half inches measured six inches above ground level.
   (D)   Understory and/or ornamental trees must have a minimum trunk diameter
of at least two inches measured six inches above ground level. Multi-stem or
clump form understory trees with a minimum height of six feet may also be used.
   (E)   Evergreen and/or coniferous trees must be a minimum five feet in
height.
   (F)   Broadleaf/deciduous shrubs must be at least three feet in height.
   (G)   Needle leaf/evergreen shrubs must have a minimum width of two feet.
   (H)   All fences must comply with §
154.172 of this chapter and § 8.5-7(f) of the County Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.234 LANDSCAPE PLACEMENT.
   (A)   All plant material must be planted in a manner that does not interfere
with drainage patterns, overhead wires, utilities, street or sidewalk pavement.
   (B)   No trees or other landscaping may be located closer than ten feet to a
fire hydrant or other above-ground utilities.
   (C)   No landscaping may interfere with intersection visibility
requirements. See §
154.125(C).
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.235 INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Plant material must comply with the American Standards for Nursery
Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen.
   (B)   All trees must be grown in a nursery located in the northern half of
the state and licensed by the state.
   (C)   All plant material must be installed free of disease and in a manner
that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and water to sustain healthy
growth.
   (D)   All tags, wires, plastic ties and rope must be cut from each tree to
prevent girdling the tree. The burlap must be pulled back from the upper third
of the root ball. If a plastic “burlap” is used, it must be removed from the
root ball in its entirety.
   (E)   When planting, the hole must be dug approximately three times wider
than the roots or root ball.
   (F)   All plant material must be planted with a minimum depth of three
inches of mulched material and a diameter of three feet around the base of the
tree.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2809.jpg]
 
   (G)   Trees must be staked with posts and not stakes in areas of high wind
for one to three years to allow the growth of new roots to stabilize. All ropes
must be covered to prevent cutting into bark.
   (H)   The planting season is approximately September 15 to December 15 and
March 15 to June 15.
   (I)   Any excess soil, clay or construction debris must be removed from the
planting site, before planting of individual trees at final grade.
   (J)   The county is authorized, at its sole discretion, to retain a
professional landscape architect or arborist to review landscape plans. All
expenses incurred by the county for the use of landscape architects or
arborists must be reimbursed by the developer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR CONSERVATION DESIGN OPTION
§ 154.250 PURPOSE/DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   A conservation design subdivision designed in accordance with this
section and §
154.251 is a by-right permitted use option in the E-1, E-2, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-
3 and R-4 zoning districts. Other development options include a conventional
residential subdivision or a planned unit development residential subdivision.
When this option is utilized, the regulations of this section are intended to
encourage subdivision designs that are more efficient and provide more open
space and greater natural resource protection than conventional subdivision
designs. One goal of conservation design subdivisions is to allow more compact
and less costly networks of streets and utilities. They may also help preserve
aquifer recharge, reduce stormwater runoff, reduce non-point source pollutant
loading rates and preserve an area’s semi-rural character. Conservation design
subdivisions are intended to encourage the provision of open space and
recreational amenities for residents and preserve natural, environmentally
sensitive and other resources.
   (B)   The conservation design subdivision standards of this section require
that a specified portion of each development be set aside and permanently
preserved as open space, which can be used to provide recreational
opportunities for the subdivision’s residents and/or to conserve and protect
significant natural resources, in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter.
   (C)   Review period. No later than five years from the date of passage of
the initial Conservation Design Ordinance, the County Board, or a committee,
subcommittee or commission thereof, shall consider whether amendments are
necessary to make this section, §§
154.251,
154.265 through
154.269 and
154.280 through
154.286 consistent with recommendations of the Land Resource Management Plan,
to encourage new or improved conservation design building practices which may
have been developed and which may have application in the county, to correct
deficiencies or difficulties which may have developed in administration of §§
154.250,
154.251,
154.265 through
154.269 and
154.280 through
154.286, or for other reasons as the County Board may determine.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.251 GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   Conservation design subdivisions are subject to all other subdivision
design and improvement standards of this chapter unless otherwise expressly
stated.
   (B)   Lots and development sites within conservation design subdivisions
must, to the maximum extent practical, be located outside of areas containing
woodlands, grasslands, surface waters, steep slopes, drainageways, rock
outcroppings and other natural resource features. See the figure below. A
natural resources inventory report, that includes site specific data, prepared
by the Will/South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District shall be submitted
to aid in identifying areas that merit conservation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2811.jpg]
 
   (C)   Impervious areas must be limited and, to the maximum extent practical,
be sited and designed to minimize stormwater runoff impact to the watershed’s
receiving waters by:
      (1)   Minimizing concentrated stormwater flow;
      (2)   Minimizing and breaking up or disconnecting large areas of
impervious surface into smaller areas;
      (3)   Maximizing the use of sheet flow through vegetated areas;
      (4)   Maximizing the flow length through vegetated areas;
      (5)   Encouraging groundwater recharge; and
      (6)   Providing natural preserve areas where natural soils will remain
undisturbed and soil compaction activities are prohibited.
   (D)   Stormwater best management practices (BMPs) shall be used to protect
water quality, preserve natural hydrology and minimize overall impacts of
development on aquatic resources. BMPs may include, but not be limited to, the
following practices:
      (1)   Use of naturalized detention basins designed to maximize removal
and transformation of run-on pollutants;
      (2)   Use of wet-bottom detention basins and native, emergent vegetation
along their periphery and in bottoms of wetland basins;
      (3)   Use of stilling basins at major detention basin inlets and use of
maximum distances between major inlets and outlets;
      (4)   Where detention basins discharge into adjacent or downstream
wetlands, use of detention basins outlet structures designed to spread and
infiltrate run-off through use of level spreader devices;
      (5)   Use of bio-swales in lieu of stormwater piping;
      (6)   Use of permeable pavers where practical; and
      (7)   Curb and gutter, pavement widths, right-of-way widths and sidewalk
requirements will be waived or modified in a conservation design subdivision
contingent upon the approval of the appropriate highway authority.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
DETERMINING MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
§ 154.265 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS ALLOWED.
   (A)   The maximum number of dwelling units allowed within a conservation
design subdivision may, at the developer’s option, be determined in accordance
with the yield plan provisions of §
154.266 or the yield formula provisions of §
154.267.
   (B)   Regardless of the method chosen (yield formula or yield plan), the
following zoning district base densities apply:
Zoning District Maximum Base Density (units per acre [UPA])
Zoning District Maximum Base Density (units per acre [UPA])
E-1             0.200
E-2             0.400
R-1             0.726
R-2             1.000
R-2A            1.452
R-3             2.178
R-4             3.485
 
   (C)   If the conservation design subdivision is located in more than one
zoning district, the maximum number of dwelling units allowed must be
determined separately for each portion of the site lying within a different
zoning district. Density may be transferred from one portion of the site to
another, provided that the transfers do not result in an increase in the number
of dwelling units allowed on the overall site.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.266 YIELD PLAN.
   (A)   Developers may elect to submit a yield plan to be used as the basis
for determining the maximum number of dwelling units allowed prior to bonus
calculations.
   (B)   Yield plans (subdivision plans) must be prepared by an engineer,
surveyor, professional planner or other qualified professional.
   (C)   The yield plan must be prepared in sufficient detail and include
sufficient backup documentation to illustrate the maximum number of dwelling
units that would realistically be allowed on the property under conventional
subdivision design, in compliance with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance,
Water Resource Ordinances, Stormwater Management Ordinance and all other
applicable ordinances.
   (D)   Yield plans must be reviewed and approved by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer as part of the plat approval process for the conservation design
subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.267 YIELD FORMULA.
   (A)   Generally. In lieu of the yield plan method of §
154.266, developers may elect to use a yield formula to be used as the basis
for determining the maximum number of dwelling units allowed prior to bonus
calculations.
   (B)   Step 1 - Determine base site area. The first step of the yield formula
involves calculating the site’s base site area, as follows:
 
1.   Determine gross site area                                acres
2.    Subtract ROW of existing streets (and ultimate -       acres
ROW)                                                                          
3.   Equals base site area                           =       acres
 
   (C)   Step 2 - Determine net site area. The second step of the yield formula
involves calculating the net site area, as follows:
 
1.    Take base site area (from division (B) above)                              acres
2.   Subtract regulated wetlands (> than 0.1 acres in area) and wetland -       acres
buffers as required by the County Water Resource Ordinances or United                            
States Army Corps of Engineers, whichever is more stringent:
3.   Equals buildable area                                              =       acres
4.   Subtract 10% of buildable area for stormwater management           -       acres
                                                                                                 
5.   Subtract 15% of buildable area for streets                         -       acres
                                                                                                 
6.   Equals net site area                                               =       acres
 
   (D)   Step 3 - determine number of dwelling units allowed. The third step of
the yield formula involves a final calculation of the maximum number of
dwelling units allowed on the site:
 
1.   Take net site area (from division (C) above)               acres
2.    Multiply by zoning district maximum density (§  x       UPA
154.265(B))                                                                     
3.   Equals pre-bonus maximum number of dwelling units =       units
allowed
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.268 DENSITY BONUSES; CALCULATIONS.
  1.   Calculate any allowed density bonus
      The maximum increase in density shall be limited to 25% of the permitted density.
The following list of incentives may be utilized to reach a density bonus not to exceed
25%.
      a.    Internal trails that are connected with existing or potential open s 
and multi-use trails outside of the development and provide access to the public. Open             %
space must be connected to larger greenway systems when technically possible = 4% bonus
      b.   The amount of open space provided exceeds the required open space are 
154.280(B) for the development by 10% or more (including the bonus acreages offered for   
any special incentives allowed per § 154.282 and any infiltration credit allowed per the+       %
Water Resources Ordinance) = 8% bonus
        c.    Open space within the development is placed into a conservation  
with a legally incorporated land conservation agency or donated to a public open space   +       %
agency (as approved by the Plat Committee) = 4% bonus
      d.   Pursue landmark status for identified historically significant buildi 
structures and sites on the subject property as determined by the County Historic         
Preservation Ordinance and recommendation of the County Historic Preservation Commission  
to have merit and suitability for preservation and/or adaptive reuse and preserve them   +       %
by incorporating them into the development proposal= 4% bonus
      e.   Provide design excellence and quality in building style and material. 
may include, but not be limited to, compact clustering of home sites with the efficient   
and appropriate layout of roads and utilities and energy conserving landscaping. This     
should include the utilization of native plant species and the preservation of natural    
resources. The aforementioned design should reflect nationally recognized standards,      
such as the Sustainable Sites Initiative, LEED or National Association of Homebuilders    
Green Building Standards or as described in the Developer’s Handbook. (not to exceed a +       %
8% bonus)
      f.   Area based density bonuses:
         i.   Woodlands are preserved and set aside in common areas:       acres
         ii.   Natural preserves in excess of 50% are created or set aside into common
areas:     acres
         iii.   Total acreage bonus for Stormwater Infiltration practices per the Water
Resource Ordinance:       acres
            Total acres for area based density bonuses (i + ii + iii): =       acres
            Divide by the net site area (§
154.267(C)): /      acres
            Multiply by 100: x 100% =       %
            Equals area based density bonus percentage (Not to exceed 10%)   +       %
2.   Equal total bonuses (Add 1a -1f) (25% Max.)                                      =       %
                                                                                                            
3.   Divide total bonus % by 100                                                              %/100
                                                                                                            
4.   Multiply total bonus by prebonus maximum number of dwelling units (from §§
154.266 or                                                                                     x       units
154.267)
5.   Equals number of bonus dwelling units                                            =       units
                                                                                                            
6.   Add results of yield plan or yield formula to bonus dwelling units for maximum   =       units
number of dwelling units                                                                                    
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.269 LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   Conservation design subdivisions are expressly exempt from the lot area, lot
width, lot coverage and setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. No
structures shall be exempt from the requirements of the County Building
Ordinance; lots must be of size and shape to allow for compliance with
applicable building codes.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
OPEN SPACE
§ 154.280 DETERMINING MINIMUM OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   The minimum amount of common open space required in a conservation design
subdivision is calculated as follows:
 
1.   Take base site area (from §                                                   acres
154.267(B))
2.    Multiply base site area times the zoning district-based minimum open x       %
space requirement (See division (B) below)                                                          
3.   Equals open space requirement                                         =       acres
 
   (B)   For purposes of determining minimum open space requirements within a
conservation design subdivision, the following minimum district-based open
space requirements apply. Any land voluntarily preserved as open space in
excess of the following open space requirement shall be awarded a bonus in
accordance with §
154.268.
Zoning District Percent of Base Site Area
Zoning District Percent of Base Site Area
E-1             60%
E-2             60%
R-1             40%
R-2             40%
R-2A            40%
R-3             30%
R-4             30%
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.281 USE, LOCATION AND DESIGN OF OPEN SPACE GENERALLY.
   (A)   Open space provided to meet minimum open space requirements must be in
one or more parcels dedicated or otherwise protected as permanent, active or
passive open space.
   (B)   Open space must be dedicated or reserved for one or more of the
following uses:
      (1)   Conservation and protection of, any readily identifiable natural
hazard areas, i.e., areas that potentially pose a significant hazard to people
or property (e.g., floodplains, wetlands and lands whose slope and/or soils
make them particularly susceptible to subsidence or erosion when disturbed by
development activities);
      (2)   Conservation and protection of any identified significant natural
areas (e.g., stream corridors, woodlands, rare plant communities, important
wildlife habitat and the like) or other environmentally sensitive areas where
development might threaten water quality or ecosystems;
      (3)   Conservation and protection of any identified, significant historic
or cultural resources;
      (4)   Compatible agricultural and horticultural uses (e.g., pastureland
for horses, greenhouses, pick-your-own operations, community supported
agriculture and the like); or
      (5)   Provision of outdoor recreation opportunities including, but not
limited to, bikeways, walking trails, equestrian trails and picnic areas,
either for the general public or for the subdivision’s residents and their
guests. Not more than 5% of total open space may be utilized for ball fields,
playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, basketball courts and similar uses.
Golf courses shall receive and maintain designation as a certified Audubon
cooperative sanctuary and shall, to the extent practicable, maximize water
quality benefits through the following practices:
         (a)   Use of reclaimed water;
         (b)   Use of native wetland vegetation along ponds; and
         (c)   Use of landscaping design and plant material that emphasize
native species, promote biodiversity and require limited use of pesticides. No
more than 50% of the open space in the golf course may be fairways, putting
greens, practice areas and other areas maintained solely by mowing.
Commentary:
   This provision is not intended to preclude a membership requirement or
monetary charge for use of recreation facilities such as a golf, swim or tennis
club, as long as subdivision residents have an opportunity to join the club or
pay to use club facilities.
   (C)   Highest priority for the location, design and use of open space must
be given to conserving, and avoiding development in, any natural hazard areas
on the subdivision site including but not limited to hydric soils, steep
slopes, high water tables and the like. Approval of development on steep slopes
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (D)   Roadways and building lots should be located to respect natural
features and to maximize exposure of building lots to preserved open space.
   (E)   Open space may contain only buildings, structures and improvements
that are integral and accessory to its function (as open space). Examples of
features that may qualify under this standard include pedestrian/bicycle paths,
pedestrian amenities, driveways that provided necessary access to the open
space, shelters and utility-related structures that provide service to the open
space area.
   (F)   The location, size, character and shape of required open space should
be appropriate for its intended use (e.g., open space proposed to be used for
recreation, particularly active recreation, should be located and designed so
that it can be accessed conveniently and safely by intended users, and open
space to be used for playing fields or other active recreational facilities
should be located on land that is relatively flat and dry).
   (G)   Open space should be designed to form an interconnected network of
reasonable width, with provisions for linkages to existing or potential open
space on adjoining properties. Fragmentation of open space into isolated,
unconnected pieces should be avoided, except to provide neighborhood parks and
commons.
   (H)   Pathways within open space and sidewalks along roadways should be
provided to connect to surrounding pedestrian/bicycle networks. This section is
not intended to limit or define the type of materials used for the pathways.
   (I)   Open space should be used as part of an integrated stormwater
management approach to maintain natural drainage patterns, attenuate water
quality impacts, replenish groundwater (e.g., through bio-retention facilities
such as infiltration trenches and rain gardens) and incorporate detention
facilities as visual and environmental amenities such as ponds.
   (J)   Parkland and school sites dedicated in excess of the minimum
requirements of the
Chapter 91, Parks and Playgrounds and
Chapter 160, the County School Site Contribution Chapter will be counted
towards meeting minimum open space requirements in conservation design
subdivisions.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.282 SPECIAL INCENTIVES FOR CERTAIN OPEN SPACE FEATURES.
   (A)   In order to promote the protection of woodlands, 120% of the land area
of woodlands may be counted toward meeting minimum open space requirements if
the woodlands are set aside and permanently protected as undeveloped open
space.
   (B)   In order to promote low-impact design and stormwater-related best
management practices, 120% of the land area used for rain gardens, bioretention
facilities, groundwater in-filtration systems and other county-approved
stormwater BMPs may be counted toward meeting minimum open space requirements
when the areas are set aside as undeveloped open space.
   (C)   In order to promote the provision and protection of natural preserves,
120% of the land area of natural preserves and created wetlands may be counted
toward meeting minimum open space requirements if the natural preserves are set
aside and permanently protected as undeveloped open space.
   (D)   The open space features in this section and those given limited credit
under §
154.283 may not be double-counted.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.283 LIMITED CREDIT FOR CERTAIN OPEN SPACE FEATURES.
   (A)   No more than 50% of the land area devoted to stormwater detention
areas may be counted toward satisfying minimum open space requirements.
   (B)   No more than 75% of the land area devoted to treated effluent
application areas may be counted toward satisfying minimum open space
requirements.
   (C)   No more than 75% of the land area devoted to commonly owned septic
drain fields may be counted toward satisfying minimum open space requirements.
   (D)   No more than 75% of the land area identified as 100-year floodplain
may be counted toward satisfying minimum open space requirements.
   (E)   No more than 75% of the land area identified as floodway may be
counted toward satisfying minimum open space requirements.
   (F)   Excluding the limited credit for open space features set forth in
divisions (A) through (E) above, at least 50% of the land counted toward
satisfying the minimum open space requirement shall be conserved as natural
habitat and planted with native species.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.284 OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Ownership.
      (1)   The applicant must identify the owner of the open space and is
responsible for obtaining and filing with the Chief Subdivision Engineer an
official letter of acceptance of the ownership and maintenance
responsibilities. A property owners association may transfer or convey any and
all open space to a land conservation agency, or similarly qualified entity,
selected with the advice and consent of the Plat Committee; consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld. A land conservation agency, or similarly qualified
entity, may be selected by the owner(s) to perform maintenance and upkeep of
any and all open space with the advice and consent of the Plat Committee;
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
      (2)   No open space in §§
154.250 and
154.251,
154.265 through
154.269 and
154.280 through
154.286 shall be required to be open to the general public unless ownership of
the open space is conveyed to a unit of local government or some other
governmental agency.
   (B)   Maintenance; generally. The owner, or if turned over to a land
conservation agency or similar entity approved by the Plat Committee, is
responsible for maintaining the open space and any associated facilities owned
by the owner, property owners association or land conservation agency. If a
property owners association is the owner, membership in the association shall
be mandatory and automatic for all property owners of the subdivision and their
successors; the requirement shall be included in the covenants and restrictions
for the subdivision and recorded with the conveyance of each lot. Unless agreed
in writing by the developer and land conservation agency, and approved by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer, open space ownership and/or maintenance shall be
turned over when 80% of the lots are sold.
   (C)   Maintenance special service area requirement.
      (1)   The applicant acknowledges that the County Board shall propose and
establish one or more maintenance special service areas pursuant to the special
service area tax law upon all taxable property within the subdivision. The
maintenance special service area (MSSA) will be used as a backup funding
mechanism in the event that the property owners association or any other person
or entity charged with maintenance and upkeep of the maintenance special
service area, fails to adequately carry out and/or provide maintenance and
upkeep of the special service area and/or perform its duties as provided in the
initial or long term management plan as determined by the Plat Committee. In
that event, the County Board may enact an ordinance to levy an ad valorem
special tax against all taxable property within the proposed maintenance
special service area in order to fund the necessary maintenance and other costs
set forth herein. In furtherance of this requirement, the applicant shall
submit to the Plat Committee a fully-executed MSSA application.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the MSSA application, the Plat Committee shall
submit a proposing ordinance to the County Board for its consideration.
      (3)   In the event the County Board adopts the proposing ordinance, an
MSSA hearing shall be held pursuant to the terms of the proposing ordinance and
special service area tax law.
      (4)   The County Board shall consider and vote upon the establishment of
the maintenance special service area after the later to occur of:
         (a)   Expiration of the MSSA objection period or, in the event the
State’s Attorney determines that sufficient consents to the formation of the
proposed maintenance special service area have been obtained which adequately
waive the right to object to the formation of the proposed maintenance special
service area under the special service area tax law, then upon the
determination; or
         (b)   The date all authorized signatures are on the final plat.
      (5)   Prior to the County Board considering and voting upon enacting the
levy ordinance for the established MSSA, all landowners within the MSSA shall
be noticed in writing via first-class mail and a non-binding public hearing
with the Plat Committee shall be held to hear comment. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county not less than 15 days before the hearing.
   (D)   Management plan.
      (1)   The applicant must submit a management plan, including initial and
long-term phases, for implementation and maintenance of open space and all
common areas.
      (2)   Prior to approval by the county, the management plan must be
submitted to the Will/South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District (SWCD)
for review and comment.
      (3)   The management plan must:
         (a)   1.   Allocate and outline developer responsibility and
guidelines for the initial phase of the management plan.
            2.   The developer must consent to inspections by the county to
check for compliance with the management plan through the initial phase not to
exceed a five-year period.
            3.   The initial phase inspection process must be through
application by the developer to the county through the Plat Committee, and all
inspection fees shall be borne by the developer;
         (b)   1.   Allocate landowner(s) or property owners association
responsibilities and guidelines for the long-term phase of the management plan.
            2.   This must include an annual inspection and report to the Plat
Committee by a qualified consultant or entity selected by the landowner(s) or
property owners association and approved by the Plat Committee.
            3.   The cost of the annual inspection shall be borne by the
landowner(s) or property owners association;
         (c)   Estimate the costs and staffing requirements needed for
maintenance, operation and insurance and outline the means by which necessary
funding will be obtained or provided;
         (d)   Provide that any changes to the management plan be approved by
the Chief Subdivision Engineer;
         (e)   Provide for enforcement of the management plan;
         (f)   Provide for a budget which lists operation and capital expenses;
and
         (g)   Provide for updating of the long-term management plan a minimum
of every five years.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.285 LEGAL INSTRUMENT FOR PERMANENT PROTECTION.
   (A)   The open space must be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal
instrument that is recorded with the deed. The legal instrument must be one of
the following:
      (1)   A permanent conservation easement in favor of either:
         (a)   A land conservation agency with legal authority to accept the
easements. The organization must be bona fide and in perpetual existence and
the conveyance instruments must contain an appropriate provision for transfer
in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or
         (b)   A governmental entity (if the entity accepting the easement is
not the county, then a third right of enforcement favoring the county must be
included in the easement).
      (2)   An open space tract protected by a permanent restrictive covenant
for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or
      (3)   An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, as
approved by the State’s Attorney.
   (B)   The instrument for permanent protection must include clear
restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions must include all
restrictions contained in this section, all restrictions approved by the County
Board and any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the open
space.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.286 DECLARATION OF CONSENT FOR MAINTENANCE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA.
   (A)   Concurrently with the recordation of the final plat, the applicant
shall also be required to record a declaration of consent, in form acceptable
to the Plat Committee, consenting to the establishment of the maintenance
special service area with the County Recorder of Deeds.
   (B)   The terms of the declaration of consent shall run with the land and be
binding on all future owners of property within the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS
§ 154.300 EXEMPT LAND DIVISIONS.
   Land divisions that are exempt from subdivision plat approval requirements
are specified in the Plat Act and in the definition of the term “subdivision”
in §
154.031.
Commentary:
   Land divisions that are exempt from subdivision plat approval requirements
must still be recorded.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.301 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. All of the following may be reviewed and approved as
minor subdivisions:
      (1)   Subdivisions that involve the creation of five or fewer lots
provided that:
         (a)   They do not involve the creation of any new streets;
         (b)   They do not require the extension of municipal facilities;
         (c)   They do not adversely affect development of the remainder of the
parcel or abutting property;
         (d)   They do not conflict with the County Land Resource Management
Plan or any of its functional elements; and
         (e)   They do not conflict with the County Zoning Ordinance, chapter
or official map.
      (2)   The consolidation of lots or parcels into a fewer number of lots or
parcels.
Commentary:
   Land divisions that are eligible for processing as minor subdivisions must
still comply with all chapter standards and requirements.
   (B)   Procedural overview.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2813.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.302 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. Any subdivision that does not meet the criteria for
processing as a minor subdivision (see §
154.031(A)) is a major subdivision and must be processed in accordance with the
major subdivision procedures of this chapter.
   (B)   Procedural overview. A major subdivision is reviewed and approved as
follows.
      (1)   First, a pre-application meeting must be held in accordance with §§
154.335 through
154.339.
      (2)   Next, a preliminary plat must be reviewed and approved in
accordance with §§
154.350 through
154.361.
      (3)   Next, if the preliminary plat is approved, improvement plans must
be reviewed and approved in accordance with §§
154.375 through
154.384.
      (4)   If the preliminary plat is approved, the applicant may then apply
for approval of a final plat (consisting of engineering improvement plans,
subdivision financial guarantees and a plat of subdivision) in accordance with
§§
154.395 through
154.404.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2815.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
COMMON PROVISIONS
§ 154.315 FORM OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications required under this chapter must be submitted in a form
and in a numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the
application.
   (B)   Officials responsible for accepting applications must develop
checklists of application submittal requirements and make those checklists
available to the public.
Commentary:
   Application forms and checklists of preliminary plat, improvement plan and
final plat submittal requirements are included in the Will County Developers’
Handbook. The county will endeavor to provide a written determination within 21
days.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.316 APPLICATION FILING FEES.
   Applications must be accompanied by the fee amount that has been established
by the County Board. Application fees are nonrefundable.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.317 APPLICATION COMPLETENESS, ACCURACY AND SUFFICIENCY.
   (A)   An application will be considered complete and ready for processing
only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required
information and is accompanied by the required filing fee.
   (B)   The official responsible for accepting the application will make a
determination of application completeness within 14 working days of application
filing.
   (C)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the official
responsible for accepting the application shall provide written notice to the
applicant along with an explanation of the application’s deficiencies. No
further processing of the application will occur until the deficiencies are
corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 60
days, the application will be considered withdrawn.
   (D)   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the
deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next
processing cycle.
   (E)   Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the
processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-
making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of
this chapter.
   (F)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer may require that applications or plans
be revised before being placed on an agenda if the Chief Subdivision Engineer
determines that:
      (1)   The application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
plan’s/application’s compliance with chapter standards;
      (2)   The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions
that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan’s/application’s
compliance with chapter standards; or
      (3)   The decision-making body does not have legal authority to approve
the application or plan.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.318 APPLICATION PROCESSING CYCLES.
   (A)   Officials responsible for accepting applications may, after consulting
with review and decision-making bodies, promulgate processing cycles for
applications.
   (B)   Processing cycles may establish:
      (1)   Deadlines for receipt of complete applications;
      (2)   Dates of regular meetings;
      (3)   The scheduling of staff reviews and staff reports on complete
applications; and
      (4)   Time-frames for review and decision- making.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.319 BURDEN OF PROOF OR PERSUASION.
   In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application
complies with applicable review or approval criteria.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.320 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   When review bodies recommend or decision-making bodies approve applications
with conditions or modifications, the conditions or modifications must relate
to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed use or development. When
conditions are imposed, an application will not be deemed finally approved
until the applicant has complied with all of the conditions.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
PRE-APPLICATION MEETINGS
§ 154.335 INTENT.
   Pre-application meetings are required for all minor subdivisions and major
subdivisions. A pre-application meeting is intended to familiarize the
applicant with applicable procedures, submittal requirements, development
standards and other pertinent matters before finalizing the development
proposal or otherwise spending large sums of money in laying out the proposed
subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.336 APPLICATION FILING.
   Pre-application meeting applications must be submitted to the Chief
Subdivision Engineer on forms available from the County Land Use Department.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.337 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following information and documentation shall be required for the pre-
application meeting: a complete application; a plat of survey or tax map; and a
sketch plan.
   (A)   Application. The developer must complete a pre-application meeting
application form, which may be obtained in the County Land Use Department
office.
   (B)   Plat of survey. The developer must provide a plat of survey of the
subject property, if available, or a tax map identifying the subject property.
   (C)   Sketch plan. The developer must provide a sketch plan that includes
the following information:
      (1)   The proposed means of access;
      (2)   Surrounding land uses;
      (3)   All adjacent streets;
      (4)   A preliminary map and analysis of natural resources present on the
subject property and contiguous resource area on adjacent property, including
hydric soils (information may be obtained from the County Land Use Department);
and
      (5)   A conceptual layout of the proposed subdivision overlaid on the
preliminary natural resources map. The layout must show streets, lots, parks
and other facilities located to protect natural resources; and the overall
stormwater management concept for the project.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.338 DISTRIBUTION OF APPLICATION; SCHEDULING OF MEETING.
   Upon receipt of a complete pre-application meeting application, the Chief
Subdivision Engineer must distribute copies of the application to appropriate
reviewers (e.g., Road District Commissioner, utility providers, municipalities
within one and one-half miles of the proposed subdivision, county staff and
other affected entities). The Chief Subdivision Engineer must notify all
reviewers and the applicant of the date, time and place of the scheduled pre-
application meeting.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.339 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   (A)   Reviewer comments on the pre-application meeting application will be
presented to the applicant at the scheduled pre-application meeting. Each
reviewer will be given an opportunity to present their findings and
recommendations on the proposed development concept.
   (B)   Following the meeting, the Chief Subdivision Engineer must provide a
written report to the applicant containing the written comments of reviewers
along with instructions for proceeding with the subdivision process.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
PRELIMINARY PLATS
§ 154.350 INTENT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2817.jpg]
 
   The preliminary plat approval procedure is intended to ensure that a major
subdivision is designed and laid out in accordance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.351 APPLICABILITY.
   Preliminary plat applications are required for all major subdivisions.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.352 PRE-APPLICATION MEETINGS.
   Pre-application meetings must be held before the filing of a preliminary
plat application.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.353 APPLICATION FILING.
   Complete preliminary plat applications must be submitted to Chief
Subdivision Engineer within one year of the pre-application meeting. The
application will be considered official when the Chief Subdivision Engineer
deems the application complete in accordance with §
154.352.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.354 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PREPARATION.
   Preliminary plats must be prepared by a state registered professional
engineer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.355 REVIEW AND REPORT; CHIEF SUBDIVISION ENGINEER.
   Within 90 days of receipt of an official preliminary plat application, the
Chief Subdivision Engineer and staff must complete their review and prepare a
report and recommendation for the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Plat
Committee. The Chief Subdivision Engineer must recommend that the preliminary
plat be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved, based on the
approval criteria of §
154.358.
Commentary:
   County staff will review the preliminary plat and present the applicant with
a written report of needed changes. The applicant is responsible for making the
required changes and submitting a revised preliminary plat. The process of
staff review followed by applicant changes may occur multiple times.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.356 REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION; PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   After receiving the recommendation of the Chief Subdivision Engineer,
the Planning and Zoning Commission must review and consider the preliminary
plat. A preliminary plat may not be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission until the Chief Subdivision Engineer has determined that the
preliminary plat complies with all county regulations. If, because of
noncompliance or the applicant’s inaction, a preliminary plat cannot be
forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission within six months of the date
that a complete application is filed, the application will be considered
withdrawn. The Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized to grant a one-time
extension of the six-month timeframe based on a determination that the
applicant is diligently pursuing preliminary plat approval.
Commentary:
   Applicants may appeal the Chief Subdivision Engineer’s determination that a
plat does not comply with county regulations in accordance with the appeal
procedure of §§
154.450 through
154.454.
   (B)   As soon as possible after a preliminary plat is forwarded to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission must act by
simple majority vote to recommend that the preliminary plat be approved,
approved with conditions or disapproved, based on the approval criteria of §
154.358.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.357 FINAL ACTION; PLAT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   As soon as possible after receiving the recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, the Plat Committee must act by simple majority vote to
approve the preliminary plat, approve the preliminary plat with conditions or
disapprove the preliminary plat, based on the approval criteria of §
154.358.
   (B)   Any waivers or modifications from chapter standards or the Water
Resource Ordinances for the unincorporated county must be forwarded to the full
County Board for a final decision, in which case the Plat Committee’s approval
of a preliminary plat is conditional on the County Board’s approval of the
associated requests.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.358 APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   No preliminary plat may be approved unless the Plat Committee finds that the
proposed plat conforms to all adopted plans and policies of the county and
complies with all applicable standards of this chapter, except as expressly
approved as a waiver or modification pursuant to §§
154.435 through
154.437.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.359 EFFECT OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval of a preliminary plat constitutes acceptance of the overall
general planning concepts for the subdivision and is a prerequisite for the
filing of a subdivision improvement plan or final plat.
   (B)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the developer may proceed to
the final plat stage with the subdivision design and layout shown on the
preliminary plat if the final plat:
      (1)   Conforms substantially to the preliminary plat;
      (2)   Meets all conditions of preliminary plat approval by the county;
      (3)   Complies with all applicable county ordinances; and
      (4)   Meets all conditions of approval by the State Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR), United States Army Corps of Engineers and Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and any other entity with jurisdiction over the
proposed subdivision.
   (C)   After approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant may proceed to
the subdivision improvement plan stage of the major subdivision approval
process.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.360 PHASING.
   For subdivisions to be developed in phases, phase limits must be shown on
the preliminary plat. The Plat Committee may impose conditions upon the phasing
plan for the subdivision it deems necessary to ensure the orderly development
of the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.361 LAPSE OF APPROVAL.
   Once a preliminary plat is approved, applicants have one year from the date
of approval to submit an improvement plan and final subdivision plat for the
subdivision or for an approved phase of the subdivision. If an improvement plan
and final plat is not submitted within the required one-year period, the
preliminary plat approval will lapse and be of no further effect. The Plat
Committee is authorized to grant a one-time extension of the one-year period,
not to exceed one year. This extension may be granted only if the applicant
submits a written request for the extension before the approval lapses.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
IMPROVEMENT PLANS
§ 154.375 INTENT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2819.jpg]
 
   The improvement plan stage of the major subdivision approval process is for
the purpose of accurately showing how subdivision improvements (streets and
drainage facilities, for example) will be constructed in order to conform to
the layout and design objectives of the preliminary plat and the standards of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.376 TIMING.
   (A)   Improvement plans may be submitted with the preliminary plat or the
developer may choose to obtain preliminary plat approval before submitting
detailed improvement construction plans, in which case improvement plans may be
submitted before or concurrently with submittal of the final plat.
   (B)   When conditions warrant, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may require
that preliminary engineering or improvement plans be submitted during the
preliminary plat review process in order to determine the land’s suitability
for the preliminary plat design. Any required off-site improvements and
engineering studies must be provided upon request of the Chief Subdivision
Engineer.
   (C)   If only a single portion or phase of the subdivision will be submitted
for final plat approval and the phasing plan has been approved at the time of
preliminary plat approval, improvement plans need be prepared for only that
phase. However, the entire area of the proposed subdivision, as well as any
additional area necessary to properly design facilities, must be the basis for
design and must be so indicated.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.377 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PREPARATION.
   Improvement plans for streets, utilities and other public improvements
required within the proposed subdivision must be prepared by a state registered
professional engineer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.378 APPLICATION FILING.
   A site development permit application and improvement plans must be
submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.379 REVIEW AND FINAL DECISION; CHIEF SUBDIVISION ENGINEER.
   (A)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer must review improvement plans to
determine if the plans comply with all applicable regulations of this chapter
and county standards and specifications.
   (B)   If the Chief Subdivision Engineer determines that the improvement
plans do not comply with applicable regulations and standards, the Chief
Subdivision Engineer is authorized to require that modifications be made to
bring the improvement plans into compliance with regulations and standards.
   (C)   After conducting a complete review of the improvement plans, the Chief
Subdivision Engineer must approve or deny the application for improvement plan
approval.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.380 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
   Before approval of the improvement plans, the applicant must submit to the
Chief Subdivision Engineer and to all approving agencies and to public utility
companies that will service the subdivision a general schedule of the timing
and sequence for construction of all required improvements.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.381 TIMING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Except upon the written approval of the Chief Subdivision Engineer, no
grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, land filling, construction of
improvements or other material change, except for the purpose of aiding in
preparation of final engineering drawings or plans, may begin on the subject
property until the applicant has:
   (A)   Received a site development permit from the Chief Subdivision
Engineer; and
   (B)   Obtained necessary approvals and permits from other affected
municipal, county, state or federal agencies.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.382 SUBDIVISION GUARANTEES.
   Before the issuance of a site development permit, the developer must post a
subdivision guarantee in a form established by the county.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.383 DEVELOPMENT IN PHASES.
   When a subdivision is to be developed in one or more phases, developers must
install public improvements or post financial guarantees for each phase. The
county may require public improvements to be installed or financial guarantees
to be posted for areas beyond an individual phase if the county determines that
improvements or guarantees are necessary to ensure the relative self-
sufficiency of the development phase, pending completion of the entire
subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.384 DIGITAL FILES.
   Upon approval of improvement plans, the developer must submit a digital copy
of the subdivision improvement plans in a form approved by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
FINAL PLATS
§ 154.395 INTENT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2821.jpg]
 
   A final plat is a record of the subdivision, as surveyed in the field. It
shows property lines and other dimensions important to the developer in selling
lots and to the public in maintaining accurate records of street lines,
easements, utility locations and other property information.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.396 PREREQUISITES TO FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
   Before approval of a final plat, the developer must post a subdivision
guarantee in a form established by the county.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.397 APPLICATION FILING.
   Complete applications for final plat approval must be filed with Chief
Subdivision Engineer before the preliminary plat approval expires. See §
154.361.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.398 REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION; CHIEF SUBDIVISION ENGINEER.
   The Chief Subdivision Engineer must review the final plat and, based on the
plat’s compliance with the final plat approval criteria of §
154.400, recommend that the final plat be approved, approved with conditions or
disapproved.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.399 REVIEW AND ACTION; PLAT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Following the Chief Subdivision Engineer’s review of the final plat,
required improvement plans, the engineer’s estimate of probable improvement
costs, required financial guarantees and construction schedule, the Chief
Subdivision Engineer must place the final plat on the agenda of the Plat
Committee for review.
   (B)   The Plat Committee must review the final plat and, based on the plat’s
compliance with the final plat approval criteria of §
154.400, act by simple majority vote to approve or disapprove the final plat.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.400 APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer must review the final plat to determine
if:
      (1)   It is in substantial conformance with the approved preliminary
plat;
      (2)   It complies with all county-imposed conditions of approval;
      (3)   It complies with all applicable county ordinances;
      (4)   It complies with all conditions of approval imposed by the State
Department of Natural Resources, United States Army Corps of Engineers and
Federal Emergency Management Agency and any other applicable agency;
      (5)   It contains all required signatures and none of the signatures are
more than 90 days old;
      (6)   Water and sewer improvements have been approved by appropriate
municipal, state or special district offices, if applicable;
      (7)   An address map for the subdivision has been approved by the County
Land Use Department in accordance with the Street Numbering and Street Sign
Ordinance;
      (8)   The design engineer has identified the location of floodplains,
wetlands and other sensitive areas as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, United States Army Corps of Engineers, State Department of
Natural Resources, the State Environmental Protection Agency and the County
Land Use Department and County Highway Department and has secured the necessary
permits and/or map revisions and has met the requirements of any other federal,
state or local agency;
      (9)   All stormwater management facilities, including stormwater
detention basins, storm sewers and floodplains are located in proper drainage
easements;
      (10)   All open space and environmentally sensitive areas to be set aside
and preserved as common areas are properly deed restricted or placed in a
conservation easement; and
      (11)   Proof of responsibility for maintenance of all community
improvements has been submitted and approved by the county.
   (B)   A final plat may not be approved if it does not comply with the
criteria of division (A) above or if:
      (1)   There are more than minor deviations from the approved preliminary
plat;
      (2)   The preliminary plat approval has lapsed in accordance with §
154.361; or
      (3)   A new highway, pipeline or other major feature has directly
affected the site.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.401 NOTICE OF DISAPPROVAL.
   When a final plat cannot be approved because it does not comply with the
final plat approval criteria of §
154.400, written notice of the reasons for disapproval must be provided to the
applicant.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.402 EFFECT OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval of a final plat confers upon the developer the right to
record the approved plat with the County Recorder of Deeds.
   (B)   No lot within the subdivision may be sold until the final plat has
been approved by the Plat Committee and the plat has been officially recorded.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.403 LAPSE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   The applicant must file the final plat with the County Recorder of
Deeds within 30 days of approval of the final plat by the Plat Committee.
   (B)   If the applicant fails to record the final plat within the required
timeframe, the Plat Committee’s final plat approval will lapse and be of no
further effect, in which case the final plat approval process must be repeated
before recording the plat.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.404 DIGITAL FILES.
   Upon final plat approval by the Plat Committee, the developer must submit a
digital copy of the subdivision plat in a form approved by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
VACATIONS
§ 154.415 INTENT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2823.jpg]
 
   This subchapter sets forth the required review and approval procedures for
vacating subdivision plats and rights-of-way.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.416 AUTHORITY TO FILE VACATION APPLICATION.
   The following groups and individuals shall have standing to file a vacation
application.
   (A)   The owner of the property that is the subject of a vacation request
may file a vacation application.
   (B)   Property owners adjoining unimproved public street rights-of-way
within their subdivision may file for vacation of the right-of-way. For rights-
of-way internal to a subdivision, the adjoining property owners on both sides
of the right-of-way to be vacated are required to jointly file for the right-
of-way vacation. For rights-of-way that form the edge of a subdivision, the
adjoining property owners within the subdivision may file for the right-of-way
vacation.
   (C)   A property owners association may file to vacate any unimproved street
right-of-way within their subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.417 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
   Except as otherwise expressly stated in this subchapter, applications to
vacate a subdivision plat or public right-of-way must be processed in the same
manner as final plats.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.418 REVIEW AND APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   Vacation requests must comply with the following review and approval
criteria, as applicable.
   (A)   The vacation is generally consistent with the County Land Resource
Management Plan.
   (B)   The right-of-way is not expected to be used in the future or the
county receives conveyance or dedication of substituted easements or rights-of-
way appropriate to satisfy the continuing need.
   (C)   The vacation does not create an irregular right-of-way configuration
that could create difficulty in the provision of services or installation of
public improvements.
   (D)   The vacation serves the best interests of the county by removing
maintenance or liability risks.
   (E)   The public benefits of the vacation request outweigh any adverse
impacts of the vacation.
   (F)   The applicant will relocate, if necessary, any public facilities or
utilities located within the right-of-way or easement and grant and/or obtain
an easement for relocation of public facilities or utilities.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.419 LIABILITY.
   As part of a vacation application, the applicant must indemnify and hold the
county harmless for damages resulting to any person as a result of the
vacation.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.420 RECORDATION.
   If the County Board approves of a vacation, the Chief Subdivision Engineer
must sign the deed of vacation (quit claim deed). The applicant must present
the Plat Committee’s approval of the vacation and the deed of vacation for
recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.421 EFFECT OF VACATION.
   (A)   The vacation of any subdivision plat or right-of-way does not
constitute a vacation of the rights of any other individual or agency in, or
related to, the subdivision plat or right-of-way.
   (B)   The approval of a vacation does not, for example, vacate the rights of
a public utility with facilities in the subject right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 154.435 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Minor waiver or modification. A request to deviate from any of the
subdivision application submittal requirements may be classified and processed
as a minor waiver or modification. The Chief Subdivision Engineer is authorized
to review and approve minor waivers or modifications.
   (B)   Major waiver or modification.
      (1)   (a)   A request to deviate from any of the subdivision design and
improvement standards of this chapter or from any requirement that does not
qualify for processing as a minor waiver or modification (see division (A)
above) is classified as a major waiver or modification.
         (b)   Only the County Board is authorized to review and approve major
waivers or modifications.
      (2)   The requirements of the County Stormwater Management Ordinance may
be varied only in accordance with the procedures specified in the Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.436 MINOR WAIVERS OR MODIFICATIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2825.jpg]
 
   (A)   Application filing. Complete applications for minor waivers or
modifications must be submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer. At a
minimum, the application must include:
      (1)   A description of the specific requirement or standard to be waived
or modified; and
      (2)   All reasons and justifications for the requested waiver or
modification.
   (B)   Review and action.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application of a minor waiver or
modification, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may distribute copies to other
officials and agencies for review and comment.
      (2)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer may approve the minor waiver or
modification only if the Chief Subdivision Engineer determines that the
requested minor waiver or modification will in no way compromise the intent of
this chapter.
      (3)   Reasonable conditions may be imposed to ensure that the minor
waiver or modification will not compromise the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.437 MAJOR WAIVERS OR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Application filing. Complete applications for major waivers or
modifications must be submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer. At a
minimum, the application must include:
      (1)   A description of specific requirement or standard to be waived or
modified; and
      (2)   The reasons and justifications for the request.
   (B)   Review and action. Requests for major waivers or modifications must be
processed concurrently with applications for plat approval. The process is the
same as required for major subdivision approval except that final authority to
approve or deny the requested major waiver or modification rests with the full
County Board.
   (C)   Approval criteria. Major waivers or modifications may be approved or
recommended for approval only if review and decision-making bodies find that:
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, topography
or other specific conditions of the subject property, strict compliance with
this chapter would cause a particular hardship upon the property owner, as
opposed to a mere inconvenience;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the waiver or modification request are
based are unique to the subject property and not applicable, generally, to
other property;
      (3)   The hardship has not been self-created;
      (4)   The requested waiver or modification will not be detrimental to the
public safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property or
improvements in the area in which the subject property is located;
      (5)   The requested waiver or modification does not conflict with the
County Stormwater Management Ordinance; and
Commentary:
   Requests for waivers of modifications to the County Stormwater Management
Ordinance may be processed only in accordance with the requirements of the
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
      (6)   The waiver or modification is the least deviation from this chapter
that will mitigate the hardship found to exist on the subject property.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
§ 154.450 APPLICABILITY; AUTHORIZED APPEALS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2827.jpg]
 
   The full County Board is authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official of the county in the
administration, interpretation or enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.451 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by the applicant or any
other aggrieved party. The County Board is authorized to determine whether the
person appealing the decision is an “aggrieved party”.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.452 APPLICATION FILING.
   (A)   Complete applications for appeals of administrative decisions must be
filed with the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
   (B)   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within 15 days of
the date of the decision being appealed.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.453 PLAT COMMITTEE REVIEW.
   The Plat Committee must review the appeal and recommend that the Chief
Subdivision Engineer’s decision be upheld or overturned, based on whether the
decision is supported by the facts in evidence and the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.454 COUNTY BOARD ACTION.
   (A)   After the Plat Committee has considered the matter and made a
recommendation, the Chief Subdivision Engineer must place the matter on the
agenda of the next regularly scheduled County Board meeting.
   (B)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer must notify the applicant and the
appellant of the date, time and place of the County Board meeting.
   (C)   The County Board must review the appeal and the recommendation of the
Plat Committee and act to uphold or overturn the action or decision of the
administrative official by simple majority vote, based on whether the decision
is supported by the facts in evidence and the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The action of the County Board is final and binding on all parties.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
§ 154.465 SUMMARY OF REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ROLES.
   The following table provides a summary of review and decision-making roles
in the subdivision review process. In the event of conflict between this
summary table and the procedures of §
154.031, the procedures of §
154.031 will govern.
 Planning and Chief                     Planning and Plat
 Zoning       Subdivision Road District Zoning       Committee County Board
              Engineer                  Commission
              Planning   Chief       Road     Planning   Plat
              and Zoning Subdivision District and Zoning Committee County Board
                         Engineer             Commission
Subdivision
Pre-
application   R          R           R
meeting
Preliminary   R          R           R        R          DM
plat
Improvement              DM
plan
Final plat               R                               DM
Minor
waivers/                 DM
modifications
Major
waivers/      R          R           R        R          R         DM
modifications
Vacations     R          R           R        R          DM
Appeals of
Admin.                                                   R         DM
decisions
R = Review and/or recommendation; DM = Final decision-making authority
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.466 COUNTY BOARD.
   The full County Board has final decision-making authority on requests for
major waivers or modifications and on appeals of administrative decisions. See
§§
154.435 through
154.437 and
154.450 through
154.454.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.467 PLAT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Plat Committee of the County Board reviews and recommends major
waivers or modifications and appeals of administrative decisions. See §§
154.435 through
154.437 and
54.450 through
154.454.
   (B)   The Plat Committee has final decision-making authority on preliminary
plats, final plats and vacations. See §§
154.350 through
154.361,
154.395 through
154.404 and
154.415 through
154.421, respectively.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.468 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission reviews and makes recommendations for
approval or denial of preliminary plats. See §§
154.350 through
154.361.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.469 PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION OF THE COUNTY LAND USE DEPARTMENT.
   The Planning and Zoning Division of the County Land Use Department is
responsible for participating in pre-application conferences and for reviewing
and evaluating preliminary plats for compliance with adopted county plans and
policies. After each review, the Planning Division must forward to the
developer and Chief Subdivision Engineer, a written review noting deficiencies
and comments.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.470 CHIEF SUBDIVISION ENGINEER.
   (A)   The County Executive has sole authority to designate a Chief
Subdivision Engineer and an acting Chief Subdivision Engineer to act in the
absence of the Chief Subdivision Engineer. The Chief Subdivision Engineer and
any acting Chief Subdivision Engineer must be state-registered professional
engineers.
   (B)   In addition to any other duties expressly assigned by this chapter,
the Chief Subdivision Engineer is responsible for:
      (1)   Maintaining permanent and current records with respect to the
regulations of this chapter;
      (2)   Receiving and filing all plans, preliminary plats, site development
plans for permit, construction or improvement plans, subdivision guarantees and
final plats, together with applications therefore;
      (3)   Reviewing all preliminary plats to determine whether the plans
comply with these regulations;
      (4)   Forwarding copies of preliminary plats to other appropriate
agencies for input, comments and/or procedural recommendations;
      (5)   Forwarding copies of construction improvement plans to the Road
District Commissioner;
      (6)   Receiving and filing transmittal letters from the Road District
Commissioner per their review of the improvement plan;
      (7)   Reviewing all final plats to determine whether they comply with the
preliminary plan and these regulations; and
      (8)   Forwarding preliminary and final plats to the Plat Committee, when
required by these regulations, together with the Chief Subdivision Engineer’s
recommendations.
   (C)   If the workload of the Chief Subdivision Engineer creates undue delay
in the review of subdivision plats or special expertise is required, an outside
consultant may be hired by the county to assist in the subdivision review and
approval process.
   (D)   Developers must bear the cost of any outside consulting support. An
outside consultant may only be hired for outside consulting assistance only
after the developer agrees in writing to bear all costs of the outside review.
The outside engineer review costs will be in addition to the regular plat and
permit fees to be paid to the county.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.471 COUNTY HIGHWAY ENGINEER OR ROAD DISTRICT COMMISSIONER.
   The County Highway Engineer or Road District Commissioner is authorized to
review with the Chief Subdivision Engineer all plans and plats and to make
determinations concerning compliance with applicable county or township road
and drainage design standards and engineering specifications.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.472 COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   The County Health Department is responsible for reviewing all plats and
making determinations and recommendations regarding the type of water supply
and sewage disposal facilities needed to provide safe and adequate service to
each subdivision. In addition, the County Health Department must make
determinations in all matters concerning public health. The determination and
recommendations must be reviewed with the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, a violation of any
provision of this chapter constitutes an ordinance violation, punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500, with each day the violation exists constituting a
separate offense.
   (B)   Imposition of a fine does not exempt an offender from compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   At the option of the Chief Subdivision Engineer, violations may be
referred to the County State’s Attorney for appropriate action.
   (D)   Any person who begins development of any property, sells or offers to
sell a lot or other property, before complying with all applicable provisions
of this chapter will be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined a minimum of $500 per
day for each offense, with each day being a separate offense.
   (E)   The remedies provided herein are not exclusive and the exercise of any
remedy does not bar, suspend or otherwise prohibit the exercise of any right to
any other remedy, including, but not limited to, a civil cause of action either
at law or in equity.
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
APPENDIX A: TYPICAL ROAD CROSS SECTIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2755.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
NOTE: Appendix A is available in PDF, click HERE
APPENDIX B: ENTRANCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2757.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-8-1970; Res. 09-167, passed 6-18-2009)
NOTE: Appendix B is available in PDF, click HERE
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
155-1 Legal Framework
   
155-1.10   Official name (title)
   
155-1.20   Effective date
   
155-1.30   Authority
   
155-1.40   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
155-1.50   Exemptions
   
155-1.60   Purposes
   
155-1.70   Minimum requirements; compliance required
   
155-1.80   Compliance required
   
155-1.90   Conflicting provisions
   
155-1.100   Rules of language and ordinance construction
   
155-1.110   Zoning map
   
155-1.120   Transitional provisions
   
155-1.130   Zoning upon disconnection or dissolution
155-2 Agricultural Districts
   
155-2.10   General
   
155-2.20   Allowed uses
   
155-2.30   Lot and building regulations
   
155-2.40   Other regulations
155-3 Residential Districts
   
155-3.10   General
   
155-3.20   Allowed uses
   
155-3.30   Lot and building regulations
   
155-3.40   Other regulations
155-4 Commercial Districts
   
155-4.10   General
   
155-4.20   Allowed uses
   
155-4.30   Lot and building regulations
   
155-4.40   Other regulations
155-5 Industrial Districts
   
155-5.10   General
   
155-5.20   Allowed uses
   
155-5.30   Lot and building regulations
   
155-5.40   Other regulations
155-6 Overlay and Special Purpose Districts
   
155-6.10   General
   
155-6.20   SP-PO, Parks and Open Space (Special Purpose) District
155-7 Allowed Uses
   
155-7.10   General
   
155-7.20   Understanding the use table
   
155-7.30   Use table
155-8 Use Classifications
   
155-8.10   General
   
155-8.20   Residential use category
   
155-8.30   Public and civic use category
   
155-8.40   Commercial use category
   
155-8.50   Industrial use category
   
155-8.60   Agricultural use category
155-9 Supplementary Use Regulations
   
155-9.10   Adult entertainment facilities
   
155-9.20   Animal care/boarding and veterinary clinics
   
155-9.25   Exotic and wild animals; rehabilitation facilities, sanctuaries, and
zoological park
   
155-9.30   Bed and breakfasts
   
155-9.40   Cargo container storage and maintenance facilities
   
155-9.50   Community gardens
   
155-9.60   Construction offices and construction-related equipment storage
   
155-9.70   Fill operations
   
155-9.80   Firearms dealers and (accessory) indoor shooting ranges
   
155-9.90   Group living facilities
   
155-9.100   Day care centers/day care homes
   
155-9.110   Elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO)
   
155-9.120   Entertainment and spectator sports
   
155-9.130   Intermodal terminals
   
155-9.140   Auto salvage
   
155-9.150   Landscape waste composting and land application of waste
   
155-9.160   Leaseholds, residential
   
155-9.170   Mobile homes
   
155-9.180   Mining/quarrying
   
155-9.190   Pipelines
   
155-9.200   Planned unit developments
   
155-9.210   Recycling facilities
   
155-9.220   Battery energy storage facilities
   
155-9.230   Residential convenience and support establishments
   
155-9.240   Self-service storage facilities
   
155-9.245   Commercial solar energy facilities
   
155-9.250   Wholesale power generators
   
155-9.260   Commercial wind energy facilities
   
155-9.270   Wireless telecommunications facilities
   
155-9.280    Wineries, craft brewing and distilling
   
155-9.290   Cargo container dwelling units
   
155-9.300   Adult-use cannabis businesses
155-10 Accessory and Temporary Uses
   
155-10.10   Accessory uses
   
155-10.20   Temporary uses
155-11 Parking and Loading
   
155-11.10   General
   
155-11.20   Calculations
   
155-11.30   Parking ratios
   
155-11.40   Shared parking
   
155-11.50   Location of off-street parking
   
155-11.60   Use of off-street parking and loading areas
   
155-11.65   Parking of trucks, trailers and recreational vehicles in A-2 and
residential districts
   
155-11.70   Parking area design
   
155-11.80   Accessible parking (for people with disabilities)
   
155-11.90   Bicycle parking
   
155-11.100   Motorcycle parking
   
155-11.110   Drive-through facilities and vehicle stacking spaces
   
155-11.120   Cross-access
   
155-11.130   Off-street loading facilities
155-12 Landscaping and Screening
   
155-12.10   General
   
155-12.20   Removal of existing trees
   
155-12.30   General site landscaping
   
155-12.40   Road frontage landscaping
   
155-12.50   Perimeter vehicular use area landscaping
   
155-12.60   Interior vehicular use area landscaping
   
155-12.70   Land use buffers
   
155-12.80   Screening
   
155-12.90   Landscape material and design
   
155-12.100   Landscape plan
   
155-12.110   Alternative compliance
155-13 Signs
   
155-13.10   General
   
155-13.20   Prohibited signs and sign characteristics
   
155-13.30   Signs allowed without sign permits
   
155-13.40   Residential uses and zoning districts
   
155-13.50   Commercial and industrial zoning districts
   
155-13.60   Advertising signs
   
155-13.70   Dynamic displays
   
155-13.80   Master sign plans
   
155-13.90   Administration
   
155-13.100   Temporary mobile signs
   
155-13.110   Nonconforming signs
   
155-13.120   Unlawful signs
   
155-13.130   Rules of measurement
   
155-13.140   External illumination
155-14 Miscellaneous Regulations
   
155-14.10   (Reserved)
   
155-14.20   Street frontage and access
   
155-14.30   Traffic studies
   
155-14.40   Pedestrian walkways
   
155-14.50   Water supply and sewage disposal
   
155-14.60   Access across property
   
155-14.70   Division of lots
   
155-14.80   Vision clearance
   
155-14.90   Fences and walls
   
155-14.100   Outdoor display and storage
   
155-14.110   Outdoor lighting
   
155-14.120   Floodplain development
   
155-14.130   Municipal provisions
   
155-14.140   Junk cars
155-15 Nonconformities
   
155-15.10   General
   
155-15.20   Nonconforming lots
   
155-15.30   Nonconforming uses
   
155-15.40   Nonconforming structures
   
155-15.50   Nonconforming development features
   
155-15.60   Nonconforming signs
155-16 Development Review and Approval Procedures
   
155-16.10   Common provisions
   
155-16.20   Zoning ordinance text amendments
   
155-16.30   Zoning map amendments (rezonings)
   
155-16.40   Special use permits
   
155-16.50   Planned unit developments
   
155-16.60   Administrative adjustments
   
155-16.70   Variances
   
155-16.80   Zoning certificates
   
155-16.90   Temporary use permits
   
155-16.100   Appeals of administrative decisions
155-17 Administration and Enforcement
   
155-17.10   Review and decision-making bodies
   
155-17.20   Violations, penalties and enforcement
155-18 Measurements and Definitions
   
155-18.10   Measurements and exceptions (lot and building regulations)
   
155-18.20   Definitions
155-1 LEGAL FRAMEWORK
§ 155-1.10 OFFICIAL NAME (TITLE).
   The official name of this chapter (
Chapter 155) is the "Zoning Ordinance of Will County, Illinois." For
convenience, it is referred to throughout
Chapter 155 as the "zoning ordinance."
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.20 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on and compliance
with its provisions becomes mandatory beginning October 1, 2012, unless
otherwise expressly stated in a specific provision of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.30 AUTHORITY.
   This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and
limitations imposed by Illinois law, including ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-12001
et seq.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.40 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The regulations of this zoning ordinance apply to all development,
public or private, within unincorporated Will County, except as provided by
state or federal law or otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Areas within the incorporated limits of cities, villages, and towns
that have zoning ordinances in effect are excluded from the jurisdiction of
this zoning ordinance. Areas within the incorporated limits of cities and towns
that do not have zoning ordinances in effect are subject to the provisions of
this zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.50 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Agricultural exemptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this zoning ordinance may not be exercised to
impose regulations or required zoning permits with respect to land used for
agricultural purposes or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair,
alteration, remodeling, or extension of buildings or structures used for
agricultural purposes upon such land, except as provided in ILCS Ch. 55, Ch. 5,
§§ 5-12001 et seq. In the event that land ceases to be used solely for
agricultural purposes, then and only then do the provisions of this zoning
ordinance apply.
      (2)   The agricultural zoning exemption stated in division (A)(1) of this
section does not exempt agricultural uses, buildings and structures from
complying with the Water Resource Ordinance or from obtaining building permits
and complying with applicable building ordinances.
      (3)   A residence in connection with an agricultural use and the
residence's water supply and sewage disposal facilities are not exempt and are
subject to the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Public utility exemptions. The provisions of this zoning ordinance may
not be exercised to impose regulations on any of the following:
      (1)   The type or location of any underground installations, poles,
towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other similar distributing
equipment of a public utility as defined in the Public Utilities Act, if the
public utility is subject to the Messages Tax Act, the Gas Revenue Tax Act or
the Public Utilities Revenue Act, or if such facilities or equipment are
located in any rights-of-way and are used for railroad purposes; or
      (2)   Uses, buildings, or structures of a public utility as defined in
the Public Utilities Act.
   (C)   FERC-regulated pipeline exemptions. Pipelines subject to regulation by
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and above-ground equipment
associated with such pipelines are permitted in all zoning districts and are
exempt from compliance with minimum lot area, lot width and setback
regulations. Pipelines are subject to the regulations of §
155-9.190.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-1.60 PURPOSES.
   This zoning ordinance is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   Helping implement the Land Resource Management Plan.
   (B)   Accommodating and promoting sustainable building and development
practices.
   (C)   Protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of present
and future inhabitants of Will County, by:
      (1)   Requiring adherence to land use patterns that have been deemed to
provide development in the best interest of the entire county as indicated,
explained, and substantiated in the official plans of Will County;
      (2)   Protecting ground water supplies by controlling inappropriate land
uses where soils and geological characteristics present the possibility of
diminishing supplies or contamination by pollutants;
      (3)   Requiring provisions of adequate open space for sunlight, clean
air, privacy, noise abatement, recreation, pedestrian circulation, and safe
sight distances for operation of motor vehicles;
      (4)   Requiring provisions for safe and adequate circulation of motor
vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
      (5)   Requiring provisions for adequate water supply and sewage disposal;
      (6)   Requiring provisions that promote adequate police and fire
protection;
      (7)   Providing for the opportunity to create a variety of housing
opportunities and life styles, employment, industrial, and commercial
enterprises;
      (8)   Prohibiting the intrusion of incompatible uses into residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, and other necessary natural
and man-made areas;
      (9)   Requiring provisions for adequate and essential facilities,
services, and utilities;
      (10)   Requiring the provisions of adequate control, operation, and
maintenance of facilities necessary for public use; and
      (11)   Providing for the maintenance of a viable agricultural base,
including supporting businesses and services.
   (D)   Conserving property values throughout Will County by:
      (1)   Prohibiting the intrusion of incompatible uses into residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, and natural resource and
other necessary natural and man-made areas;
      (2)   Requiring provisions of adequate open space for sunlight, clean
air, privacy, noise abatement, recreation, pedestrian circulation, and safe
sight distances for operation of motor vehicles;
      (3)   Requiring provisions for coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
development; and
      (4)   Requiring provisions for promoting adherence to land use patterns
that have been deemed to provide development to the best interest of the entire
county.
   (E)   Lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways of
Will County, by:
      (1)   Requiring provisions for safe and adequate circulation of motor
vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
      (2)   Requiring provisions for adequate open space for safe sight
distances for operation of motor vehicles; and
      (3)   Requiring provisions for coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
development.
   (F)   Lessening or avoiding the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation of runoff of storm or flood water within Will
County, by:
      (1)   Requiring provisions for controlling development within floodplain;
and
      (2)   Requiring provisions for sediment and erosion control.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.70 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The provisions of this zoning ordinance are the minimum requirements
deemed necessary to carry out the zoning ordinance's stated purpose and intent.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, all uses and
development must comply with all other applicable county, state and federal
regulations.
   (C)   All references in the zoning ordinance to other county, state, or
federal regulations are for informational purposes only and do not constitute a
complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any
responsibility for the county to enforce state or federal regulations.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.80 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this zoning ordinance:
   (A)   A building or structure may not be erected, moved, reconstructed,
extended or structurally altered for any purpose other than one that is allowed
in the subject zoning district.
   (B)   Land may not be used for any purpose other than one that is allowed in
the subject zoning district.
   (C)   Buildings, structures and land may be used and arranged only in
compliance with the requirements specified in this zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.90 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
zoning ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state or federal
government, the more restrictive provision will control, to the extent allowed
by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent
controls.
   (B)   Conflict with other county regulations. If the provisions of this
zoning ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with
provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the
more restrictive provision will control unless otherwise expressly stated. The
more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   (C)   Conflict with private agreements and covenants. This zoning ordinance
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant,
deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions
of this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private
agreement or covenant, the provisions of this zoning ordinance control.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.100 RULES OF LANGUAGE AND ORDINANCE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Meanings and intent. The language of the zoning ordinance must be read
literally. Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words and terms
expressly defined in this zoning ordinance (see, for example, Article
155-8 and §
155-18.20) have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context expressly
indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined in this
ordinance have their common dictionary meaning.
   (B)   Computation of time.
      (1)   References to "days" are to calendar days unless otherwise
expressly stated. References to "business days" are references to regular
county government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
observed by county government.
      (2)   The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by county government, that day is
excluded.
      (3)   A day concludes at the close of business, and any materials
received after that time will be considered to have been received the following
day.
   (C)   Tenses and usage.
      (1)   Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
      (2)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
      (3)   The words "must," "will," "shall" and "may not" are mandatory.
      (4)   The word "may" is permissive, and "should" is advisory, not
mandatory or required.
      (5)   When used with numbers, "up to x," "not more than x" and "a maximum
of x" all include "x."
   (D)   Conjunctions. Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
      (1)   "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
   (E)   Headings and illustrations. Headings and illustrations are provided
for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing,
table, figure, or illustration, the text controls.
   (F)   Current versions and citations. All references to other county, state,
or federal regulations in the zoning ordinance refer to the most current
version and citation for those regulations, unless expressly indicated
otherwise. When the referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced
by other regulations, zoning ordinance requirements for compliance are no
longer in effect.
   (G)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use "including," "such as," or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
   (H)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the county to perform an
act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this
zoning ordinance expressly prohibit such a delegation.
   (I)   Public officials and agencies. All employees, public officials, bodies
and agencies to which references are made are those of the Will County unless
otherwise expressly stated.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-1.110 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Establishment. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
established by this zoning ordinance are shown on a geographic coverage layer
entitled "zoning" that is maintained as part of the county's geographic
information system (GIS) under the direction of the Zoning Administrator. This
"zoning" geographic coverage layer constitutes Will County's official zoning
map. The official zoning map—together with all notations, references, data and
other information shown on the map—is adopted and incorporated into this zoning
ordinance. It is as much a part of this zoning ordinance as if actually
depicted within its pages.
   (B)   Maintenance and updates. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for
directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon
as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments (rezonings). No
unauthorized person may alter or modify the official zoning map. The Zoning
Administrator may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be
produced and maintain digital or printed copies of superseded versions of the
official zoning map for historical reference.
   (C)   District boundaries. When the zoning map shows a zoning district
boundary as following a particular feature, or reflects a clear intent that the
boundary follows the feature, the boundary will be construed as following that
feature as it actually exists.
   (D)   Map interpretations. Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning
boundary, the actual location of the boundary will be determined by the Zoning
Administrator using the following rules of interpretation.
      (1)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
river, stream, lake or other watercourse will be construed as following the
actual centerline of the watercourse. If, subsequent to the establishment of
the boundary, the centerline of the watercourse should move as a result of
natural processes (flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.), the boundary will
be construed as moving with the centerline of the watercourse.
      (2)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
ridge line or topographic contour line will be construed as following the
actual ridge line or contour line. If, subsequent to the establishment of the
boundary, the ridge line or contour line should move as a result of natural
processes (erosion, slippage, subsidence, etc.), the boundary will be construed
as moving with the ridge line or contour line.
      (3)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following lot
lines or other parcel boundaries assigned by the Will County Supervisor of
Assessments will be construed as following such lot lines or parcel boundaries.
      (4)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
street or railroad line will be construed as following the centerline of the
street or railroad right-of-way.
      (5)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
boundary of an adjacent municipality will be construed as following that
boundary.
      (6)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately parallel to, or
as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be construed as
being actually parallel to, or an extension of, the feature.
      (7)   Zoning boundaries that do not coincide with a property line, parcel
boundary, landmark or particular feature will be determined with a scale.
      (8)   It is the intent that the entire unincorporated area of the county,
including all land and water areas, rivers, streets, alleys, railroads, and
other right-of-ways, be included in the districts established by this zoning
ordinance. If any area is not shown on the zoning map as being included in a
zoning district, it will be deemed to be classified in the E-1 district until
otherwise reclassified by a zoning map amendment in accordance with §
155-16.30.
   (E)   Split-zoned lots.
      (1)   The zoning map may not be amended to classify a single lot into two
or more base zoning districts.
      (2)   The split zoning of any newly created lot (into more than one base
zoning district classification) is prohibited.
      (3)   When an existing lot is classified in two or more base zoning
classifications the following rules apply, at the owner's option:
         (a)   Each of the separate zoned areas on the lot may be treated as a
separate zoning lot and developed in accordance with the zoning district
regulations that apply to each respective area;
         (b)   The more restrictive provisions of the subject zoning districts,
including but not limited to, use, parking, signs, setbacks, height and other
lot and building regulations, may be applied to the entire lot; or
         (c)   When one zoning district applies to at least 75% of the total
lot area and the other zoning district occupies no more than 5,000 square feet
of the total lot area, the regulations of the zoning district occupying the
larger portion of the lot may be applied to the entire zoning lot.
      (4)   Building setbacks do not apply along base zoning district boundary
lines that split a lot under single ownership.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-1.120 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this section address the transition from the previous
zoning ordinance (the one in effect before the effective date specified in §
155-1.20) to this zoning ordinance.
   (A)   Applications, permits and approvals.
      (1)   Any building, development or structure for which a building permit
was issued or a complete permit application had been accepted for processing
before October 1, 2012 may be completed in conformance with the issued building
permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building,
development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of this zoning
ordinance. If building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed
under the original building permit, then the building, development or structure
may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the
standards of this zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Applications for special use permits, temporary use permits,
variances or other zoning approvals that were submitted in complete form and
are pending approval on the effective date specified in §
155-1.20 must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the zoning ordinance in
effect immediately before the effective date specified in §
155-1.20. Building permits for construction and development approved under such
zoning approvals may be issued in accordance with division (A)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   Building permits may be issued for construction or development
approved under division (A)(2) of this section, even if such building,
development or structure does not fully comply with provisions of this zoning
ordinance. If building is not commenced and completed within the time allowed
under the building permit, then the building, development or structure may be
constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the standards of
this zoning ordinance.
      (4)   When a use classified as a special use under this zoning ordinance
exists as a special use, permitted use, nonconforming use or a lawful use by
court decree on the effective date specified in §
155-1.20, such use will be considered a lawfully established special use under
this zoning ordinance. When any amendment to this zoning ordinance changes the
classification of a permitted use to a special use, any use lawfully
established before such amendment will be considered a lawfully established
special use after the effective date of such amendment. A lawfully established
existing use that is not allowed as a special use or permitted use in the
district in which the use is now located will be considered a nonconforming use
and will be subject to all applicable regulations of Article
155-15.
   (B)   Violations continue.
      (1)   Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance will continue to be
a violation under this zoning ordinance and be subject to penalties and
enforcement under §
155-17.20.
      (2)   If the use, development, construction or other activity that was a
violation under the previous ordinance complies with the regulations of this
zoning ordinance, enforcement action will cease, except for collecting
penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date specified in §
155-1.20.
      (3)   The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect nor prevent
any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the
previous ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in §
155-1.20.
   (C)   Nonconformities.
      (1)   Any nonconformity under the previous zoning ordinance will also be
nonconformity under this zoning ordinance, as long as the situation that
resulted in the nonconforming status under the previous regulation continues to
exist.
      (2)   If, however, a nonconforming situation under previous zoning
regulations becomes conforming because of the adoption of this zoning
ordinance, or any subsequent amendment to it, then the situation will no longer
be considered a nonconformity.
      (3)   A situation that did not constitute a (lawful) nonconforming
situation under the previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve
(lawful) nonconforming status under this zoning ordinance merely by repeal of
the previous zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-1.130 ZONING UPON DISCONNECTION OR DISSOLUTION.
   Any additions to the unincorporated area of Will County resulting from
disconnection by municipalities or dissolution of a municipality will be deemed
to be classified in the E-1 district until otherwise reclassified by a zoning
map amendment in accordance with §
155-16.30.
   (A)   Severability. If any portion of this zoning ordinance is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that portion
is to be deemed severed from the zoning ordinance and in no way affects the
validity of the remainder of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-2 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
§ 155-2.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   The districts. The county's agricultural zoning districts are listed
below. When this zoning ordinance refers to "agricultural" zoning districts or
"A" districts, it is referring to these districts.
 
Zoning District             Map Symbol
Agricultural                A-1
Agricultural-Residential[1] A-2
[1]   The A-2 district is a "grandfathered" zoning classification that is no
longer available for rezonings.
 
   (B)   Purposes.
      (1)   A-1. The A-1 zoning district is primarily intended to help
accommodate, promote and preserve agriculture and farming as economically
desirable businesses and a key determinant of the county's rural character,
while also respecting the property rights of farmers.
      (2)   A-2. The A-2 district is no longer available for rezonings. No
rezoning applications may be accepted or approved for rezoning to the A-
2 district.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-2.20 ALLOWED USES.
   Principal uses are allowed in agricultural zoning districts in accordance
with the regulations of Article
155-7 (Allowed Uses).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-2.30 LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. This section establishes basic lot and building regulations
that apply in agricultural districts. These regulations offer certainty for
property owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed;
they should not be construed as a guarantee that maximum allowed densities and
development yields can be achieved on every lot. Other factors, such as
topography, the presence of protected resources, health department requirements
for well and septic, off-street parking and other factors may work to further
limit actual development potential.
   (B)   Basic standards. The lot and building standards of the following table
apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in agricultural districts,
except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. General
exceptions to these standards and rules for measuring compliance can be found
in §
155-18.10.
Legend Lot and Building Standards A-1 A-2
Legend Lot and Building Standards                    A-1   A-2
L1     Minimum Lot Area (acres)                      10[1] 2.5
L2     Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)                   300   300
      Minimum Setbacks (feet)
S1        Street (from CL of road)                100   100
S2        Side                                    50    20
S3        Rear                                    50    50
S4     Minimum Setbacks for Animal Confinement       50    50
       Buildings (feet)[2]
B1     Maximum Building Coverage (%)                 20    20
      Maximum Accessory Building Area (square feet) None  3,000 [4]
      Maximum Building Height (feet)
         Accessory Buildings [3] [5]             25    25
         All Other                               Per Will Co. Building Ord.
[1]   See the farmstead split provisions of §
155-2.40(H) for exceptions to this minimum lot area regulation.
[2]   Setback required from all lot lines. See also §
155-10.10(B)(2).
[3]   Does not apply to farm buildings.
[4]    Does not apply to stables.
[5]   Does not apply to attached garages.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5136.jpg]
 
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 21- 139, passed 5- 20-2021)
§ 155-2.40 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Uses and development in agricultural districts may be subject to other
regulations and standards, including the following:
   (A)   Nonconformities. See Article
155-15.
   (B)   Accessory uses. See §
155-10.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading. See Article
155-11.
   (D)   Landscaping and screening. See Article
155-12.
   (E)   Signs. See Article
155-13.
   (F)   Temporary uses. See §
155-10.20.
   (G)   Outdoor lighting. See §
155-14.110.
   (H)   Farmstead splits. The intent of the farmstead split provisions of this
section is to allow a one-time split of a farmstead lot out of a qualifying A-
1-zoned parcel. The provisions apply to farmstead splits that occurred before
the effective date specified in §
155-1.20 and to farmstead splits proposed after the effective date specified in
§
155-1.20. Farmstead splits are subject to all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The farmstead split must comply with all applicable requirements of
ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205 (Plat Act).
      (2)   The parent parcel must be zoned A-1 and have no outstanding zoning
ordinance violations.
      (3)   The principal use of the parent parcel must be crop or animal
agriculture.
      (4)   Farmstead lots to be split from the parent parcel may or may not
include farm-related buildings.
      (5)   A farmstead lot to be split from the parent parcel must have
frontage on a public road or provide proof of access to a public road through a
private drive or easement.
      (6)   There is no fixed minimum size requirement for the farmstead lot to
be split from the parent farm parcel, provided that after the split the
farmstead parcel must comply with all applicable building setbacks and health
department regulations.
      (7)   After the farmstead split, the parent parcel must comply with all
applicable A-1 lot size, setback and lot coverage requirements or remain as
compliant as before the split.
      (8)   To ensure that a parcel is restricted to a single farmstead split,
the owner of the entire parent parcel must execute a recordable covenant
between the owner and the county for the entire parent parcel. The covenant
must prohibit further division of the parent parcel without full platting of
the remainder of the parent parcel and rezoning to the appropriate zoning
district, when required by ordinance. The covenant must be binding on all heirs
and assigns of both the parent parcel and the farmstead split lot. The covenant
must be recorded as a condition of the approval of the farmstead split and no
construction authorization may be issued until the covenant has been recorded.
      (9)   The farmstead split provisions of this section shall be
administered and interpreted as allowing future land divisions (farmstead
splits) that comply with these regulations and as recognizing, as lawful,
previous land divisions that comply with these regulations.
      (10)   Land divisions that are required because of condemnation
proceedings and similar land divisions that are required by government action
do not count as farmstead splits.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
155-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155-3.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   The districts. The county's residential zoning districts are listed
below. When this zoning ordinance refers to "residential" zoning districts, it
is referring to these districts.
Zoning District Map Symbol
Zoning District           Map Symbol
Residential Rural Estate  E-1
Residential Estate        E-2
Residential-Single-family R-1
Residential-Single-family R-2
Residential-Single-family R-2A
Residential-Single-family R-3
Residential-Single-family R-4
Residential-Single-family R-5
Residential-Multi-family  R-6
 
   (B)   Purposes. Will County's residential zoning districts are primarily
intended to create, maintain and promote a variety of housing and lifestyle
opportunities for individual households and to maintain and promote desired
form and use concepts designated in the county's Land Resource Management Plan.
While the districts primarily accommodate residential use types, some
nonresidential uses are also allowed.
      (1)   E-1 and E-2 districts.
         (a)   E-1 and E-2 districts are primarily intended to:
            1.   Help preserve the rural and open space character of areas that
are not prime agricultural lands and not suitable for urban or suburban
development because of location, topography, soil characteristics, the lack of
urban services or other natural or man-made factors;
            2.   Accommodate very large-lot, rural and estate-type residential
use;
            3.   Help conserve sensitive natural resources; and
            4.   Allow farming and the keeping of horses and domestic farm
animals as an accessory use to the primary residential use of the property.
         (b)   Conservation design subdivisions are allowed and encouraged for
new residential developments in E-1 and E-2 districts.
      (2)   R-1, R-2 and R-2A districts.
         (a)   R-1, R-2 and R-2A districts are primarily intended to
accommodate detached houses on large lots in areas served by paved roads and
where police, fire and emergency medical services are readily available. As
with all residential districts, R-1, R-2 and R-2A districts also allow some
other uses typically found within residential areas in Will County.
         (b)   Conservation design subdivisions are allowed and encouraged for
new residential developments in R-1, R-2 and R-2A districts.
      (3)   R-3 district.
         (a)   The R-3 district is primarily intended to accommodate detached
houses in areas served by central water service and paved roads and where
police, fire and emergency medical services are readily available. As with all
residential districts, the R-3 district also allows some other uses typically
found within residential areas in Will County.
         (b)   Conservation design subdivisions are allowed and encouraged for
new residential developments in the R-3 district.
      (4)   R-4 and R-5 districts.
         (a)   R-4 and R-5 districts are primarily intended to accommodate
detached houses in areas served by central water and sewer and a full range of
urban facilities and services, including public transportation. As with all
residential districts, R-4 and R-5 districts also allows some other uses
typically found within residential areas in Will County.
         (b)   Conservation design subdivisions are allowed and encouraged for
new residential developments in the R-4 district.
      (5)   R-6 district. The R-6 district is primarily intended to accommodate
a mix of housing types, including townhouses, multi-unit buildings and detached
houses. Like the R-4 and R-5 districts, the R-6 district is appropriate for
application only in areas served by central water and sewer and a full range of
urban services, including public transportation.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-3.20 ALLOWED USES.
   Principal uses are allowed in residential zoning districts in accordance
with the regulations of Article
155-7 (Allowed Uses).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-3.30 LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. This section establishes basic lot and building regulations
that apply in residential districts. These regulations offer certainty for
property owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed;
they are not to be construed as a guarantee that maximum allowed densities and
development yields can be achieved on every lot. Other factors, such as
topography, the presence of protected resources, health department requirements
for well and septic, off-street parking and other factors may work to further
limit actual development potential.
   (B)   Basic standards. The lot and building standards of the following table
apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in residential districts,
unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. See §
155-18.10 for exceptions to these standards and rules for measuring compliance.
Legend Lot and Building Standards E-1 E-2 R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6
Legend Lot and Building Standards          E-1     E-2     R-1    R-2    R-2A   R-3    R-4    R-5    R-6
L1     Minimum Lot Area (square feet)      215,000 105,000 60,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 12,500 10,000 10,000
      Minimum Lot Area Per Unit (sq. ft.) NA      NA      NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     NA     3,200
       [1]
L2     Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)         300     180     165    150    120    90     70     70     60
      Minimum Setbacks (feet)
S1a       Street (from CL of non-       100     100     90     80     80     80     80     80     80
       dedicated road)
S1b       Street (from ROW of dedicated 67      67      57     47     47     30     30     30     30
       road)
S2        Side                          20      20      15     10     10     10     10     5      5/10
                                                                                                     [2]
S3        Rear                          80      80      70     40     40     40     30     25     25
S4        Rear (Accessory Structures)   5       5       5      5      5      5      5      5      5
      Minimum Setbacks for Animal         50      50      50     50        Same as other buildings (above)
       Confinement Buildings (feet)[3]
B1     Maximum Building Coverage (%)[5]    20      20      20     20     25     30     40     45     45
B2     Maximum Acc. Building Area (sq.     3,000   3,000   1,800  1,800  1,800  1,500  1,200  1,200  1,200
       ft.)[5]                             [4]     [4]
      Maximum Building Height (feet)
         Accessory Buildings [6]       25      25      25     25     25     25     25     25     25
         All Other                        As regulated by Will County Building Ordinanc35     40
[1]     This minimum lot area per unit standard applies only to multi-unit buildings
[2]     Minimum side setback is 5 feet for buildings up to 30 feet in height; 10 feet for buildings above
30 feet in height.
[3]     Setback required from all lot lines. See also §
155-10.10(B)(2).
[4]     Does not apply to stables.
[5]   Area of accessory, ground-mounted solar energy systems for personal household use and beehives are
not included in building coverage limits.
[6]   Does not apply to attached garages.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5138.jpg]
 
(Ord. effective 10- 1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 18-192, passed
10-18- 2018; Ord. 19-88, passed 4-18-2019; Ord. 21-139, passed 5-20-2021)
§ 155-3.40 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Uses and development in residential districts may be subject to other
regulations and standards, including the following:
   (A)   Conservation design subdivisions. Conservation design subdivisions are
encouraged and permitted in E-1, E-2, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, and R-4 districts.
See part 3 of the subdivision ordinance for applicable regulations and
incentives.
   (B)   Nonconformities. See Article
155-15.
   (C)   Accessory uses. See §
155-10.10.
   (D)   Parking and loading. See Article
155-11.
   (E)   Landscaping and screening. See Article
155-12.
   (F)   Signs. See Article
155-13.
   (G)   Temporary uses. See §
155-10.20.
   (H)   Outdoor lighting. See §
155-14.110.
   (I)   Tents. Tents may not be erected, used, or maintained on any lot,
except those used for temporary recreational purposes.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-4 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155-4.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   The districts. The county's commercial zoning districts are listed
below. When this zoning ordinance refers to "commercial" zoning districts or
"C" districts, it is referring to these districts.
 
Zoning District          Map Symbol
Local Commercial-1       C-1
Local Commercial-2       C-2
General Commercial       C-3
Highway Commercial       C-4
Business Park Commercial C-5
Recreation Commercial    C-6
 
   (B)   Purposes. Will County's commercial zoning districts are primarily
intended to accommodate and promote business and commercial uses. Some are also
intended to accommodate mixed-use development consisting of business uses and
residential uses in the same building or on the same site.
      (1)   C-1 district. The C-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate
small retail and service establishments that provide daily convenience goods
and services for nearby residents.
      (2)   C-2 district. The C-2 district is primarily intended to accommodate
small- to moderate-scale retail and service uses in the form of neighborhood
shopping centers or vertical mixed-use developments with nonresidential uses on
the ground floor and residential units on upper floors.
      (3)   C-3 district. The C-3 district is primarily intended to accommodate
large-format retail uses, community shopping centers, service commercial and
moderate to high-intensity vertical mixed-use developments.
      (4)   C-4 district. The C-4 district is primarily intended to accommodate
retail, service and auto-oriented commercial uses.
      (5)   C-5 district. The C-5 district is primarily intended to accommodate
offices and low-intensity employment uses in the form of stand-alone office
buildings and business/research parks.
      (6)   C-6 district. The C-6 district is primarily intended to accommodate
commercial recreation, amusement, and entertainment uses.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-4.20 ALLOWED USES.
   Principal uses are allowed in commercial zoning districts in accordance with
the regulations of Article
155-7 (Allowed Uses).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-4.30 LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. This section establishes basic lot and building regulations
that apply in C districts. These regulations offer certainty for property
owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed; they are
not to be construed as a guarantee that maximum allowed densities and
development yields can be achieved on every lot. Other factors, such as
topography, the presence of protected resources, health department requirements
for well and septic, off-street parking, landscaping requirements and other
factors may further limit actual development potential.
   (B)   Basic standards. The lot and building standards of the following table
apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in C districts, unless
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. See §
155-18.10 for exceptions to these standards and rules for measuring compliance.
Lot and Building Standards C-1 C -2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6
Lot and Building Standards             C-1    C -2   C-3    C-4    C-5    C-6
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)         12,000 12,000 12,000 20,000 20,000 20,000
Minimum Lot Area Per Unit (square      3,200  3,200  3,200  3,200  NA     NA
feet)
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)            80     80     80     80     80     80
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Street (from CL of non-dedicated 80     80     150    130    130    100
road)
   Street (from ROW of dedicated roa30     30     100    80     80     50
   Side                             10     10     10     10     30     10
   Rear                             20     20     20     20     30     30
Minimum Setbacks for Animal            N/A    N/A    N/A    N/A    N/A    50
Confinement Buildings (feet) [1]
Maximum Floor Area Ratio               1.0    2.0    2.0    2.0    1.0    0.5
Maximum Floor Area (sq. ft. per        2,000  NA     NA     NA     NA     NA
allowed use)
Maximum Building Coverage (%)          40     40     50     50     40     50
Maximum Building Height (feet)
   Accessory Buildings              25     25     25     25     25     25
   All Other                        25     45     45     45     45     25
[1]Applies to farm animal confinement buildings, such as those associated with
riding stables.
 
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-4.40 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Uses and development in commercial districts may be subject to other
regulations and standards, including the following:
   (A)   Nonconformities. See Article
155-15.
   (B)   Accessory uses. See §
155-10.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading. See Article
155-11.
   (D)   Landscaping and screening. See Article
155-12.
   (E)   Signs. See Article
155-13.
   (F)   Temporary uses. See §
155-10.20.
   (G)   Outdoor lighting. See §
155-14.110.
   (H)   Outdoor (sales) display and storage. See §
155-14.100.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-5 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155-5.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   The districts. The county's industrial zoning districts are listed
below. When this zoning ordinance refers to "industrial" zoning districts or
"I" districts, it is referring to these districts.
 
Zoning District      Map Symbol
Limited Industrial   I-1
General Industrial   I-2
Intensive Industrial I-3
 
   (B)   Purposes. Will County's industrial zoning districts are primarily
intended to accommodate and promote industrial, manufacturing and employment-
generating uses.
      (1)   I-1 district. The I-1 district is primarily intended to accommodate
low-impact industrial uses and industrial park developments that have very
limited adverse visual and operational impacts.
      (2)   I-2 district. The I-2 district is primarily intended to accommodate
moderate-impact industrial uses in areas that will not cause adverse impacts on
residential uses.
      (3)   I-3 district. The I-3 district is primarily intended to accommodate
high-impact industrial uses in areas that will not cause adverse impacts on
residential uses.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-5.20 ALLOWED USES.
   Principal uses are allowed in industrial zoning districts in accordance with
the regulations of Article
155-7 (Allowed Uses).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-5.30 LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. This section establishes basic lot and building regulations
that apply in I districts. These regulations offer certainty for property
owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed; they are
not to be construed as a guarantee that maximum allowed densities and
development yields can be achieved on every lot. Other factors, such as
topography, the presence of protected resources, health department requirements
for well and septic, off-street parking, landscaping requirements and other
factors may further limit actual development potential.
   (B)   Basic standards. The lot and building standards of the following table
apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in I districts, except as
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance. General exceptions to
these standards and rules for measuring compliance can be found in §
155-18.10.
Lot and Building Standards I-1 I-2 I-3
Lot and Building Standards                I-1    I-2      I-3
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)            10,000 10,000   40,000
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)               60     80       80
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Street (from CL of non-dedicated roa80     100      150
   Street (from ROW of dedicated road) 30     50       100
   Side                                10     10       20
   Rear                                10     40       40
Maximum Building Coverage (%)             70     70       70
Maximum Building Height (feet)
   Accessory Buildings                 25     25       25
   All Other                           35     35/75[1] 35/75[1]
[1]   Maximum height of 35 feet for buildings within 200 feet of any
residential district//maximum height of 75 feet for buildings located more
than 200 feet from residential zoning district.
 
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-5.40 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Uses and development in industrial districts may be subject to other
regulations and standards, including the following:
   (A)   Nonconformities. See Article
155-15.
   (B)   Accessory uses. See §
155-10.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading. See Article
155-11.
   (D)   Landscaping and screening. See Article
155-12.
   (E)   Signs. See Article
155-13.
   (F)   Temporary uses. See §
155-10.20.
   (G)   Outdoor lighting. See §
155-14.110.
   (H)   Outdoor (sales) display and storage. See §
155-14.100.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-6 OVERLAY AND SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
§ 155-6.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   Overlay districts.
      (1)   Establishment. Overlay zoning districts may be established, amended
or removed only in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of §
155-16.30.
      (2)   Interpretation. Overlay zoning district regulations apply in
combination with underlying (base) zoning district regulations and all other
applicable standards of this zoning ordinance. All applicable regulations of
the underlying base zoning district apply to property in an overlay zoning
district unless otherwise expressly stated. When overlay district standards
conflict with standards that otherwise apply in the underlying, base zoning
district, the regulations of the overlay zoning district govern.
   (B)   Special purpose districts. Like overlay zoning districts, special
purpose zoning districts are tools for dealing with special situations or
accomplishing special planning and zoning goals. Unlike overlay districts,
special purpose districts are base zoning classifications; they do not "over-
lay" other base zoning districts.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-6.20 SP-PO, PARKS AND OPEN SPACE (SPECIAL PURPOSE) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The SP-PO Parks and Open Space district is a special purpose
zoning district that is intended to help preserve and protect lands set aside
for park and open space use. Such areas and facilities provide many benefits to
county residents and visitors. They provide cultural and recreation
opportunities; preserve natural and scenic areas; protect sensitive natural
resource areas; and offer refuge from the built, urban environment. The SP-PO
district is intended to be applied to public parks and open space lands under
the jurisdiction of the forest preserve district or other county, state or
federal government agencies. The SP-PO district may be applied to privately
owned lands only with the private property owner's consent.
   (B)   Allowed uses. Principal uses are allowed in the SP-PO zoning district
in accordance with the regulations of Article
155-7 (Allowed Uses).
   (C)   Lot and building regulations.
      (1)   General. This section establishes basic lot and building
regulations that apply in special purpose zoning districts. These regulations
offer certainty for property owners, developers and neighbors about the limits
of what is allowed; they are not to be construed as a guarantee that maximum
allowed densities and development yields can be achieved on every lot. Other
factors, such as topography, the presence of protected resources, health
department requirements for well and septic, off-street parking, landscaping
requirements and other factors may further limit actual development potential.
      (2)   Basic standards. The lot and building standards of the following
table apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in special purpose
zoning districts, except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning
ordinance. General exceptions to these standards and rules for measuring
compliance can be found in §
155-18.10.
Lot and Building Standards SP-PO
Lot and Building Standards                SP-PO
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)            None
Minimum Lot Frontage (feet)               None
Minimum Setbacks (feet)
   Street (from CL of non-dedicated roa50
   Street (from ROW of dedicated road) 30
   Side                                10
   Rear                                30
Maximum Building Height (feet)            45
Maximum Building Coverage (%)             20
[1]   Maximum height of 35 feet for buildings within 200 feet of any
residential district//maximum height of 75 feet for buildings located more
than 200 feet from residential zoning district.
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Uses and development in the SP-PO district may be
subject to other regulations and standards, including the following:
      (1)   Nonconformities. See Article
155-15.
      (2)   Accessory uses. See §
155-10.10.
      (3)   Parking and loading. See Article
155-11.
      (4)   Landscaping and screening. See Article
155-12.
      (5)   Signs. See Article
155-13.
      (6)   Temporary uses. See §
155-10.20.
      (7)   Outdoor lighting. See §
155-14.110.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-7 ALLOWED USES
§ 155-7.10 GENERAL.
   Principal uses are allowed in agricultural, residential, commercial and
industrial zoning districts in accordance with use table of §
155-7.30.
§ 155-7.20 UNDERSTANDING THE USE TABLE.
   (A)   Use classification system. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance,
uses are classified into use categories and subcategories. These are described
and defined in Article
155-8. Use categories and subcategories are identified in the first column of
the use tables. In some cases, specific use types are listed in addition to the
use categories and subcategories.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses identified with a "P" in the use tables are
permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district, subject to compliance
with all other applicable standards of this zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Special uses. Uses identified with an "S" in the use table may be
allowed if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use permit
procedures of §
155-16.40. Special uses are subject to compliance with any use-specific
standards identified in the final column of the table and with all other
applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Prohibited uses. Uses identified with an "-" are expressly prohibited.
Uses that are not listed in the use table and that cannot reasonably be
interpreted to fall within the use categories described in Article
155-8 are also prohibited. See §
155-8.10(D) for use interpretation rules.
   (E)   Use standards. The "standards" column of use table identifies use-
specific standards that apply to some uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
compliance with such standards is required regardless of whether the use is
permitted as-of-right or requires special use approval.
   (F)   Accessory uses. Customary accessory uses are permitted in conjunction
with allowed principal uses, provided they comply with all applicable
regulations of §
155-10.10.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-7.30 USE TABLE.
   The following table identifies principal uses allowed in A, R, C and I
zoning districts. See §
155-7.20 for information about how to interpret the use table.
Note: This table is available in PDF for ease of printing. Click HERE.
USE         ZONING DISTRICTS
CATEGORY
Use         A- A- E- E- R- R- R- R- R- R- R- C- C- C- C- C- C- I- I- I- SP- Standards
Subcategory 1  2  1  2  1  2  2A 3  4  5  6  1  2  3  4  5  6  1  2  3  PO
   LSpecific Use Type
   P = use permitted as of right S = use allowed with special use approval - = use
not allowed
USE CATEGORY                                                 ZONING DISTRICTS
Use Subcategory                                              A- A- E- E- R- R- R- R- R- R- R- C- C- C- C- C- C- I- I- I- SP- Standards
                                                             1  2  1  2  1  2  2A 3  4  5  6  1  2  3  4  5  6  1  2  3  PO
   LSpecific Use Type
   P = use permitted as of right S = use allowed with special use approval - = use not allowed
RESIDENTIAL                                                                                              
Household Living
   LDetached House                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
      •   Accessory dwelling unit, attached       P  P  P  P  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-10.10
                                                                                                                             (C)
      •   Accessory dwelling unit, detached       P  P  P  P  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-10.10
                                                                                                                             (C)
   LDetached House on Existing Residential Leasehold ParceP  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.160
   LTownhouse                                             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LMobile Home                                           P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -   155-9.170
   LMobile Home on Existing Residential Leasehold Parcel  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.160
   LMobile Home Park                                      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.170
   LMulti-unit Building                                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LAbove-ground-floor dwelling unit in vertical mixed-use-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  S  -  -  -  -  -  -    
building
   Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity (ECHO)               S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.110
Group Living (except as identified below)                    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LEmergency or Temporary Shelter                        -  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.90
   LFraternities, Dormitories and Boarding Houses         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LGroup Care Home (maximum 6 residents)                 P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.90
   LGroup Care Home (7-16 residents)                      -  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.90
   LHalfway House                                         -  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.90
   LNursing Home                                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LOrphanage                                             -  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LConvent, Monastery or Similar Group Religious Living  -  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Quarters
PUBLIC AND CIVIC                                                                                         
Airport-related Facilities                                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P    
College or University                                        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -    
Day Care (except as identified below)                        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  P   155-9.100
   LAdult or Child Day Care Home                          P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -   155-9.100
Detention and Correctional Facilities                        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -    
Fraternal, Labor, Membership Organization                    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  S  -  -  -    
Hospital                                                     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -    
Library/Cultural Exhibits                                    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  P    
Park/Recreation/Open Space (except as identified below)      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  P    
   LCemeteries, Columbariums, and Mausoleums              S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  S  -  -  -  -    
   LCommunity Center                                      P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  P    
   LGolf Course/Country Club                              -  -  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  P    
   LForest Preserve                                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P    
   LPark                                                  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  P    
   LPlayground                                            P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  P    
   LSwimming Pool                                         P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  P    
Religious Assembly                                           S  S  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  S  -  -  -    
Safety Service                                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P    
School                                                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Utilities and Services
   LMinor, Basic (except as identified below)             P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P    
      LBattery Energy Storage Facilities               S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P   155-9.220
   LMajor (except as identified below)                    S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  P  P  -    
      LBattery Energy Storage Facilities               S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P   155-9.220
      LSolar Energy Facilities; Commercial             S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.245
      LWholesale Power Generators                      S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.250
      LWind Energy Facilities; Commercial              S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S- S  -   155-9.260
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   155-9.270
COMMERCIAL                                                                                               
Adult Entertainment Facility                                 -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -   155-9.10
Animal Service
   LAnimal Sales/Grooming                                 S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LAnimal Care/Boarding                                  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   155-9.20
   LVeterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital                    S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   155-9.20
   LStable (accessory use)                                P  P  P  P  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -   155-10.10
                                                                                                                             (B)(2)
   LStable (principal use)                                P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
Artist Work or Sales Space                                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Building Maintenance Service (except as identified below)    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P    -  -  P  P  -    
   LLandscaping and Lawn Maintenance Business             S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Building Supplies and Equipment                              -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Business Support Services                                    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Communication Service Establishment                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Construction Sales and Services                              S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LConstruction Offices/and Equipment/ Materials Storage P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   155-9.60
(Temporary)
Eating and Drinking Establishment (except as identified      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  P  P  -  -  P    
below)
   LDrive-In Restaurants                                  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  P  P  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LBars, Taverns, Cocktail Lounges, Ancillary Liquor     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S  -  P  -  -  -  -    
Service
   LAncillary Liquor Service in conjunction with allowed  S  S                                          
agritourism uses
Entertainment and Spectator Sports
   LIndoor, Minor                                         P  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  P  -  -  -  -   155-9.120
   LIndoor, Major                                         S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  P  -  -  -  -   155-9.120
   LOutdoor, Minor                                        P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -  P  -  -  -  -   155-9.120
   LOutdoor, Major                                        S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -   155-9.120
Financial Services (except as identified below)              -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  -  P  P  P  -    
   LWith Drive-through Facilities                         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  P  P  -  P  P  P  -    
   LCurrency Exchange                                     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LPawn Shop, Check Cashing and Short-Term Loan          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Establishment
Food and Beverage Retail Sales (except as identified below)  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LLiquor Stores (Package Sales)                         -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Funeral and Interment Services                               -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Lodging
   LBed and Breakfast                                     S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.30
   LHotel/Motel                                           -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -  S  -  -  -  -    
   LRetreat                                               S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -    
   LRecreational Vehicle Park/RV Campground               S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -    
Office, Administrative, Professional or Consumer Service     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  -  P  P  P  P    
Office or Clinic, Medical                                    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  P  -  P  P  P  -    
Parking, Non-Accessory                                       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Personal Improvement Service (except as identified below)    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LBarber/Salon                                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  P  S  S  -    
Repair or Laundry Service, Consumer                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  P  S  S  -    
Research Services (except as identified below)               -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  P  P  P  -    
Residential Convenience/Support Establishment                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.230
Retail Sales and Service (except as identified below)        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  -  -  -  P    
   LFarm/Agricultural Supply Sales                        P  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LFirearms Dealer                                       S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  P  P  -  -  P  P  -  -   155-9.80
   LSeed Sales                                            P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Sports and Recreation Participant (except as identified      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  P  P  P  -  P  S  -  -  -    
below)
   LCommercial Fishing Pond                               S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LDay Camps                                             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LFair Grounds                                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LGo-Cart and Motorbike Tracks                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LHunting Preserves and/or Clubs                        S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LIce Skating Rinks                                     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LMarina                                                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LMiniature Golf Courses                                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LPractice Golf Driving Ranges                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LPrivate Recreational Clubs                            S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LShooting Range, Indoor                                S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  P  P  P  -  -    
   LShooting Range, Outdoor                               S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -    
   LSki Slope                                             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LVideo Arcade                                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
   LWater Park/Aquatic Amusement                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  -    
Vehicle and Equipment Sales and Service
   LMinor Motor Vehicle Fueling Station (may include      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -   155-8.40
convenience retail sales)                                                                                                    (Y)
   LMajor Motor Vehicle Fueling Station - Planned Unit    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-8.40
Development                                                                                                                  (Y)
   LTravel Plaza - Planned Unit Development               -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-8.40
                                                                                                                             (Y)
   LCar Wash/Cleaning Service                             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LHeavy Equipment Sales/Rental (except as identified    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  S  P  P  -    
below)
      LAgricultural Implement Sales and Service        S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LLight Equipment Sales/Rental                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  S  P  P  -    
   LMotor Vehicle Repair                                  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LVehicle Storage and Towing                            -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
INDUSTRIAL                                                                                           -    
Auto Salvage (except as identified below)                    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -   155-9.140
   LAuto Salvage (completely enclosed building)           -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -    
   Accessory Dwelling Unit for Security                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-10.10
                                                                                                                             (C)
   LAuto Rebuilder (completely enclosed building)                                                P  P        P  P  P       
   LAuto Rebuilder (with outdoor storage)                                                                          S       
Manufacturing and Industrial Services, Artisan               -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -  P  P  P  -    
Manufacturing and Industrial Services, Limited (except as    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
identified below)
   LBottling Works                                        -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LCraft Brewing and Distilling                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -  -  P  P  P  -   155-9.280
   LMerchandise and Product Display Space (No Direct Sales-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P  P  -    
   LElectronics Industries                                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -  P  P  P  -    
   LWineries (no retail sales or tastings)                P  P                      P  P  P  -  -  P  P  P     155-9.280
   LWineries (with retail sales or tastings)              S  S                      S  S  S      P  P  P     155-9.280
Manufacturing and Industrial Services, General (except as    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  P  P  -    
identified below)
   LAnimal Feed Preparation, Grinding, Mixing and Storage S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -    
Manufacturing and Industrial Services, Intensive (except as  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -    
identified below)
   LFertilizer Mixing, Sales and Storage                  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -    
   LAnhydrous Ammonia Sales and Storage                   S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -    
Mining/Quarrying                                             S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.180
Recycling Facilities
   LConcrete and Asphalt Recycling Facilities             -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.210
                                                                                                                             (A)
   LGeneral Construction or Demolition Debris Recycling   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.210
Facilities                                                                                                                   (B)
   LRecyclable Material Drop-off Facilities, Indoor       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   155-9.210
                                                                                                                             (C)
   LRecyclable Material Drop-off Facilities, Outdoor      -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.210
                                                                                                                             (C)
   LRecyclable Material Processing Facilities, Indoor     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -   155-9.210
                                                                                                                             (D)
   LRecyclable Material Processing Facilities, Outdoor    -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.210
                                                                                                                             (D)
   LSoil Storage, Recycling and Reuse                     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.210
                                                                                                                             (E)
Self-Service Storage Facility                                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.240
Warehousing, Wholesaling and Freight Movement (except as     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
identified below)
   LBeverage Warehouse/Distribution                       -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LParcel (Package) Delivery Service                     -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LCargo Container Storage and Maintenance Facilities (on-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -   155-9.40
or off-chassis)
   LGrain Storage                                         S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LIntermodal Terminal                                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.130
   LStorage Warehouse/Wholesaling, Indoor                 -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
   LStorage Yard, Outdoor                                 -S -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -   155-
                                                                                                                             14.100(B)
   LTruck or Bus Terminal                                 -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  P  -    
Waste-related Use (except as identified below)               -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LClean Construction or Demolition Debris Fill Operation-  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.70
                                                                                                                             (A)
   LLandscape Waste Composting                            S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.150
   LLandscape Waste, Land Application of                  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.150
   LLandscape Waste Processing/Transfer Facility          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -    
   LPollution Control Facilities                          -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -    
   LUncontaminated Soil Fill Operations                   -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  -   155-9.70
                                                                                                                             (A)
AGRICULTURAL                                                                                             
Agriculture
   LCrop Farming                                          P  P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LAll Other                                             P  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Agritourism (except as identified below)                     P  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
   LRural Events                                          S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Community Garden                                             P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   155-9.50
Horticulture, Nurseries and Greenhouses (except as           -  -  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  P    
identified below)
   LHorticulture                                          P  P  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  P    
   LNursery, Wholesale                                    P  P  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  P    
   LGreenhouse, Wholesale                                 P  P  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -  -  P  P  P  -    
OTHER                                                                                                    
Aircraft Landing Strip or Pad, Private                       S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  P  -    
Exotic Animal Breeding & Training                            S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
Exotic Animal Rehabilitation Facility; Indigenous; less than S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.25
22 lbs./10 kg
Exotic Animal Rehabilitation Facility; Indigenous; 22 lbs./  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  -   155-9.25
10 kg. or larger
Exotic Animal Rehabilitation Facility; Non-Native            S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.25
Exotic Animal Sanctuary; Indigenous or Non-Native            S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -   155-9.25
Exotic Animal Zoological Park                                S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  -  -  -  -   155-9.25
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center                          P                                  P  P  P  -    
Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization                     S                      S  S  S  S      S  S  S  -    
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensary                                S                      S  S  S  S      S  S  S  -   155-9.300
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower                              P                      P  P  P  P      P  P  P  -   155-9.300
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center                        P                      P  P  P  P      P  P  P  -   155-9.300
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser                                   S                      S  S  S  S      S  S  S  -   155-9.300
Adult-Use Cannabis Processor                                 S                      S  S  S  S      S  S  S  -   155-9.300
On-premise dynamic display in agricultural and residential   S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -    
zoning districts
Radio/TV Tower                                               -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  P  -    
Railroad Passenger Stations                                  -  S  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  S  S  S  S  -  -  P  P  -    
Railroad Yard                                                -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  P  -    
Similar or Compatible Uses to a Permitted Use in the         S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S   155-8.10
underlying district                                                                                                          (D)(2)
 
Am. Ord. 14-44, passed 3-20-2014; Am. Ord. 14-231, passed 9-18-2014; Am. Ord.
15-39, passed 2-19-2015; Am. Ord. 16-258, passed 9-15-2016; Am. Ord. 16-227,
passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 18-193, passed 7-19-2018;
Ord. 18-221, passed 8-16-2018; Ord. 18-222, passed 8-16-2018; Ord. 18-240,
passed 9-20-2018; Ord. 19-237, passed 9-19-2019; Ord. 19-352, passed 12-19-
2019; Ord. 20-478, passed 12-17-2020; Ord. 20-266, passed 8-20-2020; Ord. 21-
233, passed 7-15-2021; Ord. 22-226, passed 9-15-2022; Ord. 22-257, passed 9-15-
2022; Ord. 22-258, passed 9-15-2022; Ord. 22-256, passed 10-20-2022; Ord. 23-
70, passed 3-16-2023; Ord. 23-173, passed 8-17-2023; Ord. 23-353, passed 11-16-
2023)
155-8 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
§ 155-8.10 GENERAL.
   This article contains a description of the use classification system used to
classify principal uses in this zoning ordinance.
   (A)   Use categories. This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses
into five major groupings, which are referred to as use categories:
      (1)   Residential
      (2)   Public and Civic
      (3)   Commercial
      (4)   Industrial
      (5)   Agricultural
   (B)   Use subcategories. Each use category is further divided into more
specific "subcategories." Use subcategories classify principal land uses and
activities based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics,
such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents,
how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions.
   (C)   Specific uses. Some use subcategories are further broken down to
identify specific use, business or activity types that are regulated
differently than the parent subcategory as a whole.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5144.jpg]
 
   (D)   Determination of use categories and subcategories.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to classify uses on the
basis of the use category and subcategory descriptions of this section.
      (2)   When a use cannot be readily classified into a use category/
subcategory or appears to fit into multiple categories/subcategories, the
Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine the most similar, and thus most
appropriate, use category/ subcategory based on the actual or projected
characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use
category and subcategory descriptions provided in this section. In making such
determinations, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to consider all of the
following:
         (a)   The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the
use;
         (b)   The types of equipment and processes to be used;
         (c)   The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or
employees;
         (d)   Parking demands associated with the use; and
         (e)   Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
The Zoning Administrator is not required to concur with a Special Use Permit
application, as provided in §
155-16.40, for a use "similar or compatible" with a permitted use of the
underlying district. lt is incumbent upon the applicant to demonstrate the
proposed special use is "similar or compatible" with a permitted use of the
underlying district.
      (3)   If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories,
subcategories or specific use types, the Zoning Administrator must categorize
the use in the category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the
most exact, narrowest and appropriate match.
      (4)   If the Zoning Administrator is unable to determine the appropriate
use category for a proposed use, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny
the permit request. This decision may be appealed in accordance with §
155-16.100.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Am. Ord. 23-353, passed 11-16-2023)
§ 155-8.20 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY.
   The residential use category includes uses that provide living
accommodations to one or more persons. The group includes two use
subcategories: household living and group living.
   (A)   Household living category. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by
a household. When dwelling units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-
month or longer basis. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period
are not considered residential; they are considered a form of lodging.
   (B)   Group living. Residential occupancy of a dwelling by other than a
"household," typically providing communal kitchen/dining facilities. Examples
of group living uses include but are not limited to fraternities, sororities,
convents, monasteries, nursing homes and the following specific use types:
      (1)   Emergency or temporary shelter. A dwelling that provides temporary
living arrangements (no more than 30 days) for persons who are in need of
temporary housing as a result of a short-term personal crisis. Examples
include, but are not limited to, homes for victims of domestic violence,
economic crisis centers and homes for unwed mothers.
      (2)   Group care home. A dwelling shared by persons with disabilities who
live together as a single housekeeping unit in a long-term, family-like
environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation
in community activities for the residents with a primary goal of enabling the
resident to live as independently as possible.
      (3)   Halfway house. A dwelling that provides temporary living
arrangements for persons who are receiving supervision, rehabilitation and
counseling to help them re-enter society and live independently. Examples
include, but are not limited to: programs to help residents recuperate from the
effects of drug or alcohol addiction; pre-release, work-release, probationary,
and other programs that serve as an alternative to incarceration; and programs
for persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized
care and attention.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-8.30 PUBLIC AND CIVIC USE CATEGORY.
   The public and civic use category includes uses that provide public or
quasi-public services. The public and civic use category includes the following
use subcategories:
   (A)   Airport-related facilities. Any of the following:
      (1)   Air terminals;
      (2)   Airport administration buildings, including airline offices, and
related uses;
      (3)   Ancillary retail sales and commercial services uses;
      (4)   Fixed base operators;
      (5)   Air hangars;
      (6)   General aviation operations;
      (7)   Airport maintenance, rescue and firefighting buildings, public
safety uses including security and immigration processing;
      (8)   Airport operational facilities including but not limited to air
traffic control towers, communication facilities, weather service offices and
equipment and instrument landing systems and other related navigational
equipment;
      (9)   Air cargo and related ground transportation facilities;
      (10)   Flight schools, flying clubs and other schools or training
facilities relating to aviation or air-related transportation;
      (11)   Fuel and fuel waste containment storage systems and pumps;
      (12)   Aircraft related sales, manufacturing, assembly testing, and
repair of aircraft, aircraft parts, avionics, instruments, or other aircraft
equipment;
      (13)   Runways;
      (14)   Taxiways;
      (15)   Emergency (outpatient) medical facilities;
      (16)   Ground transportation facilities commonly associated with
airports, such as rail, car rental facilities, taxi cabs, buses and limousines,
including associated maintenance, fueling, storage and administration; and
      (17)   Other uses determined to be airport-related by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   College/university. Colleges and other institutions of higher learning
that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree. They
are certified by the state or by a recognized accrediting agency. Colleges tend
to be in campus-like settings or on multiple blocks. Examples include
universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical
schools not accessory to a hospital, conservatories and seminaries. Business
and trade schools are classified in "Business Support Services Subcategory."
   (C)   Day care. Uses providing care, protection and supervision for children
or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence for fewer than
24 hours per day.
   (D)   Detention and correctional facilities. Facilities for the judicially
required detention or incarceration of people. Inmates and detainees are under
24-hour supervision by peace officers, except when on an approved leave.
Examples include prisons, jails, probation centers and juvenile detention
homes.
   (E)   Fraternal, labor, membership organization. The use of a building or
parcel by a fraternal, labor or membership-based, not-for-profit organization
that restricts access to its facility to bona fide, annual dues-paying members
and their occasional guests.
   (F)   Hospital. Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and
offering inpatient (overnight) care and that may include helipads as an
accessory use.
   (G)   Library/cultural exhibit. Museum-like preservation and exhibition of
objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of
art, or library collection of books, manuscripts, etc., for study and reading.
   (H)   Park/recreation/open space. Recreational, social, or multi-purpose
uses associated with public parks, public open spaces, public community
centers, public play fields, public or private golf courses, or other public
recreation areas or buildings. Cemeteries, memorial parks and similar uses are
included in the park/recreation/open space subcategory.
   (I)   Religious assembly. Religious services involving public assembly such
as customarily occur in synagogues, temples, mosques and churches.
   (J)   Safety services. Public safety services that provide fire, police or
life protection, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of
necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations, police stations and
ambulance services.
   (K)   School. Public and private schools at the primary, elementary, junior
high, or high school level that provide state-mandated basic education.
   (L)   Utilities and services.
      (1)   Minor, basic.
         (a)   Utilities and infrastructure services that need to be located in
or close to the area where the service is provided. Minor utilities and
services generally do not have regular employees at the site and typically have
few if any impacts on surrounding areas. Above-ground structures, when present,
are small. Typical uses include water and sewer pump stations; underground
electric distribution substations, electric transformers; water conveyance
systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance systems; cable television
equipment, telephone switching equipment and emergency communication broadcast
facilities.
         (b)   The production, collection or distribution of renewable energy,
water, organic waste, or other similar resources at a neighborhood or campus
scale are expressly classified as minor, basic utilities and services. This
includes renewable, distributed energy facilities; battery energy storage
facilities 10- acres or less in size neighborhood composting areas and
neighborhood stormwater facilities.
         (c)   Neighborhood or campus-scale systems that produce or distribute
energy from the biological breakdown of organic matter produced within that
neighborhood or campus are considered minor, basic utilities and services.
         (d)   Energy production systems that generate energy from the
byproducts of the principal use are considered accessory uses, including net
metered installations and installations that generate power to sell at
wholesale to the power grid.
      (2)   Major. Infrastructure, utility and public service uses that
typically have substantial land-use or operational impacts on surrounding
areas. Typical uses include wholesale power generators, utility-scale power
generation facilities, water and wastewater treatment facilities, public works
and utility storage yards and garages, high-voltage electric substations, water
treatment plants and major water storage facilities, such as water towers and
reservoirs.
         (a)   Wholesale power generator. Any electricity generating operation,
other than a solar farm, that is operated or owned by any organization, other
than the owner an maintainer of a majority of electricity transmission
facilities within the planning jurisdiction, that serves uses, structures, or
sites outside the site on which the operation is located. This definition does
not include any facility designated by the State of Illinois as exempt from
such regulation.
         (b)   Solar farm. A solar energy power generation facility, solar
collection system or area of land comprised of a solar energy system, array of
systems, or structural design features, principally used to provide for the
generation of energy distributed into the electrical grid and not intended to
primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power,
         (c)   Commercial solar farm. Any solar energy system that is rated to
produce 100 MW/AC or greater.
         (d)   Battery energy storage facilities greater than 10-acres in size.
   (M)   Wireless telecommunication facility. That part of the signal
distribution system used or operated by a telecommunications carrier or AM
broadcast station under a license from the Federal Communications Commission
consisting of a combination of improvements and equipment including (i) one or
more antennas, (ii) a supporting structure and the hardware by which antennas
are attached; (iii) equipment housing; and (iv) ancillary equipment such as
signal transmission cables and miscellaneous hardware.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 22-226, passed 9-
15-2022; Ord. 22-256, passed 10-20-2022)
§ 155-8.40 COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORY.
   The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or
involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general public.
The commercial use category includes the following use subcategories.
   (A)   Adult entertainment facility. Any of the following commercial
establishments:
      (1)   Adult cabaret. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business features or provides any of the
following:
         (a)   Persons who appear semi-nude;
         (b)   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides,
computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind
that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
      (2)   Adult store. Any commercial establishment that has any one or more
of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Contains one or more adult booths;
         (b)   Offers for sale, rental, or viewing any adult materials as a
significant portion of its business; or
         (c)   Has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of adult
materials.
      (3)   Adult theater. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business features or provides:
         (a)   Films, motion pictures, video, or audio cassettes, slides, or
other visual representations or recordings that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of
specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities; or
         (b)   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   (B)   Animal services. The following are animal services use subcategories:
      (1)   Animal care/boarding and care. The keeping and care of a cumulative
total of six or more companion animals. Typical uses include boarding kennels,
pet resorts/hotels, doggy or pet day care facilities, foster care homes, dog
training centers and animal rescue shelters.
      (2)   Animal sales/grooming. Sales and grooming of companion animals.
Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing and clipping salons and pet
grooming shops.
      (3)   Veterinary. Typical uses include pet and veterinary clinics, dog
and cat hospitals and animal hospitals.
      (4)   Stable. Land or structures in which horses are kept, including
horses owned by owner or occupant of the subject property and those that are
not owned by the subject property owner or the occupant of the subject
property. Facilities that offer horse and pony rides, equestrian training and
similar services and amusements are also classified as stables.
   (C)   Artist work or sales space. Floor space devoted to the production,
showing, or sale of art. Typical uses include art galleries, artist and
photography studios, but not including art museums. Art museums are classified
in the "library/cultural exhibit" use subcategory.
   (D)   Building maintenance service. Provision of maintenance and custodial
services to commercial and industrial establishments. Typical uses include
janitorial, landscape maintenance and window cleaning services. Also includes
exterminator services for residential, commercial or industrial applications.
   (E)   Building supplies and equipment. Establishments that sell or rent
supplies or equipment to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or
premises. Typical uses include lumber yards, home improvement centers, and farm
and garden supply stores. Hardware stores, paint stores and similar businesses
that do not include any visible outdoor storage or display are classified as
retail sales establishments.
   (F)   Business equipment sales and service. Sales, rental, or repair of
office, professional and service equipment and supplies to companies rather
than to individuals. Excludes vehicle and heavy equipment sales or service.
Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine
repair shops and hotel equipment and supply firms.
   (G)   Business support service. Provision of clerical, employment,
protective, or minor processing services to firms rather than individuals.
Typical uses include employment agencies and telephone answering services and
business or trade schools. Business or trades schools that involve outdoor
storage or manufacturing processes are not considered business support services
but rather are classified in the "industrial" use category. Truck driving
schools are classified and regulated as truck terminals (warehousing,
wholesaling and freight movement use subcategory).
   (H)   Communication service establishments. Broadcasting and other
information relay services accomplished through use of electronic and
telephonic mechanisms. Excludes services classified as "major utilities and
services" and "minor/basic utilities and services." Typical uses include
recording studios, television and radio studios, telecommunication service
centers and telegraph service offices.
   (I)   Construction services. Construction and development services and
related storage. Unless otherwise expressly stated, this use subcategory refers
to activities on parcels other than active construction or development sites.
Typical uses include building contracting/construction businesses, including
contractor storage yards. Uses that involve office or administrative functions
only, with no on-site equipment or vehicle storage, are classified as offices.
   (J)   Eating and drinking establishments. Provision of prepared food and/or
beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. Typical uses include
restaurants, taverns and nightclubs.
      (1)   Restaurant. An establishment primarily engaged in serving prepared
food to the public and in which sales of such prepared foods and meals
constitutes at least 65% of the establishment's gross income.
      (2)   Tavern or nightclub. An establishment that is primarily engaged in
serving alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises and in which the
serving of prepared food and meals constitutes less than 65% of the
establishment's gross income. Taverns and nightclubs may offer live
entertainment and dancing.
   (K)   Entertainment and spectator sports. Provision of cultural,
entertainment, athletic and other events to spectators, such as typically
occurs in theaters, cinemas, auditoriums, fairgrounds, stadiums, arenas, lienzo
charros, show barns, show grounds and racetracks.
      (1)   Indoor, minor. Entertainment and spectator sports venues and events
that are conducted entirely within buildings that have a capacity of fewer than
100 participants, exhibitors or spectators.
      (2)   Indoor, major. Entertainment and spectator sports venues and events
that are conducted entirely within buildings and that have a capacity of 100 or
more participants, exhibitors and spectators.
      (3)   Outdoor, minor. Entertainment and spectator sports venues and
events that are conducted primarily outside of buildings and that have a
capacity of fewer than 100 participants, exhibitors and spectators.
      (4)   Outdoor, major. Entertainment and spectator sports venues and
events that are conducted primarily outside of buildings and that have a
capacity of 100 or more participants, exhibitors and spectators.
   (L)   Financial services. Financial or securities brokerage services.
Typical uses include banks, savings and loans, consumer investment businesses,
pawn shops, and check-cashing/loan services.
      (1)   Bank. A federally chartered bank, credit union, savings and loan
association or trust company.
      (2)   Check-cashing/loan service. A business engaged in cashing checks or
providing short-term loans for members of the general public as a principal
purpose of its operation and that is not a bank, savings and loan association,
or other financial service, including businesses offering payday loans, title
loans, signature loans, small loans, and other similar loans, but not including
pawn shops.
      (3)   Pawn shop. Businesses that lend money on the security of pledged
goods or that is engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal
property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for
a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
   (M)   Food and beverage retail sales. Retail sale of food and beverages for
home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores and wine
stores.
   (N)   Funeral and interment services. Provision of services involving the
care, preparation or disposition of human or pet remains. The following are
funeral and interment services use subcategories:
      (1)   Cemetery/columbarium/mausoleum. Land or facilities used for burial
of human or remains.
      (2)   Cremating. Crematory services involving the purification and
reduction of the human body by fire. Typical uses include crematories and
crematoriums. (Note: cremating is also considered an accessory use to a
cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum.)
      (3)   Undertaking. Undertaking services such as preparing the dead for
burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes
and mortuaries.
   (O)   Lodging. Provision of lodging services on a temporary basis with
incidental food, drink and other sales and services intended for the
convenience of guests. The following are lodging use categories:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast. A detached house in which the owner offers
overnight accommodations and meal service to guests for compensation.
      (2)   Hotel/motel. An establishment, other than a bed and breakfast, in
which short-term lodging is offered for compensation and that may or may not
include the service of one or more meals to guests. Typical uses include hotels
and motels.
      (3)   Recreational vehicle park/RV campground. An establishment that
provides temporary overnight accommodations for camping in a travel trailer,
camping trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, or tent trailer and
that may include areas for overnight camping in tents.
      (4)   Retreat. An establishment that provides temporary overnight
accommodations for groups engaged in supervised training or personal
improvement activities. Examples include corporate retreat facilities,
educational retreat facilities and spa and fitness facilities.
   (P)   Office, administrative, professional or consumer service.
Professional, governmental, executive, management or administrative offices of
private organizations or government agencies. Typical uses include
administrative offices, law offices, architectural firms, insurance companies
and government offices. Also includes travel agencies, tax preparation office
and similar consumer service businesses.
   (Q)   Office or clinic, medical. Personal health services including
prevention, diagnosis and treatment, rehabilitation services provided by
physicians, dentists, nurses and other health personnel and medical testing and
analysis services. Typical uses include medical and dental offices, including
chiropractic offices, physical and massage therapy offices, psychologist and
psychiatrist offices, health maintenance organizations, blood banks, plasma
centers and government-operated health centers. Excludes use types more
specifically classified, such as hospitals.
   (R)   Parking, non-accessory. Parking that is not provided to comply with
minimum off-street parking requirements and that is not provided exclusively to
serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to
the public at-large. A facility that provides both accessory parking and non-
accessory parking is classified as non-accessory parking.
   (S)   Personal improvement service. Informational, instructional, personal
improvement and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses
include hair salons, barber shops, beauty shops, nail salons, yoga or dance
studios, driving schools, body art services and martial arts studios.
      (1)   Body art service. Provision of any of the following procedures:
body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding or scarification. This
definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by
the Illinois Medical Board, which may not be performed in a body art services
establishment.
   (T)   Repair or laundry service, consumer. Provision of repair, dry cleaning
or laundry services to individuals and households, but not to firms. Excludes
vehicle and equipment repair. Typical uses include laundry/dry cleaning drop-
off stations (with no dry cleaning on the premises), hand laundries, appliance
repair shops, locksmiths, shoe and apparel repair and musical instrument
repair.
   (U)   Research service. An establishment that conducts educational,
scientific, high-technology or medical research not involving the mass
production, distribution or sale of products. Research services do not produce
odors, dust, noise, vibration or other external impacts that are detectable
beyond the property lines of the subject property. Research-related
establishments that do produce such external impacts are classified as
"manufacturing, production and industrial services."
   (V)   Residential convenience and support establishment. Commercial uses
provided primarily to serve the needs of residents in large, multi-unit
(residential) buildings or residents within the immediate area. The following
are considered residential convenience and support establishments:
      (1)   Day care;
      (2)   Restaurants;
      (3)   Food and beverage retail sales;
      (4)   Medical office;
      (5)   Administrative, professional or general offices;
      (6)   Personal improvement service; and
      (7)   Retail sales establishments.
   (W)   Retail sales. Businesses involved in the sale, lease or rent of new or
used products or merchandise to consumers. Typical uses include drug stores,
grocery stores, department stores, auto parts stores, pet supply stores,
discount stores, convenience stores and apparel stores.
      (1)   Farm/agricultural supply sales. The sale of seed corn and similar
farm supplies by farmers as agents, where grain elevators or similar commercial
facilities are not maintained on the farm premises.
   (X)   Sports and recreation, participant. Provision of sports or recreation
primarily by and for participants. (Spectators would be incidental and on a
nonrecurring basis). Examples include bowling alleys, health clubs, skating
rinks, bingo halls, casinos, billiard parlors, driving ranges and miniature
golf courses, shooting and archery ranges and batting cages.
   (Y)   Vehicle and equipment sales and service. Sales of motor vehicles or
equipment and services related to motor vehicles and related equipment. The
following are vehicle sales and service use subcategories:
      (1)   Car wash/cleaning service. A building or site containing facilities
for washing automobiles. It may use automatic production line methods—a chain
conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical device—or it may
provide space, water and equipment for hand washing, cleaning or detailing of
automobiles, whether by the customer or the operator.
      (2)   Minor motor vehicle fueling station. Uses engaged in retail sales
of conventional and alternative vehicle fuels, including electric vehicle
charging stations with a capacity to fuel no more than eight vehicles
simultaneously. Designated tractor-trailer and truck pump islands are
prohibited. Level 1 (slow-charging) and level 2 (medium) battery charging
stations are considered accessory uses and are not regulated as auto fueling
stations. Minor motor vehicle fueling station uses may include convenience
retail sales activities. Minor motor vehicle fueling stations may include
convenience stores, but no drive-throughs or car wash/cleaning services.
      (3)   Major motor vehicle fueling station. Uses engaged in the retail
sales of conventional and alternative vehicle fuels, including electric
charging stations. Capacity shall not exceed the ability to fuel more than 12
vehicles simultaneously, with no more than one designated tractor-trailer and
truck pump island with a capacity to fuel no more than two tractor-trailers and
trucks. Level 1 (slow charging) and level 2 (medium) battery charging stations
are considered accessory and are not regulated as auto fueling stations. Major
motor vehicle fueling stations may include drive-throughs and car wash/cleaning
services and must be processed as a special use permit for a planned unit
development.
      (4)   Travel plaza. A facility primarily engaged in the maintenance,
servicing, storage, parking, or repair of commercial vehicles, including the
sale of motor vehicle fuels or other petroleum products, and the sale of
accessories or equipment of for over-the-road trucks, tractor trailers, and
similar commercial vehicles. A travel plaza may also include overnight vehicle
parking, showers, vehicles scales, restaurants, and other services intended
mainly for use by truck drivers.
      (5)   Heavy equipment sales/rentals. Sale, retail or wholesale and/or
rental from the premises of heavy construction equipment, trucks and aircraft,
together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include heavy construction
equipment dealers, mobile home dealers and tractor trailer sales.
      (6)   Light equipment sales/rentals. Sale, retail, wholesale, or rental
from the premises of autos, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, trailers of less
than 10,000 pounds gross cargo weight, recreational vehicles and boat dealers,
together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include automobile and boat
dealers, car rental agencies and recreational vehicle sales and rental
agencies. For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the sales or display for
sale of more than two vehicles on a single parcel is classified as a "light
equipment sales/rental" use. Note: auto parts stores are classified as a
“retail sales” use.
      (7)   Motor vehicle repair, limited. A business establishment that
provides ordinary maintenance and minor engine/systems repair services to motor
vehicles, including lubrication and/or checking, changing, or additions of
those fluids and filters necessary to the maintenance of a vehicle. Also
includes vehicle repair establishments that provide replacement of passenger
vehicle parts or repairs that do not involve body work or painting or require
removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential.
Examples include tire, muffler and transmission shops. Repair of motor vehicles
conducted solely by the owner of such vehicles is not classified or regulated
as “limited motor vehicle repair.”
      (8)   Motor vehicle repair, general. Any vehicle repair establishment
other than "limited motor vehicle repair." Examples include repair or servicing
of commercial vehicles or heavy equipment or body work, painting, or major
repairs to passenger vehicles.
      (9)   Vehicle storage and towing. Storage of operating motor vehicles or
vehicle towing services. Typical uses include towing services, private parking
tow-aways (tow lots), impound yards and fleet storage yards. Includes the use
of a site for temporary storage of motor vehicles for a period of not more than
15 days, not including temporary storage facilities for vehicles that are to be
sold, rented, salvaged, dismantled, repaired or returned to owners upon payment
of towing and storage fees.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-258, passed 9-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-
18-2018)
§ 155-8.50 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORY.
   The industrial use category includes uses that produce goods from extracted
materials or from recyclable or previously prepared materials, including the
design, storage and handling of these products and the materials from which
they are produced. It also includes uses that store or distribute materials or
goods in large quantities. The industrial use category includes the following
use subcategories:
   (A)   Auto salvage. An area where inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles
and motor vehicle parts are stored, disassembled or handled and where
salvageable parts may or may not be sold.
   (B)   Manufacturing and industrial services, artisan. On-site production of
goods by hand manufacturing, involving the use of hand tools and small-scale,
light mechanical equipment in a completely enclosed building with no outdoor
operations or storage, and occupying no more than 3,500 square feet of gross
floor area. Typical uses include woodworking and cabinet shops, ceramic
studios, jewelry manufacturing and similar types of arts and crafts or very
small-scale manufacturing uses that have no negative external impacts on
surrounding properties.
   (C)   Manufacturing and industrial services, limited. Manufacturing or
refurbishing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared
materials. Typical uses include: catering establishments, craft brewing and
distilling (as defined and regulated by ILCS Ch. 235), wineries, printing and
related support activities; machinery manufacturing; food processing and
manufacturing; computer and electronic product manufacturing/assembly;
electrical equipment, appliance, component manufacturing/ assembly; furniture
and related product manufacturing/assembly; and other manufacturing and
production establishments that typically have very few, if any, negative
external impacts on surrounding properties. Also includes "artisan
manufacturing/ production" type uses that do not comply with the enclosed
building, floor area and/or outside operations/storage criteria that apply to
artisan manufacturing/production uses.
   (D)   Manufacturing and industrial services, general.
      (1)   Manufacturing of finished or unfinished products, primarily from
extracted or raw materials, or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage
and handling of such products and materials. Typical uses include: preparation,
grinding, and mixing of animal feed; textile mills; textile product mills;
apparel manufacturing; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood product
manufacturing; paper manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber
products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing;
transportation equipment manufacturing; primary metal manufacturing; and
fabricated metal product manufacturing. Also includes medical, scientific or
technology-related research establishments that produce odors, dust, noise,
vibration or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property
lines of the subject property.
      (2)   Industrial service firms engaged in the repair or servicing of
industrial or commercial machinery, equipment, products or by-products. Typical
uses include: welding shops; machine shops; industrial tool repair; fuel oil
distributors; solid fuel yards; laundry, dry-cleaning and carpet cleaning
plants; and photofinishing laboratories. Excludes uses classified as "repair or
laundry services."
   (E)   Manufacturing and industrial services, intensive. Manufacturing of
acetylene, acid, cement, cement blocks, lime, gypsum or Plaster-of-Paris,
chlorine, corrosive acid or fertilizer, insecticides, disinfectants, poisons,
explosives, paint, lacquer, varnish, petroleum products, coal products, plastic
and synthetic resins and radioactive materials. Also includes smelting,
stamping mills, drop forges, meat packing, rendering plants, incinerators,
foundries, concrete and asphalt mixing, sawmills and oil refining.
   (F)   Mining/quarrying. The extraction of mineral or aggregate resources
from the ground for off-site use. Examples include quarrying or dredging for
sand, gravel or other aggregate materials; mining; oil and gas drilling and
topsoil removal.
   (G)   Recycling facilities. An establishment that collects, stores, or
processes recyclable material for the purpose of marketing or reusing the
material in the manufacturing of new, reused or reconstituted products.
      (1)   Concrete and asphalt recycling. Sites that accept concrete or
asphalt for separation or processing for the purposes of returning the material
to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials within four years of
the date that the material is accepted for processing.
      (2)   General construction or demolition debris recycling facilities.
Establishments that receive and process general construction or demolition
debris for recycling.
      (3)   Recyclable material drop-off facilities. An establishment that
accepts consumer recyclable commodities directly from the consuming party and
accumulates or stores them for not more than 30 days. Establishments that
process recyclable material are classified as "recyclable material processing
facilities." (Note: small consumer-oriented donation and (recycling) collection
drop boxes for items such as clothes, books, newspapers, cans and glass items
may be considered an accessory use, subject to the regulations of §
155-10.10(L)) Donation and (recycling) collection drop boxes that do not comply
with the regulations of §
155-10.10(L) are classified as "recyclable material drop-off facilities" and
are subject to the regulations that apply to recyclable material drop-off
facilities.
      (4)   Recyclable material processing facilities. Establishments that
receive and process consumer recyclable commodities for subsequent use in the
secondary market.
      (5)   Soil storage, recycling and reuse. A site that accepts soil, stores
it for period of time, and then markets the soil for reuse at another property.
   (H)   Self-service storage facilities. Storage or warehousing for
individuals to store personal effects and for businesses to store materials for
operation of an industrial or commercial enterprise elsewhere. Incidental uses
may include the repair and maintenance of stored materials by the tenant; but
in no case may storage space function as an independent retail, wholesale,
business, or service use. Spaces may not be used for workshops, hobby shops,
manufacturing, or similar uses.
   (I)   Warehousing, wholesaling and freight movement. Temporary storage,
wholesale sales or distribution of materials and equipment. Typical uses
include intermodal terminals, grain storage facilities, storage warehouses,
moving companies, cargo container storage and maintenance facilities, truck or
bus terminals, trucking or cartage operations, truck staging or storage areas,
and wholesale sales of materials and equipment to entities other than the
general public.
      (1)   Cargo container storage and maintenance facilities. The principal
use of a site, outside of an intermodal terminal, for the movement, temporary
storage, staging, redistribution or maintenance of cargo containers either on
or off of a chassis, but not including railroad operations that are under the
jurisdiction of the U.S. Department of Transportation Surface Transportation
Board. All establishments engaged in the maintenance and repair of cargo
containers, outside of intermodal terminals, are also classified as cargo
container storage and maintenance facilities, including operations engaged in
the conversion of cargo containers for secondary use or sale.
      (2)   Truck or bus terminal. A facility principally used for the parking,
storage, dispatching, and maintenance or repair of trucks, truck-tractors,
semitrailers or buses.
      (3)   Intermodal terminal. A facility at which containerized freight
arrives on trains or trucks for sorting and transfer to other trains or trucks
for transport to their final destination.
   (J)   Waste-related use. Waste-related uses are characterized by the
receiving of solid or liquid wastes from other users and sites for transfer to
another location; by the collection of sanitary wastes or other approved waste
materials for on-site disposal; or by the manufacture or production of goods or
energy from the composting of organic material. Typical uses include pollution
control facilities, sanitary landfills, solid waste separation facilities,
solid waste transfer stations, clean construction or demolition fill
operations, uncontaminated soil fill operations and anaerobic digestion
facilities. Biomass energy systems that produce energy from the biological
breakdown of organic matter produced on the site of a landfill or other waste-
related use are considered accessory to the principal waste-related use of the
site, except that small, neighborhood or campus-scale waste-to-energy systems
are considered "minor, basic utilities and services."
      (1)   Clean construction or demolition debris (CCDD) fill operations.
Fill operations that receive and process general construction or demolition
debris for disposal.
      (2)   Landscape waste processing/transfer facility. A site where grass,
shrubbery cuttings, leaves, and other materials generated by gardening, yard or
landscaping activities are brought to be processed, composted or transferred to
another facility or end-use market. Typical uses include landscape waste
transfer facilities and landscape waste material processing facilities.
      (3)   Uncontaminated soil fill operations. A current or former quarry,
mine, or other excavation where uncontaminated soil is used as fill material,
but does not include a clean construction or demolition debris fill operation.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-
18-2018)
§ 155-8.60 AGRICULTURAL USE CATEGORY.
   The agricultural use category includes the following subcategories:
   (A)   Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including the
growing of farm crops, truck garden crops, animal and poultry husbandry,
apiculture, aquaculture, dairying, floriculture, horticulture, nurseries, tree
farms, sod farms, pasturage, viticulture and wholesale greenhouses when such
agricultural purposes constitute the principal activity on the land.
   (B)   Community garden. An area of land managed and maintained by a group of
individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops,
such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption, sales, or donation.
   (C)   Horticulture, nurseries and greenhouses. A principal use involving
propagation and growth of trees or plants in containers or in the ground for
wholesale sales and distribution. Does not include on-site retail sales unless
such retail sales activities are otherwise permitted in the subject zoning
district.
   (D)   Agritourism. Farm-related enterprises that operate for the enjoyment
and education of the public and that combine tourism and agriculture.
Agritourism uses include those that are for-profit and those that are provided
free of charge to the public, including all of the following:
      (1)   Agriculture cultural center. A facility established for the purpose
of educating the public about agricultural activities, or the heritage and
culture of agricultural activities, in addition, this use subcategory included
museums dedicated solely to agriculture themes and living history farm sites.
      (2)   Agritainment. Events and activities that allow for recreation,
entertainment, and tourism in conjunction with agriculture support and services
directly associated with on-going agricultural activities on-site that are for-
profit. Events and activities include the following: hay rides, corn mazes, hay
mazes, petting zoos (farm animals only) and agricultural festivals.
      (3)   Eco-tourism enterprise. Tourism activities and facilities that
focus on visitation and observation of or education about natural history,
indigenous ecosystems, native plant or animal species, natural scenery or other
features, of the natural environment. Eco-tourism enterprises may include
cultural activities related to such activities or work projects that help
conserve or safeguard the integrity of a natural feature, habitat or ecosystem.
      (4)   Farm markets. An on-site, accessory use to a working or active farm
that includes the sale of horticulture or agricultural products, including,
perennial, annuals, bulbs, dried flowers, compost, Christmas trees, fresh
produce, honey, cider, and similar agricultural products. A minimum of 50% of
the products sold must be agricultural products produced on-site.
      (5)   Farmer's market, community-scale. A facility with a maximum area of
less than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area or ground area that sells or
provides fresh agricultural products directly to the consumer in a market
setting. Farmer's markets may include multiple vendors who offer homegrown
produce raised by the vendor or produce bought by the vendor on consignment,
for retail sale.
      (6)   Farmer's market, regional-scale. A facility that is 5,000 square
feet in gross floor area or ground area that sells or provides fresh
agricultural products directly to the consumer in a market setting. Farmer's
markets may include multiple vendors who offer homegrown produce raised by the
vendor or produce bought by the vendor on consignment, for retail sale.
      (7)   Restaurant, farm-based. Restaurants on tracts occupied by a working
farm that serve food and beverages primarily to customers seated at tables or
counters located within a building or designated outdoor seating areas. At a
minimum, 50% of the food served at this type of restaurant must be grown on-
site, or on tracts that are part of the subject farm.
      (8)   Participatory farms. Farm-based, tourism-driven enterprises where
individuals or groups pay to participate on a working farm or dude ranch.
      (9)   Rural retreat. An establishment that is part of a working farm that
provides temporary overnight accommodations for individuals or groups engaged
in supervised training or personal improvement activities. Examples include
corporate retreat facilities, educational retreat facilities and working farm
learning centers. Restaurants are an allowed accessory use.
      (10)   Wine tasting room. A facility in which wine products grown or
processed on the owner's property may be tasted and sold. This definition may
include the following as ancillary uses: gift/retail sales, assembly areas and
meeting rooms.
      (11)   Rural events. Events and activities that are operated for profit
and not open to the general public. Examples include wedding barns, event barns
or use of the property or any portion to host weddings, parties, receptions or
other special events.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 18-221, passed 8-
16-2018)
155-9 SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS
§ 155-9.10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   All adult entertainment facilities must comply with all of the
following regulations:
      (1)   An adult entertainment establishment may not be located within
1,000 feet of another existing adult entertainment establishment.
      (2)   An adult entertainment establishment may not be located within
1,000 feet of any pre-existing agricultural or residential zoning district.
      (3)   An adult entertainment establishment may not be located within
3,000 feet of a pre-existing school, day care center, cemetery, public park,
forest preserve, public housing, religious assembly use, or residential
dwelling unit.
      (4)   An adult entertainment establishment may not be located in a
structure that contains another business that sells or dispenses alcoholic
beverages in any manner.
      (5)   For the purpose of these regulations, measurements must be made in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
property line of the proposed adult entertainment establishment to the nearest
property line of another adult entertainment establishment, school, day care
center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public housing, religious
assembly use, residential dwelling unit or agricultural or residential zoning
district boundary.
      (6)   The adult entertainment establishment must comply with all
requirements of the county ordinance establishing licensing regulations for
adult entertainment establishments.
      (7)   Adult entertainment facilities may be approved as a special use in
the I-3 zoning district, in accordance with the special use permit procedures
of §
155-16.40. They are prohibited in all other zoning districts.
   (B)   Any adult entertainment facility lawfully established before and
operating on June 19, 2008 that is in violation of the regulations of division
(A) of this section is deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use is
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for 30 days or more. The
nonconforming use may not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except
that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more adult
entertainment facilities are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in
a permissible location, the adult entertainment facility that was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established adult entertainment facility is the
nonconforming use.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.20 ANIMAL CARE/BOARDING AND VETERINARY CLINICS.
   (A)   Agricultural districts. In all agricultural zoning districts, animal
care/boarding facilities and veterinary clinics—including all buildings,
enclosures and animal run/exercise areas—must be set back at least 250 feet
from all R-zoned lots and at least 500 feet from any dwelling unit or community
building such as, but not limited to, school, place of worship, or government
office building. No setback is required from a dwelling unit located on the
same lot as the subject animal services use.
   (B)   E-1 and E-2 districts. In E-1 and E-2 districts, animal care/boarding
facilities and veterinary clinics—including all buildings, enclosures and
animal run/exercise areas—must be set back at least 250 feet from all R-zoned
lots and at least 500 feet from any dwelling unit or community building such
as, but not limited to, school, place of worship, or government office
building. No setback is required from a dwelling unit located on the same lot
as the subject animal services use.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 21-233, passed 7-15-2021)
§ 155-9.25 EXOTIC AND WILD ANIMALS; REHABILITATION FACILITIES, SANCTUARIES, AND
ZOOLOGICAL PARK.
   (A)   Exemptions. Unless specifically exempted by Illinois State Statutes -
such as, but not limited to the Herptiles-Herps Act (510 ILCS 68/1 et seq.),
Wildlife Code (520 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), and Criminal Code; Dangerous Animals (720
ILCS 5/48-10 (c)) - the care and keeping of exotic animals must be approved in
accordance with the special use permit procedures of § 155-16.40 which shall
include any and all licenses and permits required by state or federal agencies
and departments.
   (B)   Minimum lot area.
      (1)   A-1, A-2, E-1 and E-2 Districts.
         (a)   Exotic animal rehabilitation facility; indigenous; less than 22
lbs./10 kg. - not less than 2 acres.
         (b)   Exotic animal rehabilitation facility; indigenous; 22 lbs./10
kg. or larger – not less than 5 acres.
         (c)   All other exotic animal uses – not less than 10 acres.
      (2)   C-6 Recreational Commercial District. Exotic animal zoological park
not less than 10 acres.
      (3)   All other commercial and industrial districts. Not less than 0.5
acres (21,780 square feet) or district lot area requirements, whichever is
greater.
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. All buildings, enclosures and animal run/exercise
areas for exotic animals approved under paragraph (A) of this section must be
set back at least 250 feet from all R-zoned lots and at least 500 feet any
dwelling unit or community building such as, but not limited to, school, place
of worship, or government office building. No setback is required from a
dwelling unit located on the same lot as the subject animal services use.
   (D)   Exotic animals & wildlife prohibitions.
      (1)   Exotic animal: No person shall own, or keep in their custody any
exotic or crossbred or hybrid exotic animals in any place other than a properly
maintained zoological park, circus, scientific or educational institution,
research laboratory, veterinary hospital or animal sanctuary.
      (2)   Wildlife domestication: No person shall keep, or permit to be kept,
or domesticate any wildlife contrary to federal, state and local laws, and
regulations.
      (3)   Indigenous wildlife: No person shall be permitted to own, harbor or
keep in his or her custody any wildlife indigenous to the State of Illinois for
the purpose of selling, giving or trading the animal as a pet, irrespective of
holding a fur-bearing mammal permit or game breeders permit from the Illinois
Department of Conservation. Fur-bearing farms are exempt from this requirement
provided that the operation meets the requirement of state and county
regulations.
      (4)   Wildlife hybrids: No person shall own or keep in their custody any
domestic animal-wildlife hybrid such as coy dogs, wolf dogs, domestic cats bred
to wild cats (e.g. Asian leopard cat, Geoffrey’s cat, and bobcat) or any other
wild canine or feline hybrid, in any place other than a properly maintained
zoological park, circus, scientific or educational institution, research
laboratory or veterinary hospital.
(Ord. 21-233, passed 7-15-2021)
§ 155-9.30 BED AND BREAKFASTS.
   Bed and breakfast establishments are subject to all the following
regulations.
   (A)   No more than four guest rooms are allowed in the dwelling unit, and
maximum occupancy is limited to two adults per guest room.
   (B)   Length of stay for a guest may not exceed ten consecutive days.
   (C)   A single non-illuminated wall sign with a maximum area of two square
feet is allowed.
   (D)   No parking spaces are allowed in a street yard.
   (E)   Tandem off-street parking spaces may be provided, but not more than
two spaces deep.
   (F)   The dwelling in which the bed and breakfast operates must be the
principal residence of the operator/owner and the operator/owner must live on
the premises.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.40 CARGO CONTAINER STORAGE AND MAINTENANCE FACILITIES.
   Cargo container storage and maintenance facilities are subject to all of the
following regulations. Cargo container storage and maintenance activities
within intermodal terminals are subject to the regulations of §
155-9.130.
   (A)   Where allowed. Cargo container storage and maintenance facilities may
be approved by special use permit (see §
155-16.40) in the I-3 zoning district, provided that parcel on which the
facility is located has a minimum area of 20 acres.
   (B)   Regulations. The following regulations apply to all cargo container
storage and maintenance facilities.
      (1)   Stacking and racking.
         (a)   Individual cargo containers may not be stacked more than three
units high. When containers are stacked, an additional 20 feet of setback
distance must be added for each level of stacked containers above the first
level. Empty trailer chassis may not be stacked more than five units high.
         (b)   Chassis stored in an upright position with the trailer bed
perpendicular to the ground ("racking") may not exceed 60 feet in height. When
racked chassis exceed 30 feet in height an additional one foot of set-back
distance must be added for each foot of racked chassis height above 30 feet.
      (2)   Groupings. Side-by-side groupings may not exceed 20 cargo
containers or chassis in width and no end-to-end grouping may exceed two cargo
containers or chassis in length. Paved access drives with a minimum width of 30
feet must be maintained at all times on all sides of a grouping of cargo
containers and chassis.
      (3)   Access. Cargo containers and chassis may not be stored in a manner
that blocks access to public rights-of-way, utility or drainage easements or
adjacent buildings.
      (4)   Separation distance. No cargo container or chassis may be located
within 1,000 feet of any R-zoned lot or any lot occupied by a residential
dwelling unit.
      (5)   Required off-street parking. No portion of any required off-street
parking or loading/unloading areas may be used for the storage of cargo
containers.
      (6)   Historically sensitive site, buildings or structure. Cargo
container storage and maintenance facilities may not be located within 1,000
feet of any site designated or identified by any federal, state or local
government as a local or national historic landmark, natural area or preserve.
      (7)   Traffic studies. A traffic study must be submitted in accordance
with §
155-14.30. Additional documentation must be submitted to address traffic
planning and adequacy of the road and bridge infrastructure to accommodate the
proposed use.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.50 COMMUNITY GARDENS.
   Community gardens are subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   A community garden area may be divided into separate garden plots for
cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members
of the group.
   (B)   Community garden group members may or may not reside on the subject
property.
   (C)   Any structure used in conjunction with a community garden must comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   Be located at least ten feet from any property line.
      (2)   If the total area of structures used in conjunction with a
community garden does not exceed 64 square feet, the structures are not
considered accessory buildings. Otherwise, all structures used for community
gardens are accessory buildings and must comply with the applicable accessory
use and structure regulations of §
155-10.10.
      (3)   The following are not considered structures for the purposes of
this section: benches, bike racks, cold-frames, hoop houses, raised/ accessible
planting beds, compost or waste bins, picnic tables, garden art, rain barrel
systems, and children's play areas.
   (D)   The site must be designed and maintained so that water and fertilizer
will not drain onto adjacent property.
   (E)   Sales and donation activities may occur only in locations where retail
sales or farm (roadside) stands are an allowed use, provided that on-site sale
and donation of crops grown on the community garden site may be authorized as a
temporary use in accordance with §
155-10.20.
   (F)   Garden beds on sites known to have been previously occupied by a
commercial or industrial use must be raised (elevated) at least 12 inches above
surrounding grade. If raised garden beds are not used, the applicant must
provide a Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) or applicable site
history. Any historical sources of contamination identified in the ESA or
applicable site history must be tested to determine type and level of
contamination; appropriate remediation procedures must be undertaken to ensure
that soil is suitable for gardening. If a raised garden bed is used, it must be
made of untreated lumber or plastic.
   (G)   The operator of a community garden must maintain the property in
productive use during the growing season.
   (H)   At the end of each growing season annual vegetation must be cut down
to a height of not more than six inches above ground level.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.60 CONSTRUCTION OFFICES AND CONSTRUCTION-RELATED EQUIPMENT STORAGE.
   (A)   Construction offices and (equipment and material) storage areas may be
located on the site of an on-going construction project, provided that all
required permits and approvals have been issued and remain in effect.
   (B)   No construction office or equipment storage area may contain sleeping
or cooking accommodations.
   (C)   All offices, storage buildings and equipment must be removed within 14
days of completion of the construction project or upon expiration of the
building permit, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.70 FILL OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Clean construction or demolition debris and uncontaminated soil fill.
Clean construction or demolition debris fill operations and uncontaminated soil
fill operations are subject to the regulations of this section, in addition to
any state or federal permitting/ reporting requirements and applicable sections
of 35 IAC 1100.
      (1)   Prior to the acceptance of soils for disposal, the site must have a
standard operation procedure in place to verify that the regulations of this
section have been met.
      (2)   A minimum of one load per day from each generating source must be
subjected to a discharge inspection. The selected load must be spread out and
screened with a PID or other monitoring device approved by the IEPA. Readings
may not exceed 0.0 PPM. Loads must also be screened for non-CCDD materials.
Documentation of results must be recorded and the records must be kept per the
site's IEPA permit.
      (3)   Any rejected loads must be reported to the Will County Land Use
Department, Resource Recovery and Energy Division within 24 hours. For all
rejected loads the owner or operator is required to report, at a minimum, name
and location address of facility, the date and time of the inspection, the
weight or volume of the clean construction or demolition debris or
uncontaminated soil, the name of the hauler, the name of the hauling firm, the
vehicle identification number or license plate number, the source site owner
and operator, and the location of the site of origin of the fill.
      (4)   Applicants must provide the Will County Land Use Department,
Resource Recovery and Energy Division with current and complete IEPA permit
applications, IEPA Permits, closure/ reclamation plans and NPDES permits as
well as relevant correspondence relating to the site.
      (5)   The owner or operator is required to provided and maintain annually
a performance bond (or other county-approved financial guarantee) in an amount
equal to the estimated cost to close the current operating area. The estimate
is subject to annual review and approval by Will County. The financial
guarantee must be maintained for a minimum of five years after IEPA has issued
a certificate of closure. This performance bond must be purchased by the
operator and renewed each year by January 1, naming Will County as beneficiary.
      (6)   An adequate level of pollution liability insurance must be
maintained by the operator until five years after the IEPA has issued a
certificate of closure. The level of insurance will be reviewed by the county
on a case-by-case basis, depending on site factors.
      (7)   In the event that Class I groundwater standards are violated, the
owner or operator is required to supply municipal water (or an alternative
clean drinking water source such as a deeper well) to residents or businesses
served by a private well within one-quarter mile of the facility. Each
situation must be evaluated individually and the following parameters must be
considered:
         (a)   Is the detected compound a drinking water parameter that is a
threat to human health or the environment; and
         (b)   Is the detected compound a result of the operations of the
facility or is it a naturally occurring compound present in both upgradient and
down gradient wells.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.80 FIREARMS DEALERS AND (ACCESSORY) INDOOR SHOOTING RANGES.
   (A)   Indoor shooting ranges are considered an accessory use to firearms
dealers in commercial and industrial zoning districts.
   (B)   Firearms dealers located in commercial or industrial zoning districts
must install and maintain an electronic security system that emits an audible
alarm at the firearms dealer's place of business when triggered. The security
system must also transmit a silent alarm directly to a public safety agency. If
the public safety agency with jurisdiction over the firearms dealer property
does not allow for direct transmission of alarm signals, the security system
must transmit an alarm signal to a UL-approved monitoring station that must,
within two minutes, provide notification to a public safety agency with
jurisdiction over the firearms dealer property.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.90 GROUP LIVING FACILITIES.
   Group care homes, halfway houses, emergency shelters and temporary shelters
are subject to the regulations of this section, as indicated.
   (A)   General regulations. Group care homes, halfway houses, emergency
shelters and temporary shelters are all subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Group care homes, halfway houses, emergency shelters and temporary
shelters must be licensed and/or certified by the appropriate federal, state,
or local agencies.
      (2)   Group care homes, halfway houses, emergency shelters and temporary
shelters are subject to the occupancy limits of BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code 1990, Page 20, section PM-403.3, which requires that every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant must contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant must contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for
each occupant.
      (3)   Structures and sites must be visually and structurally compatible
with the surrounding area.
      (4)   Facilities may house such staff as may be required to meet the
standards of federal, state, or local agencies. Support staff are not counted
in determining the number of residents.
   (B)   Emergency shelters and temporary shelters. No emergency shelter or
temporary shelter may be located within 1,000 feet of an existing emergency
shelter or temporary shelter, as measured from lot line to lot line.
   (C)   Halfway houses. No halfway house may be located within 1,000 feet of
an existing halfway house, as measured from lot line to lot line.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.100 DAY CARE CENTERS/DAY CARE HOMES.
   (A)   General regulations. Day care homes and day care centers must be
licensed and/or certified by the appropriate federal, state, or local agencies.
Facilities that require special use permit approval must be licensed and/or
certified by the appropriate federal, state, or local agencies before the
special use permit will become effective.
   (B)   Day care homes for adults or children. The following regulations apply
only to day care homes:
      (1)   Day care homes for children provide care for no more than 12
children, including the family's (provider's) natural, foster or adopted
children and all other persons under the age of 12.
      (2)   Day care homes for adults may provide care for no more than five
adults, not including the caregivers.
      (3)   Structures and sites must be visually and structurally compatible
with existing structures and sites in the surrounding area.
      (4)   The owner and operator of the day care home must reside in the
dwelling unit in which day care services are provided.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.110 ELDER COTTAGE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY (ECHO).
   (A)   Purpose. The ECHO housing regulations of this section are intended to:
      (1)   Allow households to provide small temporary residences for
relatives or household members who are in need of support, while still
maintaining some independence.
      (2)   Allow households to provide security and support for relatives or
household members with health problems or disabilities.
      (3)   Reduce the degree to which elderly or disabled residents have to
choose between increasing isolation in their own homes and institutionalization
in nursing homes or similar facilities.
      (4)   Accommodate housing types in residential neighborhoods that are
appropriate for households at various stages of the life cycle.
      (5)   Allow ECHO housing in a manner that protects the property values
and residential character of neighborhoods by ensuring that the units are
compatible with the neighborhood and are easily removed.
   (B)   Where allowed. ECHO housing units are allowed as a special use permit
associated with a detached house in the A-1, A-2, E-1, E-2, R-1, and R-2 zoning
districts.
   (C)   Regulations. ECHO housing units are subject to all of the following
regulations:
      (1)   A maximum of one ECHO housing unit may be located on a lot, in
addition to the principal residence. ECHO housing units are not permitted on
lots occupied by accessory dwelling units (see also § 155-10.110(C).
      (2)   ECHO housing units must comply with all applicable setbacks of the
subject zoning district.
      (3)   ECHO housing units may not contain more than 1,000 square feet of
living space or more than two bedrooms in the R-1 and R-2 zoning district.
      (4)   ECHO housing units may not contain more than 1,200 square feet of
living space or more than two bedrooms in A-1, A-2, E- 1 and E-2 zoning
districts.
      (5)   ECHO housing units must be a mobile home or an attached or detached
pre-manufactured home with a removable foundation.
      (6)   No more than one parking space may be provided for an ECHO housing
unit.
      (7)   The owner of the lot must live in either the principal dwelling
unit or the ECHO housing unit.
      (8)   The owner of the principal residence and the resident of the ECHO
unit must be related by blood, marriage, civil union or adoption or be a
licensed caretaker.
      (9)   At least one of the occupants of the ECHO housing unit must be at
least 62 years of age, or unable to live independently because of disabilities.
All disabled occupants must submit a letter from a licensed physician verifying
the disability and stating the permanency of the situation.
      (10)   The owner of the lot must submit an affidavit to the Zoning
Administrator every year verifying that the property is being maintained in
full compliance with the ECHO housing regulations of this section and that all
eligibility requirements continue to be met. Once the eligibility requirements
are no longer met, the lot owner has up to six months to remove the ECHO
housing unit from the property.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-
18-2018)
§ 155-9.120 ENTERTAINMENT AND SPECTATOR SPORTS.
   Entertainment and spectator sports uses are subject to the following
regulations, as indicated.
   (A)   Minor outdoor entertainment and spectator sports. Minor outdoor
entertainment and spectator sports uses are permitted as of right in the A-
1 districts if separated by a distance of at least 500 feet from any R-zoned
lot. Minor outdoor entertainment and spectator sports uses separated by less
than 500 feet from R-zoned property may be approved through the special use
permit procedures of §
155-16.40.
   (B)   Entertainment and spectator sports uses requiring special use permit.
A development and operating plan must be submitted and approved with the
special use permit application. This plan must include:
      (1)   A site plan drawn to scale depicting public assembly and activity
areas, site improvements, road access, driveways, parking areas and sanitary
facilities;
      (2)   A description of facilities for any animals involved in the planned
activities;
      (3)   The methods proposed to control dust, erosion, odor, noise, glare,
waste disposal (manure, trash, etc.) and traffic congestion;
      (4)   A transportation impact study and a traffic management plan;
      (5)   The hours of operation;
      (6)   The projected number of people on the property during activities;
      (7)   A description of all items for sale during event activities, such
as food, beverages and souvenirs; and
      (8)   Additional information as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator to enable competent review of the required special use permit.
   (C)   Measurement of required separation distances. Measurement of the
separation distance required between outdoor entertainment and spectator sports
uses must be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the property line of the proposed outdoor entertainment and
spectator sports establishment to the nearest property line of any R-zoned lot.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.130 INTERMODAL TERMINALS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of the intermodal terminal use regulations of
this section are to:
      (1)   Permit the development, use and operation of intermodal rail
terminal facilities; connecting and switch tracks to provide rail connections
between railroad main lines and intermodal rail terminal facilities; short-term
storage or staging of goods and commodities in transit; transportation
equipment support and storage facilities; warehouse, distribution and other
logistics-centered buildings and uses; and other related industrial and
commercial uses.
      (2)   Promote a comprehensive master planning approach to (i) the
placement of various land uses within intermodal terminal planned unit
developments, (ii) rail infrastructure and roadways to support the planned unit
development and to minimize external impacts, and (iii) the identification of
areas within the planned unit development for stormwater management and other
conservation areas.
      (3)   Require a land use master plan that allows for the development of
the uses allowed within an intermodal terminal PUD while also promoting the
public health, safety and general welfare.
      (4)   Provide developers of large-scale, complex and integrated
intermodal rail, logistics and industrial projects with appropriate flexibility
to commence and complete such projects in a phased manner and over an extended
period of time.
   (B)   PUD approval required. Intermodal terminals require approval in
accordance with the PUD approval procedures of §
155-16.50.
   (C)   General regulations. Unless otherwise expressly stated in this zoning
ordinance or approved as part of a PUD development plan, intermodal terminals
must comply with all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance,
including, for example, the parking, landscaping, sign, and general planned
unit development regulations. If the intermodal terminal use regulations of
this section are in conflict with other regulations of this zoning ordinance,
the intermodal terminal use regulations of this section govern.
   (D)   Minimum land area. An intermodal terminal planned unit development may
be approved only on contiguous parcels of 300 acres or more, under single
ownership or unified development control at the time that the development plan
for the planned unit development is established and approved.
   (E)   Location. The site must be adjacent to a railroad right-of-way and be
connected by switches, lead tracks, connecting tracks or spur tracks operated
by a railroad common carrier or a short haul or a terminal railroad serving the
terminal.
   (F)   Development plans. An intermodal terminal PUD application must be
accompanied by a development plan that designates the general location of the
various permitted subareas proposed within the planned unit development. There
are three permitted subareas, as follows:
      (1)   Intermodal terminal subarea. This subarea consists primarily of the
intermodal railroad operations and is considered the most intense land use
subarea.
      (2)   Transportation equipment subarea. This is the second most intense
land use subarea. Cargo containers awaiting delivery may be stored in this
subarea, as may empty containers awaiting re-use. Other permitted uses include
trucking companies, grain handling operations and other transportation
equipment storage and operations.
      (3)   Industrial park subarea. This category allows for industrial
warehouses, logistics and distribution facilities. Accessory uses are also
allowed to complement the primary permitted uses. Unless otherwise expressly
specified, permitted uses within the subareas are not cumulative.
   (G)   Uses. The following uses are permitted within the designated subareas
set forth in the approved development plan for each planned unit development.
      (1)   Intermodal terminal subarea. The following uses are permitted in
the intermodal terminal subarea:
         (a)   Intermodal rail and truck terminals, including: switching yards,
freight yards, lift tracks and storage tracks; outdoor overhead cranes and
gantries; train fueling and maintenance facilities; entrance and exit gates and
structures and associated security apparatus; vehicular queuing areas;
administrative offices and other buildings and structures customarily accessory
to an intermodal railroad facility; cargo container, truck trailer and truck
chassis loading and unloading; outdoor storage of truck chassis; short-term
outdoor storage of cargo containers and truck trailers; and short term outdoor
storage of goods in transit.
         (b)   Railroad rights-of-way and all associated railroad track
improvements, including but not limited to tracks, ties, switches, lead tracks,
connecting tracks, spur tracks, gates and signals.
         (c)   Governmental offices related to intermodal regulatory functions
or customs, and private offices performing such functions under governmental
contract.
         (d)   Public and quasi-public utilities, including, but not limited to
water wells, water treatment plants, pumping stations, sewage treatment plants,
lift stations, electrical substations and facilities necessarily accessory
thereto.
      (2)   Transportation equipment subarea. The following uses are permitted
in the transportation equipment subarea:
         (a)   Short-term storage or staging of goods in transit.
         (b)   Long-term cargo container storage and repair facilities.
         (c)   Truck dispatch yards, including truck storage, fueling and
repair facilities.
         (d)   Chassis storage, dispatch and repair facilities.
         (e)   Administrative offices, repair and storage buildings, entrance
and exit gates, and other uses ancillary to the foregoing transportation
equipment uses.
         (f)   Public and quasi-public utilities, including, but not limited to
water wells, water treatment plants, pumping stations, sewage treatment plants,
lift stations, electrical substations and facilities necessarily accessory
thereto.
         (g)   Railroad rights-of-way and all associated railroad track
improvements, including but not limited to tracks, ties, switches, lead tracks,
connecting tracks, spur tracks, gates and signals.
         (h)   Grain unloading, loading and handling facilities (including the
filling of shipping containers or similar vessels for the transportation of
grain).
      (3)   Industrial park subarea. The following uses are permitted in the
industrial park subarea:
         (a)   Industrial warehouse, logistics and distribution facilities.
         (b)   Office uses.
         (c)   Manufacturing and industrial services; warehousing, wholesaling,
and freight movement.
         (d)   Uses and buildings accessory to the foregoing, including any
retail sales component that are accessory in nature to the principal use.
         (e)   Governmental offices and facilities, and private offices and
facilities under government contract usage.
         (f)   Public and quasi-public utilities, including, but not limited to
water wells, water treatment plants, pumping stations, sewage treatment plants,
lift stations, electrical substations and facilities necessarily accessory
thereto.
         (g)   Railroad rights-of-way and all associated railroad track
improvements, including but not limited to tracks, ties, switches, lead tracks,
connecting tracks, spur tracks, gates and signals.
   (H)   Cargo container regulations.
      (1)   Cargo container storage is limited to the intermodal terminal and
transportation equipment subareas. Short-term cargo container storage is
permitted in intermodal terminal and transportation equipment subareas. Long-
term cargo container storage is only permitted in a transportation equipment
subarea.
      (2)   Cargo containers affixed with hazardous materials placards must be
handled, stored and stacked in compliance with the Federal Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act of 1975, as amended from time to time (49 U.S.C. § 5101)
("HMTA") and all applicable regulations issued pursuant to HMTA.
      (3)   On Site Use of Cargo Containers.
         (a)   Cargo containers may be modified or retrofitted for on-site
habitation with a Special Use Permit in accordance with the procedures of §
155-16.40 and shall comply with the regulations of §
155-10.10(C) Accessory Uses - Accessory Dwelling Units and §
155-9.290 Supplementary Uses - Cargo Container Dwelling Units.
         (b)   Within an intermodal rail facility in an intermodal terminal
subarea, up to 30 cargo containers may be used as storage units for equipment,
replacement parts, air compressors and similar on-site property, and are not
subject to durational limitations.
      (4)   Cargo containers may not be stored within a restricted area
immediately adjacent to any entrance onto a public road. The restricted area
must be at least 100 feet in width and 150 feet in depth and centered in the
entranceway.
      (5)   In intermodal terminal subareas, short-term cargo container storage
and stacking (not to exceed five units high) is permitted in and adjacent to
lift-track areas of an intermodal rail yard, provided that such five-high
stacking may not occur within 200 feet of the bottom of the inside face of a
required perimeter berm as set forth in the development plan. Elsewhere within
the intermodal terminal subarea, short-term cargo container storage and
stacking (not to exceed three units high) is permitted, provided that such
three-high stacking may not occur within 70 feet of the bottom of the inside
face of the required perimeter berms as set forth in the development plan.
      (6)   In transportation equipment subareas, long-term cargo container
storage and stacking storage and stacking (not to exceed five units high) is
permitted in and adjacent to lift-track areas of an intermodal rail yard,
provided that such five-high stacking may not occur within 200 feet of the
bottom of the inside face of a required perimeter berm as set forth in the
development plan. Elsewhere within the intermodal terminal subarea, short-term
cargo container storage and stacking (not to exceed three units high) is
permitted, provided that such three-high stacking may not occur within 70 feet
of the bottom of the inside face of the required perimeter berms as set forth
in the development plan. Cargo containers may not be grouped more than two deep
end-to-end, and such two-deep groupings must be separated by drive aisles of
not less than 30 feet in width.
      (7)   In transportation equipment subareas, on-road vehicles entering or
leaving a cargo container storage yard are restricted to paved surfaces only,
and in each such storage yard there must be constructed and maintained
sufficient paved areas so as to permit all on-road vehicles to enter, exit,
load, off-load, maneuver and otherwise remain at all times on wholly paved
surfaces within the storage facility. Other than the required paved areas
aforesaid, the remainder of the storage areas in transportation equipment
subareas must be paved or surfaced and maintained with not less than 12 inches
of dust-retardant compacted gravel material.
      (8)   No removable fastened signage may be displayed on any cargo
container, with the exception of standardized safety or warning information
placards (including hazardous materials placards used in compliance with the
HMTA and all applicable regulations issued pursuant to the HMTA).
      (9)   All cargo containers and truck trailer containers visible to public
rights-of-way must be stored in a secure fashion with doors that are fully
closed.
   (I)   Site access. Each individual lot or principal building site must have
direct vehicular access to a paved public roadway or a paved private easement
road.
   (J)   Buffers.
      (1)   A buffer with a minimum width of 100 feet must be provided around
the entire exterior perimeter of every intermodal terminal and transportation
equipment subarea, except for (i) areas of ingress, egress and drainage out-
fall, (ii) railroad rights-of-way containing lead tracks, spur tracks and
associated railroad improvements, (iii) land under which pipeline transmission
facilities exist, provided that reasonable buffering and/or landscaping must be
provided if and to the extent allowed by the pipeline operator, (iv) such
portions of any intermodal terminal or transportation equipment subareas that
abut each other, and (v) such portions of the perimeter as are specifically
designated to have a solid wall in lieu of a buffer with a minimum height of
eight feet with an architectural element or stamped detail.
      (2)   Buffers must include an undulated landscaped berm at least 15 feet
in height, unless the approved development plan sets forth a requirement for an
engineered solid wall of a designated minimum height.
      (3)   Required berms must have a slope of 3:1 on the exterior (street-
frontage) side, and may have a slope of 2.5:1 on the interior side.
      (4)   Green space, setback requirements, perimeter berms and setbacks
must be shown on the approved development plan.
      (5)   Required perimeter berms must be landscaped and seeded with native
grasses. Unless otherwise approved as part of the planned unit development, the
required berms for the intermodal terminal and transportation equipment
subareas must be installed as part of the activities authorized by the first
site development permit issued for that specific subarea on the development
plan.
      (6)   Subject to the foregoing requirements, the final design of
perimeter berms, berm landscaping or solid wall is subject to review and
approval as part of the site development permit process. In appropriate
circumstances, the County Board is authorized to reduce both the width of the
buffer and the height of the berm, or the height of a solid wall if allowed in
lieu of a berm.
   (K)   Security fences.
      (1)   Perimeter and other interior security fences are allowed for all
uses in intermodal terminal, transportation equipment and industrial park
subareas. Fences may be up to ten feet in height.
      (2)   For buildings in industrial park subareas that do not have front-
facing docks, unless occupant security requirements otherwise require, as is
reasonably determined by Will County, security fencing may not extend any
closer to the street than the front face of the building unless approved as a
special use.
      (3)   For buildings in industrial park subareas that do have front facing
docks, unless occupant security requirements otherwise require, security
fencing may not extend any closer to the street than ten feet from back of curb
on the street side edge of a parking area unless approved as a special use.
   (L)   Semi-tractor trailers and truck parking restrictions.
      (1)   In the intermodal terminal subarea, only short-term storage of
semi-tractor trailers and trucks are permitted; except that tractors, hostlers
and trucks used by the owner or occupant and intermodal facility for its
operations in an intermodal terminal subarea is permitted without durational
limitations.
      (2)   In the transportation equipment subarea, long-term semi-tractor
trailer storage is permitted, and indefinite storage of operable, licensed and
registered trucks is a permitted use in the transportation equipment subarea.
Tractors, hostlers and trucks used by the owner or occupant of transportation
equipment management facility for its operations in a transportation equipment
subarea is permitted without durational limitations.
      (3)   In the industrial park subarea, only short-term storage of semi-
tractor trailers and trucks is permitted, and the maximum number of accessory
parking spaces (not including trailer positions immediately adjacent to dock
doors) intended for use by semi-trailers, wheeled containers or truck-trailer
combinations at warehouses, distribution facilities and other similar
facilities used for storage, loading or off-loading of goods, may not exceed
one parking space for every 1,500 square feet of ground floor area of the
principal building.
      (4)   In all subareas of the planned unit development, the use of public
or private streets for the regular staging of trucks or tractor trailers is
prohibited.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 19-241, passed 9-
19-2019)
§ 155-9.140 AUTO SALVAGE.
   (A)   All outdoor auto salvage operations must be enclosed on all sides by a
solid wall or fence at least eight feet in height. No junk or salvage material
may be visible from adjacent streets and lots.
   (B)   All gasoline, motor oils, brake and transmission fluids, antifreeze,
hydraulic fluids, battery acids and other fluids must be removed immediately
from all salvaged vehicles. Such fluids must be stored and disposed of in a
manner that avoids soil and environmental contamination of the subject site and
prevents contamination of surrounding properties and waterways.
   (C)   Only processed vehicles may be stored outdoors. Processed vehicle
storage areas must have an aggregate base at least four inches in depth
throughout and be graded so that no pools of water are present. Pathways at
least 20 feet in width must be provided in vehicle storage area to permit
access by emergency vehicles.
   (D)   All vehicle crushing must be conducted on an impervious surface.
   (E)   Only processed vehicles may be crushed. Crushed vehicles may be
stacked two high and must be stored on an impervious surface.
   (F)   Auto salvage establishments must be properly maintained at all times.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.150 LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOSTING AND LAND APPLICATION OF WASTE.
   Landscape and food waste composting operations and land application of
landscape waste (including grass clippings, leaves and chipped brush) or food
waste (including discarded fruits, vegetables, and grains) are subject to all
of the following regulations.
   (A)   Only activities that do not require a permit from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Land (IEPA-BOL) are allowed.
   (B)   Landscape waste compost material must be applied on land farmed by the
operator of the compost facility. Land application of landscape waste and food
waste may occur only on parcels on which an annual crop was planted and
harvested during the previous 12-month period.
   (C)   Landscape waste composted and land-applied landscape waste and food
waste must be incorporated (tilled) within five days of application at
analytically determined agronomic rates including consideration of the carbon/
nitrogen ratio, based on soil type, nutrient needs of the soil, nutrient needs
of the crop to be grown, and nutrient contents of the material to be applied.
   (D)   All litter must be removed from landscape waste and food waste upon
receipt and prior to composting and land application. All litter must be
removed from windrows of landscape waste and land applied landscape waste and
food waste.
   (E)   The required analytical determination must be based on current crop
nutrient needs based on a laboratory soil test by a participating Illinois Soil
Testing Association laboratory and include a specified rate of application. The
analytical determination must be available for review within ten working days
of a request by the county.
   (F)   At no time may the depth of applied landscape waste composted material
or food waste exceed the determined agronomic rate. Landscape waste and/or food
waste to be land-applied must be land-applied within five days of its arrival
at the site.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.160 LEASEHOLDS, RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any residential leasehold parcel created on or after October 1, 2012
must comply with the subdivision ordinance and all buildings and development on
such parcels must comply with applicable zoning regulations.
   (B)   Residential leasehold parcels in existence before October 1, 2012 are
deemed to be nonconforming lots.
      (1)   No further subdivision, division or parcelization of such
residential lease-hold parcels, other than boundary adjustments that do not
result in the creation of additional leasehold parcels, are allowed.
      (2)   Permits may be issued for new construction, mobile home placement
and building additions on residential leasehold parcels in existence before
October 1, 2012, provided that the proposed construction or placement complies
with the Building Ordinance, Water Resource Ordinance and the following lot and
building regulations:
 
Lot and Building Regulations
Maximum Building Height              30
Maximum Acc. Building Area (sq. ft.) 480
 
      (3)   Accessory dwelling units of any type are expressly prohibited on
nonconforming leasehold parcels.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.170 MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Mobile homes are allowed only in approved mobile home parks, on
residential leasehold parcels, and in the C-6 district for caretaker or
security purposes with an approved special use permit except that a single
mobile home is permitted on a lot in the A-1 district with an area of at least
ten acres.
      (2)   Mobile homes are subject to applicable health code regulations.
   (B)   Mobile home parks.
      (1)   Permits and approvals.
         (a)   No mobile home park may be established until a special use
permit has been approved in accordance with the procedures of §
155-16.40 and the park owner has provided evidence that all state and county
requirements have been met and all required permits have been obtained.
         (b)   Existing mobile homes in nonconforming mobile home parks may be
replaced, but no additional mobile home units may be added to a nonconforming
mobile home park, and the extent of the park's non-conformity may not be
increased.
      (2)   Minimum park size. Mobile home parks must have a minimum area of
nine acres.
      (3)   Maximum density. The maximum density of a mobile home park may not
exceed ten mobile homes per acre of mobile home park area.
      (4)   Minimum space size. Each mobile home space must have a minimum area
of 4,000 square feet and a minimum width of 40 feet. No more than one mobile
home is allowed per mobile home space.
      (5)   Minimum setbacks. Mobile homes are subject to the following minimum
setbacks:
         (a)   From internal park accessways: ten feet;
         (b)   From public streets: 50 feet;
         (c)   From other mobile homes: ten feet.
      (6)   Mobile home stands. Mobile homes must be placed on concrete slabs,
piers or runners and be anchored in compliance with applicable state
requirements.
      (7)   Internal accessways. All vehicular accessways within a mobile home
park must be privately owned and maintained. Vehicular accessways must be
paved, with a minimum pavement width of 24 feet.
      (8)   Tenant storage. At least 250 cubic feet of storage area must be
provided for each mobile home space in the mobile home park. Tenant storage
space may be located in a central building or in individual enclosed storage
buildings on each mobile home space.
      (9)   Recreation area. One or more outdoor recreation areas must be
provided within each mobile home park. Required recreation area must be located
to ensure safety and convenience for users.
      (10)   Water and sewer. Mobile home parks must be served by central water
and sewer service.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 19-237, passed 9-
19-2019)
§ 155-9.180 MINING/QUARRYING.
   Mining and quarrying may be approved as a special use (See §
155-16.40) in the A-1, I-1 and I-2 districts, subject to all of the following
regulations.
   (A)   All open pits and shafts must be located at least 200 feet from any
public road and at least 50 feet from any side and rear property line.
   (B)   All buildings or structures must be located at least 200 feet from any
property line.
   (C)   The entire operation must be surrounded by a fence or wall at least
six feet in height or by a six-foot tall earthen berm and six-foot tall chain-
link fence either in front or behind the berm.
   (D)   A land reclamation plan must be provided with the special use
application.
   (E)   No blasting or other use of explosives is permitted unless
specifically requested and expressly authorized by the approved special use
permit. If permitted as part of the approved special use permit, all blasting
must conform to the following standards:
      (1)   The use, handling and detonation of explosives (sometimes referred
to as "blasting") in connection with the quarrying operations must be under the
direct supervision of persons having the requisite experience and knowledge to
safely conduct such operations. If the persons are hereafter required to be
licensed by any federal agency or by the State of Illinois or Will County, the
persons must meet the licensing requirements and obtain the required license.
      (2)   The storage of explosives must occur in accordance with all
applicable federal and state laws and regulations and must be stored in
magazines, buildings, or structures that meet the safety requirements of
applicable laws and regulations.
      (3)   Blasting procedures must be in accordance with modern techniques,
generally accepted in the quarrying industry, whereby a shot consists of a
series of drill holes containing quantities of explosives fired or detonated in
sequences of multiple delays at intervals of milliseconds, so as to counteract
and reduce the ground motion or earthborn vibration from each successive
detonation (sometimes referred to as "short-period delay blasting"). Blasting
procedures must be designed, on the basis of maximum charge per delay (that is,
quantity of explosives in pounds per detonation) and distances in feet, so that
the maximum ground vibration intensity do not exceed 0.5 inches per second of
ground particle velocity resulting from any shot or blast measured by any one
of the three mutually perpendicular planes of ground motion as recorded at the
nearest existing building.
      (4)   Blasting procedures are subject to and must comply with applicable
lawful requirements of the Illinois Pollution Control Board, Illinois
Department of Mines and Minerals, Mine Enforcement and Safety Administration
(MESA) of the United States Department of the Interior, and any other
governmental agency with jurisdiction over the procedures.
      (5)   Blasting procedures must be in conformity with approved safety
regulations, customs, and practices generally accepted in the quarrying
industry, and the safety regulations of governmental agencies with jurisdiction
over the procedures.
      (6)   Compliance with the provisions of these regulations governing
blasting procedures and quarrying operations is subject to review and
inspection from time-to-time by authorized county officials, upon reasonable
prior notice and during reasonable business hours.
      (7)   The actual detonation of any blast is restricted to the local time
period between 1:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday of each week. No
blasting may occur on Sunday or on the following legal holidays: New Year's
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas
Day.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.190 PIPELINES.
   The regulations of this section apply to all pipelines that are not
constructed in relation to direct development or improvement of agricultural
properties and to all properties with sensitive natural resource features,
including wetlands, woodlands and other natural features.
   (A)   Pipeline depth.
      (1)   Except for aboveground piping facilities, such as mainline block
valves, tap valves, meter stations, etc., the pipeline must be buried with:
         (a)   A minimum of five feet of top cover where it crosses cropland.
         (b)   A minimum of five feet of top cover where it crosses pastureland
or other agricultural land comprised of soils that are classified by the USDA
as being prime soils.
         (c)   A minimum of three feet of top cover where it crosses
pastureland and other agricultural land not comprised of prime soils.
         (d)   A minimum of three feet of top cover where it crosses wooded/
brushy land or other sensitive areas.
         (e)   Substantially the same top cover as an existing parallel
pipeline, but not less than three feet, where the route parallels an existing
pipeline within a 100-foot perpendicular offset.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in those areas where (1) rock in its
natural formation and/or (2) a continuous strata of gravel exceeding 200 feet
in length are encountered, the minimum strata must be at least 30 inches.
      (3)   All pipelines should be covered with at least five feet of soil.
   (B)   Replacement of topsoil.
      (1)   The topsoil depth must be determined by a properly qualified,
independent soil scientist or soil technician who must set stakes at least
every 200 feet along the right-of-way identifying the depth of topsoil to be
removed.
      (2)   The actual depth of the topsoil, not to exceed 36 inches, must
first be stripped from the area to be excavated above the pipeline and from the
adjacent subsoil storage area. The topsoil must be stored parallel to the pipe-
line trench in such a manner that it will be intermixed with subsoil materials.
      (3)   The topsoil must be replaced so that after settling occurs, the
topsoil's original depth and contour (with an allowance for settling) will be
restored. The same requirements apply where excavations are made for road,
stream, drainage ditch, or other crossings. Topsoil materials may not be used
for any other purpose.
      (4)   As the topsoil is replaced, all rocks greater than three inches in
any dimension must be removed.
   (C)   Restoration of ground cover.
      (1)   All soil conservation practices (such as terraces, grassed
waterways, etc.) That are damaged by the pipeline's construction must be
restored to their pre-construction condition.
      (2)   Sensitive areas must be restored by seeding or planting vegetation
that will establish preexisting character or to the landowner's desire, not to
exceed what was formerly present.
   (D)   Restoration and repair of field tiles.
      (1)   All tile lines within the right-of-way prior to the pipeline's
installation must be identified so that necessary repairs can be made. The
pipeline company must request information regarding line locations from
affected landowners/tenants before the pipeline's installation. All identified
tile lines must be staked or flagged before construction to alert construction
crews to the possible need for tile line repairs.
      (2)   All tile lines that are damaged, cut, or removed must be staked or
flagged with the stakes or flags in such a manner that they will remain visible
until permanent repairs are completed. Tile lines must be restored to their
original route within 14 days of the tile being broken or damaged.
      (3)   If tile lines are severed by the pipeline trench, angle iron, I-
beams, or an equivalent must be used to support the repaired tile lines. The
support members must be installed to rest on a minimum of eight-inch
undisturbed soil shelves, and they must be sufficient to support a ten-ton
point load on the surface directly above the repaired tile line.
   (E)   Ingress and egress routes. Prior to the pipeline's installation, the
pipeline company and the landowner must reach a mutually acceptable agreement
on the route that will be utilized for entering and leaving the pipe-line
right-of-way should access to right-of-way not be practical or feasible from
adjacent segments of the pipeline right-of-way or public highway or railroad
right-of-way.
   (F)   Required notifications.
      (1)   The property owners of the land on which the pipe will be located
must be notified of the project intent and approximate scheduling of the
construction.
      (2)   Written permission must be obtained from each property owner
affected for pipelines not approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission.
      (3)   Pipeline companies seeking requesting a certificate of public
convenience and necessity must provide written notice to the County Executive
at least 30 days before any Federal Energy Regulatory Commission hearing.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.200 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   General. The PUD, Planned Unit Development regulations are intended
to accommodate development that provides public benefits but that may be
difficult if not impossible to carry out under otherwise applicable zoning and
subdivision regulations. Examples of the types of developments that are
appropriate for approval through the PUD regulations include the following:
         (a)   Enhanced protection of natural resource areas. Developments that
offer enhanced protection of natural resources and sensitive environmental
features, including streams, water bodies, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands,
wildlife habitats and native plant communities.
         (b)   Traditional urban development. Developments characterized by lot
configurations, street patterns, streetscapes, and neighborhood amenities
commonly found in neighborhoods platted or otherwise created before the 1950s.
         (c)   Mixed-use development. Developments that contain a complementary
mix of residential and nonresidential uses.
         (d)   Intermodal terminals. Intermodal terminals require PUD approval.
See also §
155-9.130.
         (e)   Sustainability. Developments that incorporate sustainable
("green") building and development practices, as evidenced by attainment of
LEED "Certified," "Silver," "Gold" or "Platinum" status.
      (2)   Objectives. Different types of PUDs will promote different planning
goals. In general, however, PUDs are intended to promote the following
objectives:
         (a)   Implementation of and consistency with the county's adopted
plans and policies, including the Land Resource Management Plan;
         (b)   Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social,
economic and market conditions allowing greater public benefits than could be
achieved using conventional zoning and subdivision regulations;
         (c)   High levels of energy conservation and environmental
sustainability;
         (d)   Advancement of economic opportunity and social equity;
         (e)   Variety in housing types and sizes to accommodate households of
all ages, sizes, incomes and lifestyle choices;
         (f)   Compact, mixed-use development patterns where residential,
commercial, civic, and open spaces are located in close proximity to one
another;
         (g)   A coordinated transportation system that includes an inter-
connected hierarchy of facilities for pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles;
         (h)   Compatibility of buildings and other improvements as determined
by their arrangement, massing, form, character and landscaping;
         (i)   The incorporation of open space amenities and natural resource
features into the development design;
         (j)   Stormwater BMPs (best management practices); and
         (k)   Attractive, high-quality landscaping, lighting, architecture and
signage that reflect the unique character of the development.
   (B)   Unified control. The site must be under single ownership and/or
unified control at the time of final plat approval.
   (C)   Procedure. PUDs must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the
planned unit development procedures of §
155-16.50.
   (D)   Developer's statement of intent. Each PUD application must include a
written explanation from the applicant describing the overall community
benefits of the proposed development and how the proposed development provides
greater benefits to the county than would a development carried out in
accordance with otherwise applicable zoning and subdivision regulations.
   (E)   Approval criteria. A PUD may be approved only when the County Board
determines that the proposed PUD would result in a greater benefit to the
county than would development under conventional zoning regulations. Such
greater benefit may include implementation of adopted planning policies,
natural resource preservation, urban design, neighborhood/ community amenities
or an overall level of development quality.
   (F)   Regulations eligible for waiver of modification. Unless otherwise
expressly approved by the County Board as part of the PUD approval process,
PUDs are subject to all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance and the
subdivision ordinance. The County Board is authorized to approve PUDs that
deviate from strict compliance with specified regulations and standards if they
determine that the resulting development satisfies the approval criteria of
division (E) of this section.
   (G)   Residential density.
      (1)   Facility and service adequacy. Before approving any density
increase, the County Board must determine that the increased density can be
supported by existing and planned public facilities and services.
      (2)   General public benefit. The maximum allowable residential density
of the subject zoning district may be increased by up to 10% above the maximum
density allowed by the subject zoning district if the County Board determines
that such an increase is warranted to support the public benefit likely to
result from the proposed development.
      (3)   Sustainability.
         (a)   If the developer commits to attainment of LEED-ND certification
or an equivalent or higher level of sustainability as certified by a county-
approved accreditation organization, the County Board may allow the maximum
residential density of the subject zoning district to be increased above the
maximum density allowed by the subject zoning district, in accordance with the
following table:
 
LEED Certification Level Maximum Allowable Density Increase
Certified                10%
Silver                   15%
Gold                     20%
Platinum                 25%
 
         (b)   Because sustainable or "green" project certifications cannot
occur until after development is completed, any density bonuses granted must be
based on the developer's good faith commitment to achievement of the applicable
sustainability level.
            1.   The developer (applicant) must submit a binding letter of
intent that communicates their commitment to achievement of the required
sustainability level.
            2.   The county will then issue subsequent approvals based on this
commitment.
            3.   A letter of credit, other county-approved financial guarantee
or other reliable method must be established by the County Board at the time of
approval to ensure ultimate compliance with the required sustainability level.
            4.   Any forfeited financial guarantees and all penalties collected
must be contributed to a green building fund dedicated to supporting market
adoption of green building practices.
   (H)   Streets. Minimum right-of-way widths of 50 feet are required.
   (I)   Conditions and guarantees. Before approving a PUD, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend, and the County Board may impose conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density,
construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of the
planned unit development deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest, improvement of the development, protection of the adjacent area, and
ensure compliance with applicable regulations and standards. The County Board
may require such evidence and guarantees as it deems necessary to ensure
ongoing compliance with conditions stipulated in the approved PUD.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.210 RECYCLING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Concrete and asphalt recycling facilities.
      (1)   Sites that recycle concrete or asphalt must comply with all
applicable state and federal regulations. This includes providing records, upon
request to demonstrate that at least 25% of the total amount of recycled
concrete or asphalt present at the site during a calendar year was transported
off of the site during the next calendar year.
      (2)   All concrete or asphalt loads accepted may be kept on site for a
maximum period of four years.
   (B)   General construction or demolition debris recycling facilities. The
regulations of this section apply to general construction or demolition
recycling facilities.
      (1)   Site and siting.
         (a)   The minimum area requirement for general construction or
demolition recycling facilities is five acres.
         (b)   General construction or demolition debris recycling facilities
must be located at least 500 feet from any residential zoning district unless
otherwise expressly approved as part of the special use permit procedures of §
155-16.40. Considerations for modifying the location standard may include the
separation of the residentially zoned property from the proposed site by a
designated truck route, active rail line, high voltage power transmission
easement or other clearly demarcated land-use planning transition boundary.
         (c)   General construction or demolition debris receiving/tipping
areas must be constructed of a low permeability material (e.g., Portland cement
concrete, asphalt concrete) that prevents infiltration and is able to withstand
anticipated loads.
         (d)   The facility must be equipped with a fence of at least eight
feet in height located to secure the operating areas of the facility during
non-operating hours as well as assist in minimizing the potential for litter to
leave the facility.
      (2)   Putrescible material, runoff and discharge permits.
         (a)   All loads containing putrescible materials must be tipped,
processed and stored indoors or under cover until sent offsite for reuse,
recycling, or disposal. Wood may be stored outside if sorted within 72 hours of
receipt and immediately processed.
         (b)   Any leachate or runoff from waste/ recyclable material must be
contained onsite.
         (c)   All state discharge permits or other applicable permits must be
acquired prior to commencing operations.
         (d)   All necessary permits must be acquired to store fuel or other
regulated material onsite.
      (3)   Special use permit application and submittal requirements.
         (a)   The application for a special use permit must be accompanied by:
            1.   A site plan and architectural drawing depicting building and
structure elevations and descriptions of such buildings and structures
necessary to convey the architectural appearance and physical magnitude of the
proposed improvements;
            2.   A narrative description of the activities proposed to be
conducted indoors or under cover within the facility boundaries;
            3.   A narrative description of other proposed uses (such as, but
not limited to truck storage, maintenance, fueling, and container storage) and
a demonstration that other such uses can be conducted in a safe and unobtrusive
manner without interference with safe recycling activities on the site; and
            4.   A plan describing how incoming material will be handled (both
under cover and outdoors), areas for sorting, processing, storing, baling and
container storage and all equipment that will be used.
         (b)   A spill plan must be submitted for review and approval by the
county as a condition of the special use permit.
         (c)   The site plan must include at least the following information:
            1.   A legal description of the subject property; access/egress
point(s);
            2.   Parking areas;
            3.   Any buildings, structures or fixed equipment:
            4.   The extent of paved or impervious surfaces; material tipping/
receiving areas;
            5.   Material processing areas;
            6.   Areas of proposed material stockpiling (by material type);
            7.   Material loading areas; and
            8.   Fencing, berm or screening features.
         (d)   If the applicant and Will County have previously entered into a
host agreement for the proposed general construction or demolition recycling
facility, the terms and conditions of that host agreement must be incorporated
as conditions of the special use permit and may be enforced by any party to the
agreements.
      (4)   Operating plan. The applicant must provide with a special use
permit application a proposed operating plan that contains at least all of the
following information:
         (a)   Number of employees anticipated at the facility;
         (b)   Proposed hours of operations for receipt of general construction
or demolition debris and for processing and shipment of general construction or
demolition debris;
         (c)   Proposed daily average/maximum volume (in tons) of general
construction or demolition debris to be received at the facility. The minimum
amount of recyclable material shipped offsite must be at least 75% of the total
incoming material on a quarterly basis, or more frequently if applicable
regulations are more stringent;
         (d)   The types of material tracking methods and recordkeeping to be
employed to demonstrate compliance with applicable recycling thresholds.
Records must be kept in accordance with regulatory standards. A daily record of
incoming/ outgoing material or waste must be kept and reported no less than
quarterly to the Will County Land Use Department. All records must be
maintained by the operator at the facility for a period of at least three years
or longer in the event of a dispute. The operator must allow reasonable access
to inspect the facility during operating hours for compliance with applicable
approvals, permits and regulations;
         (e)   The procedures by which all non-recyclable general construction
or demolition debris will be removed and disposed within 72 hours of receipt.
Describe the method and equipment used to load recyclable and non-recyclable
general construction or demolition material prior to shipment from the
facility;
         (f)   The end-use markets for separated general construction or
demolition debris to demonstrate compliance with meeting applicable recycling
thresholds;
         (g)   A closure plan for the facility;
         (h)   The maximum number of vehicles (by vehicle type) proposed to
utilize the facility on a daily basis;
         (i)   All processing equipment proposed to be utilized to prepare the
recyclable general construction or demolition debris for stockpiling or
shipment and the location and design of any noise-buffering elements,
sheltering and operating controls to minimize noise impacts;
         (j)   Operating methods employed to control odor, accidental
combustion of materials, vectors, dust, and litter. Any and all air permits
from the IEPA, USEPA, or other applicable regulatory authorities must be
obtained as necessary;
         (k)   The method and equipment utilized to load recyclable and non-
recyclable general construction or demolition for shipment from the facility;
and
         (l)   Typical and maximum anticipated height of stockpiled recyclable
general construction or demolition debris for each recyclable material by type.
Identification of the buffering and/or screening measures employed to minimize
the visual impact of the proposed stockpiles from surrounding land uses.
      (5)   IEPA permit. The special use permit will become effective upon
receipt of a permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in
accordance with Section 22.38 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act
("The IEPA Act"). It must be a condition of the special use permit that the
facility continues to operate in accordance with Section 22.38 of the IEPA Act
and all other regulations and applicable permits.
   (C)   Recyclable material drop-off facilities. The regulations of this
section apply to all recyclable material drop-off facilities.
      (1)   Recyclable material drop-off facilities may only accept consumer
recyclable commodities and accumulate or store them for a maximum of 60 days
after their receipt. Recyclable material drop-off facilities may not accept
general construction or demolition debris or clean construction or demolition
debris.
      (2)   Consumer recyclable commodities may only be accepted directly from
the consuming party.
      (3)   The types of consumer recyclable commodities accepted at the
subject recyclable material drop-off facility must be clearly identified.
      (4)   Consumer recyclable commodities must be accepted, accumulated, or
stored in containers that protect their marketability.
      (5)   Recyclable material drop-off facilities must be operated in a safe,
sanitary, and litter-free manner that protects human health and the
environment.
      (6)   Dust, odors, noise, and other nuisances resulting from the
operation of recyclable material drop-off facilities must be minimized to the
greatest extent practicable.
      (7)   Contact between consumer recyclable commodities and disease vectors
or other nuisance organisms must be prevented.
      (8)   Accumulation of surface water in areas where consumer recyclable
commodities are accepted, accumulated, or stored must be prevented.
      (9)   Consumer recyclable commodities or other material may not be
disposed of at the facility.
      (10)   No processing of recyclable material may occur in conjunction with
a recyclable material drop-off facility.
      (11)   In order to be classified as in "indoor" facility all storage and
work areas must be located within completely enclosed buildings. Outdoor
storage is limited to drop-off recycling bins, which must be screened from view
with a solid fence or wall at least six feet and no more than eight feet in
height. Storage material may not exceed the height of the fence or wall.
   (D)   Recyclable material processing facilities. The regulations of this
section apply to all recyclable material processing facilities.
      (1)   Recyclable material processing facilities may not accept or process
general construction or demolition debris or clean construction or demolition
debris.
      (2)   All putrescible waste must be processed and stored within
completely enclosed buildings.
      (3)   The material recycling facility must be operated in a safe,
sanitary, and litter free manner that protects human health and the
environment.
      (4)   Dust, odors, noise, and other nuisances resulting from the
operation of the material recycling facility must be minimized to the greatest
extent practicable.
      (5)   Contact between consumer recyclable commodities and disease vectors
or other nuisance organisms must be prevented.
      (6)   Accumulation of surface water in areas where consumer recyclable
commodities are recycled must be prevented.
      (7)   Unauthorized entry into recyclable material processing facilities
must be prevented.
         (a)   Measures to prevent unauthorized entry include appropriate signs
located at entrances and other locations in a sufficient number and size to be
seen from any approach to the facility and may include fencing where
appropriate.
         (b)   If consumer recyclable commodities are accepted directly from
the public:
            1.   A designated and clearly identified public consumer recyclable
commodities acceptance area that minimizes the potential for accidents and
unauthorized entry into non-public areas of the recyclable material processing
facility must be provided; and
            2.   The types of consumer recyclable commodities accepted from the
public and the containers in which they are accepted must be clearly
identified.
      (8)   If the material processing facility is located on a site where
activities other than the recycling of consumer recyclable commodities occur,
the recycling of consumer recyclable commodities must be kept separate from all
other activities at the site.
      (9)   If material that will not be recycled at the material recycling
facility is discovered, the material must be placed in a container by the end
of the operating day, accumulated or stored separately from material being
recycled, and properly disposed of within seven days after its receipt.
      (10)   In order to be classified as an "indoor" facility all storage,
processing and work areas must be located within completely enclosed buildings.
Outdoor storage is limited to drop-off recycling bins, which must be screened
from view with a solid fence or wall at least six feet and no more than eight
feet in height. Storage material may not exceed the height of the fence or
wall.
   (E)   Soil storage, recycling and reuse. Soil storage, recycling and reuse
facilities (sites) are subject to the regulations that apply to uncontaminated
soil fill operations (see §
155-9.70(A)).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.220 BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE FACILITIES.
   Battery energy storage facilities are subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   Battery energy storage facilities: One or more battery cells for
storing electrical energy in a battery energy storage system ("BESS") with a
battery management system ("BMS").
      (2)   Battery energy storage system: A physical container providing
secondary containment to battery cells that is equipped with cooling,
ventilation, fire suppression, and a battery management system.
      (3)   Battery management system: An electronic regulator that manages a
battery energy storage system by monitoring individual battery module voltages
and temperatures, container temperature and humidity, off-gassing of
combustible gas, fire, ground fault and DC surge, and door access and capable
of shutting down the system before operating outside safe parameters.
   (B)   Utility lines and electrical circuitry. All on-site utility lines
shall be placed underground to the extent feasible and as permitted by the
serving utility, with the exception of the main service connection at the
utility company right-of-way and any new interconnection equipment, including
without limitation any poles, with new easements and right-of-way.
   (C)   Buildings are subiect to the lot and building standards of the
underlying zoning district.
   (D)   Security barrier. Battery energy storage facilities must be enclosed
by perimeter security fencing or other county-approved barrier with a minimum
height of at least six feet unless housed in a dedicated-use building. The use
of barbed wire or razor wire that runs along the top of chain linked fences is
permitted. Existing perimeter fencing or county-approved barriers can be used
if they meet the requirements above.
   (E)   A battery energy storage system is not classified as cargo container
for the purpose of §
155-10.10(K).
   (F)   Submittal requirements for battery energy storage facilities that are
subiect to a special use permit. All applications for special use permit
approval must include the following information.
      (1)   Preliminary site plan identifying the following:
         (a)   Subject property induding the property lines, setback lines, and
right-of-way lines.
         (b)   Physical features including but not limited to roads, floodplain
(s) (if applicable), wetland(s) (if applicable), existing and proposed building
(s), solar panels and equipment (number, location, and spacing of solar panels/
arrays), proposed locations of underground or overhead electric lines and
utility poles, landscaping, and fencing.
      (2)   Identification of proposed construction and ongoing maintenance
routes from the nearest arterial road as detailed on a map.
      (3)   Letter of intent with the applicable road authority that
acknowledges the proposed project and a preliminary agreement with the road
district's requirements. Or certified letter with return receipt requested
evidencing a good faith effort to contact the applicable road authority.
      (4)   Proposed product cut-sheets.
      (5)   Visual screening report that includes the following:
         (a)   A map of homes within 300 feet of the facility,
         (b)   Locations and type of existing vegetation that provides
screening of views of the facility,
         (c)   Locations of homes within the subject property and residential
properties that have waived visual screening, and
         (d)   Topographic features that provide screening of the facility.
      (6)   Interconnection service agreement or evidence of filing required
interconnection service applications with the electric utility.
      (7)   Preliminary operation and maintenance plan of the battery energy
storage facility, including measures for maintaining safe access to the
installation, stormwater controls, landscaping maintenance, as well as general
procedures for operation and maintenance of the installation.
      (8)   Proof of liability insurance.
      (9)   Preliminary emergency services plan, including but not limited to
the project summary, electrical schematic and means of shutting down the
battery energy storage facility throughout the life of the installation.
      (10)   Redacted copy of the memorandum of lease for the subject property.
      (11)   Notice of development letters. The owner/operator must mail
letters to Will County Board representatives for the district in which the
battery energy storage facility is to be built as well as to the respective
township, Will/South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District, and to all
municipalities located within 1.5 miles of the battery energy storage facility.
(Ord. 22-256, passed 10-20-2022)
§ 155-9.230 RESIDENTIAL CONVENIENCE AND SUPPORT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Residential convenience and support establishments are allowed in the R-
6 zoning district in conjunction with multi-dwelling buildings, provided they
comply with the following regulations.
   (A)   Residential convenience and support establishments must be located in
the same building as the principal residential use, and occupy in aggregate, no
more than 4,500 square feet or 15% of the gross floor area of the principal
residential use, whichever is less.
   (B)   Residential convenience and support establishments are limited to a
maximum of one nonilluminated wall sign not exceeding three square feet in
area.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.240 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES.
   Self-service storage facilities are subject to all of the following
regulations.
   (A)   Self-service storage facilities are limited to dead storage use only.
   (B)   No activities other than rental storage units and pick-up and deposit
of dead storage are allowed on the premises.
   (C)   All storage on the property must be kept within an enclosed building,
except in the I-3 district where outdoor storage of recreational vehicles is
allowed as of right and in C-3, C-4, I- 1 and I-2 districts, where outdoor
storage of recreational vehicles may be approved as a special use.
   (D)   A fence must be provided around the perimeter of all drive-up style
self-service storage developments. The fence must be at least six feet in
height and must be constructed of opaque materials such as brick, stone,
architectural tile, masonry units, wood, or similar finish materials that will
prevent the passage of light and debris. Chain link and woven wire fences are
expressly prohibited.
   (E)   No door openings for a drive-up style self-storage unit may face any
R-zoned property.
   (F)   No drive-up style self-service storage building may exceed 12 feet in
height.
   (G)   No drive-up style individual storage unit may exceed 600 square feet
in floor area.
   (H)   Parking and loading/unloading areas must be provided. Drive-up style
self-service storage uses may provide required parking within parking/driving
lanes adjacent to the storage unit buildings. These lanes must be at least 26
feet in width when storage units open onto only one side of the lane and at
least 30 feet in width when storage units open onto both sides of the lane.
   (I)   No person, on premises covered by a special use permit for self-
service storage facility may conduct:
      (1)   Any business activity (other than rental of storage units)
including miscellaneous or garage sales, and transfer/storage businesses that
utilize vehicles as part of the business.
      (2)   Servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn
mowers, or any similar equipment.
   (J)   All self-service storage facility rental/lease agreements must include
clauses prohibiting:
      (1)   The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive
materials, or hazardous chemicals.
      (2)   The use of the property for uses other than dead storage.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 22-258, passed 9-
15-2022)
§ 155-9.245 COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES.
   Commercial solar energy facilities may be approved as a special use (see §
155-16.40) in the A-1 zoning district and I-1, I-2, and I-3 Industrial zoning
districts and are subject to compliance with the following regulations. (See §
155-10.10(F), Accessory solar energy systems for any solar energy system not
applicable to commercial solar energy facilities.)
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   The terms SUBJECT PROPERTY and/or SUBJECT PARCEL as used herein
shall mean and include all parcels. Whether contiguous or noncontiguous, which
are identified on the preliminary site plan for the use of the commercial solar
energy facility.
      (2)   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS shall mean solar arrays or solar panels
including mounting structures and inverters.
   (B)   Height. Buildings are subject to the height limits of the subject
zoning district. Ground-mounted solar energy systems may not exceed 20 feet in
height when oriented at maximum tilt unless waived by written consent by each
affected non-participating property owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020
Counties Code Section (e).
   (C)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Buildings are subject to the setback regulations of the subject
zoning district.
      (2)   Solar energy systems, excluding fences, are subject to the
following setbacks:
         (a)   At least 50 feet from the nearest edge of public right-of-way
unless waived by written consent by each affected non-participating property
owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020 Counties Code Section (e);
         (b)   At least 50 feet from adjacent properties not included in the
subject property as depicted in the site plan unless waived by written consent
by each affected non-participating property owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/
5-12020 Counties Code Section (e);
         (c)   At least 150 feet from the nearest point of the outside wall of
a dwelling unit or occupied community building on any property not part of the
subject property unless waived by written consent by each affected property
owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020 Counties Code Section (e);
         (d)   District requirements apply to existing structuresof the subject
property, including homes, barns, sheds, or outbuildings;
         (e)   Zero feet for side and rear yards on all properties that are
adjacent and within the subject property.
   (D)   Glare. Solar energy systems must be designed, constructed and sited to
minimize glare or reflections on adjacent properties and roadways and to not
interfere with traffic, including air traffic, or otherwise create a safety
hazard.
   (E)   Soil and ground cover.
      (1)   Topsoils shall not be removed from the site during development
unless the removal is expressly approved as part of the special use permit.
      (2)   Perennial vegetative ground cover must be maintained or established
in all areas of the solar energy systems. The seed mix selections for both
temporary and long-term mixes shall be determined at the time of the pre-
construction meeting as detailed in division (J) of this section.
      (3)   Perennial vegetative ground cover or farm crops must be maintained
or established in required setbacks to prevent erosion and manage run-off.
      (4)   Stormwater calculations showing a net watershed benefit from the
project shall be accepted in lieu of a stormwater management plan. To determine
applicability of §
164.020(c)(4), new impervious surfaces shall be analyzed on a parcel-by-parcel
basis.
      (5)   A Preliminary Maintenance Plan shall be approved by the County
Board at the time of special use permit approval and shall be implemented
during the term of the Special Use Permit. Any revisions to said plan may be
approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator or the County Board.
      (6)   The use of earthen berms may be used by the applicant but are
explicitly not required by the county as a condition of any Special Use Permit.
   (F)   Security barrier. Solar energy systems that are part of a commercial
solar energy facility must be enclosed by perimeter security fencing or other
county-approved barrier with a minimum height of at least six feet and no more
than 25 feet unless waived by written consent by each affected non-
participating property owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020 Counties Code
Section (e). The use of barbed wire or razor wire that runs along the top of
chain linked fences is permitted.
   (G)   Approved solar components. Electric system components must have a UL
(Underwriters Laboratories Inc.), or similar nationally recognized testing
laboratory listing.
   (H)   Lighting. Solar energy systems may not be permanently illuminated,
unless required by the FAA or other applicable government agency or authority.
   (I)   On-site utilities. On-site power lines and utility connections must be
placed underground unless otherwise expressly approved as part of the special
use permit.
   (J)   Pre-construction meeting. Prior to submission of a site development
and/or building permit application by the facility owner, a pre-construction
meeting shall be held. The agencies/individuals invited to attend shall include
Will County staff, elected officials, Will County Farm Bureau staff, Will/South
Cook Soil & Water Conservation District, and other interested parties as
determined by Land Use staff and/or the facility owner.
   (K)   Conservation Plan. The facility owner shall submit a conservation plan
reviewed by the Will/South Cook Soil & Water Conservation District to the
County of Will at the time of the site development and/or building permit
application. The conservation plan shall address conformance with the
Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA), inspection schedule, soils,
plantings/vegetation, drainage, and maintenance, Will/South Cook Soil & Water
Conservation District reserves the right to request access to the site to
conduct visual inspections and assess the condition of the native planting
areas and soil erosion and sediment controls.
   (L)   Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA). The facility owner
shall execute an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture. The facility owner shall file a copy of the
signed AIMA to the County of Will at the time of the site development and/or
building permit application. Financial assurance shall be provided to the
county in accordance with the AIMA. Public Act (SB 2591).
   (M)   Monitoring and maintenance. The owner/operator of the commercial solar
energy facility is responsible for keeping the facility in safe, sound and
well-maintained condition, including painting, grounds keeping, structural
repairs, internal access drives and the integrity of security measures.
      (1)   The owner/operator shall maintain the areas located within the
lease area, not excluding the areas located outside the perimeter fence lines
unless excluded in the lease agreement.
      (2)   Maintenance of grounds keeping shall include mowing, reseeding, and
weed management practices. Mowing shall occur a minimum of five times, or once
ground cover exceeds 13 inches in height, starting the month of May and ending
the month of October.
   (N)   Avoidance and mitigation of damages to public infrastructure.
      (1)   Roads. If a facility owner enters into a road use agreement with
the Illinois Department of Transportation, a road district, or other unit of
local government relating to a commercial solar energy facility, the road use
agreement shall require the facility owner to be responsible for:
         (a)   The reasonable cost of improving roads used by the facility
owner to construct the commercial solar energy facility, and
         (b)   The reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility
owner during construction of the commercial solar energy facility so that those
roads are in a condition that is safe for the driving public after the
completion of the facility's construction.
Roadways improved in preparation for and during the construction of the
commercial solar energy facility shall be repaired and restored to the improved
condition at the reasonable cost of the developer if the roadways have degraded
or were damaged as a result of construction-related activities.
The road use agreement shall not require the facility owner to pay costs, fees,
or charges for road work that is not specifically and uniquely attributable to
the construction of the commercial solar energy facility. Road-related fees,
permit fees, or other charges imposed by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, a road district, or other unit of local government under a road
use agreement with the facility owner shall be reasonably related to the cost
of administration of the road use agreement.
      (2)   Temporary access drives shall not require dedication of any
additional right-of-way for the County Highway and this provision shall
expressly control over Section 56.081(C)(1)(d) of the Will County Division of
Transportation Permit and Access Control Regulations Ordinance ("Access Control
Regulation"). Access drives for any permanent improvement associated with the
special use shall meet the requirements of the Access Control Regulations.
      (3)   Existing road conditions. Prior to construction, the owner/operator
must conduct a pre-construction survey, in coordination with the applicable
highway authority to determine existing road conditions. The owner/operator is
responsible for on-going road maintenance and dust-control measures resulting
from the construction and installation of the commercial solar energy facility
as identified by the applicable road authority during all phases of
construction and installation.
      (4)   Drainage system. Prior to construction, the owner/operator is
responsible for identifying the location of all subsurface drainage systems.
The owner/operator is responsible for promptly repairing damage to drain tiles
and other drainage systems that result from construction, operation, or
maintenance of the commercial solar energy facility that negatively impact
properties outside the subject property. Repair of subsurface drainage systems
shall, at a minimum, be in compliance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement (AIMA) as identified in division (Q) of this section.
   (Q)   Submittal requirements. All applications for special use permit
approval must include the following information. The customary submittal
requirements for special use permit applications are also detailed below. A
commercial solar energy facility may submit one application for the entire
subject property. This provision shall expressly control over the application
filing requirements contained in §
155-16.40.
      (1)   Customary submittal requirements.
         (a)   Completed zoning case application.
         (b)   Copy of recorded deed(s).
         (c)   Electronic copy of legal description that is editable.
         (d)   Plat of survey (to scale) from a professional land surveyor.
Survey must include a scale, north arrow and dimensions of the subject parcel.
         (e)   Affidavit of owner's consent (if applicable).
         (f)   Disclosure of beneficiaries (if applicable).
         (g)   Application fee.
         (h)   Completed Natural Resource Information Report by the Will-South
Cook Soil & Water Conservation District.
         (i)   The results and recommendations from consultation with the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources obtained through the Ecological
Compliance Assessment Tool (EcoCAT) or a comparable successor tool.
         (j)   FAA Notice of No Flight Hazard and/or application to the FAA for
Notice of Criteria Tool.
         (k)   The results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool.
         (l)   Evidence of consultation with the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office to assess potential impacts if any state-registered
historic sites under the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act are present on-site or in the vicinity.
         (m)   Proof of compliance with noise regulations of the Illinois
Pollution Control Board.
      (2)   Preliminary site plan identifying the following:
         (a)   Subject property including the property lines, setback lines,
and right-of-way lines.
         (b)   Physical features including but not limited to roads, floodplain
(s) (if applicable), wetland(s) (if applicable), existing and proposed building
(s), solar panels and equipment (number, location, and spacing of solar panels/
arrays), proposed locations of underground or overhead electric lines and
utility poles, landscaping, and fencing.
      (3)   Identification of proposed construction and ongoing maintenance
routes from the nearest arterial road as detailed on a map.
      (4)   Letter of Intent with the applicable road authority that
acknowledges the proposed project and a preliminary agreement with the road
district's requirements. Or certified letter with return receipt requested
evidencing a good faith effort to contact the applicable road authority.
      (5)   Proposed product cut-sheets.
      (6)   Glare study report, if required.
      (7)   Visual screening report that includes the following:
         (a)   A map of homes within 300 feet of the facility,
         (b)   Locations and type of existing vegetation that provides
screening of views of the facility,
         (c)   Locations of homes within the subject property and residential
properties that have waived visual screening, and
         (d)   Topographic features that provide screening of the facility.
      (8)   Interconnection service agreement or evidence of filing required
interconnection service applications with the electric utility.
      (9)   Preliminary operation and maintenance plan of the commercial solar
energy facility, including measures for maintaining safe access to the
installation, stormwater controls, landscaping maintenance, as well as general
procedures for operation and maintenance of the installation.
      (10)   Proof of liability insurance.
      (11)   Preliminary emergency services plan, including but not limited to
the project summary, electrical schematic and means of shutting down energy
systems throughout the life of the installation.
      (12)   Redacted copies of all leases for the subject property.
      (13)   Notice of development letters. The owner/operator must mail
letters to Will County Board representatives for the district in which the
solar farm is to be built as well as to the respective township, Will/South
Cook Soil & Water Conservation District, and to all municipalities located
within 1.5 miles of the solar farm.
      (14)   Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA). The facility
owner shall execute an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture. The facility owner shall file a copy of the
signed AIMA to the County of Will prior to the public hearing. Financial
assurance shall be provided to the county in accordance with the AIMA.
   (P)   Prohibited systems. Concentrated solar power systems are prohibited.
   (Q)   Test solar energy systems.
      (1)   For the purpose of gathering information, test solar energy systems
may be erected without obtaining a special use permit.
      (2)   Test solar energy systems may not exceed a building footprint of
greater than one acre (43,560 square feet) on a parcel of at least five acres.
      (3)   Test solar energy systems must be dismantled within three years of
installation.
      (4)   Test solar energy systems must be set back from all property lines
and road rights-of-way according to the current zoning district.
      (5)   Building permit applications for test solar energy systems must be
accompanied by standard drawings of the structure. An engineering analysis of
the test solar energy systems showing compliance with the adopted county
building codes and certified by an Illinois licensed professional structural
engineer must be submitted.
(Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 22-226, passed 9-15-2022; Ord. 23-70, passed
3-16-2023)
§ 155-9.250 WHOLESALE POWER GENERATORS.
   (A)   No portion of any wholesale power generator structure may be located
within 1,320 feet of R-zoned lots or residential dwelling units.
   (B)   Wholesale power generation facilities may not:
      (1)   Draw more than 1,000 gallons water from subsurface water aquifers
for each megawatt of electricity generated;
      (2)   Use fuels other than natural gas; or
      (3)   Exceed 1,500 hours of operation per turbine, per year.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-9.260 COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITIES.
   Commercial wind energy facilities may be approved as a special use (See §
155-16.40) in the A-1 zoning district and I-1, I-2, and I-3 Industrial zoning
districts and are subject to compliance with the following regulations. (See §
155-10.10(G), Accessory wind energy systems for any wind energy system less
than 500 kilowatts in total nameplate generating capacity.)
   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area requirement for a commercial
wind energy facility is 1,000 acres, which may include rented, owned, or leased
property.
   (B)   Maximum height. Electric-generating wind devices may not exceed 500
feet in height, measured to the blade tip of the rotor at its highest point.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5146.jpg]
 
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. Unless waived by written consent by each affected
non- participating property owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020 Counties
Code Section (e), excepting division (C)(6) of this section:
      (1)   Electric-generating wind devices must be set back from the property
lines of:
         (a)   Any United States Fish and Wildlife area and/or Illinois Nature
Preserve Commission lands a distance of at least 210% of the device height.
         (b)   All other property lines a distance of at least 1.1X the device
height.
      (2)   No portion of an electric-generating wind device may be located
within of at least 2.1X the device height of any off-site residential dwelling
units or occupied community buildings in existence at the time of the special
use permit application for the commercial wind energy facility is filed.
      (3)   No portion of an electric-generating wind device may be located
within of at least 1.10X the device height of any on-site residential dwelling
for the commercial wind energy facility is filed.
      (4)   Each electric-generating wind device must be set back from above-
ground public electric power lines, telephone lines, and cable television lines
a distance of 1.1X of the device height.
      (5)   No portion of an electric-generating wind device may be located
within of at least 1.1X the device height of any public road rights-of-way.
      (6)   No building, base, or foundation of an electric-generating wind
device or other structure of the commercial wind energy facility may be located
within 1.5 miles of a municipal border units in existence at the time of the
special use permit application is filed.
   (D)   Ground clearance. The blade tip of any rotor must, at its lowest
point, have ground clearance of at least 75 feet.
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   All climbing apparatus must be located at least 15 feet above the
ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first 15
feet above the ground or base.
      (2)   Electric-generating wind device rotors, towers and turbines must be
painted a non-reflective, non-obtrusive color.
      (3)   The design of all buildings and related structures must, to the
extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that reflects the natural setting and the existing environment. The
use of earthen berms may be used by the applicant but are explicitly not
required by the county as a condition of any Special Use Permit.
      (4)   Commercial wind energy facilities may not be artificially
illuminated, except to the extent required by the FAA or other applicable
authority.
      (5)   Wind turbines may not be used for displaying and advertising except
for reasonable identification of the manufacture or operator of the commercial
wind energy facility.
      (6)   Electrical controls and control wiring and power-lines must be
wireless or not above-ground except where commercial wind energy facility
wiring is brought together for connection to the transmission or distribution
network, adjacent to that network.
      (7)   All access doors and gates to wind turbine towers and electrical
equipment must be lockable.
      (8)   Each electric-generating wind device tower must be marked with a
visible identification number to assist with provision of emergency services,
and the permitee must file with the appropriate local fire protection district
and sheriff's police, a commercial wind energy facility map identifying wind
turbine locations and numbers.
      (9)   Warning signs concerning voltage must be posted on the base of each
tower, electrical equipment, and at the entrance to any commercial wind energy
facility site.
      (10)   If a facility owner enters into a road use agreement with the
Illinois Department of Transportation, a road district, or other unit of local
government relating to a commercial wind energy facility, the road use
agreement shall require the facility owner to be responsible for:
         (a)   The reasonable cost of improving roads used by the facility
owner to construct the commercial wind energy facility, and
         (b)   The reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility
owner during construction of the commercial wind energy facility so that those
roads are in a condition that is safe for the driving public after the
completion of the facility's construction.
Roadways improved in preparation for and during the construction of the
commercial wind energy facility shall be repaired and restored to the improved
condition at the reasonable cost of the developer if the roadways have degraded
or were damaged as a result of construction-related activities.
The road use agreement shall not require the facility owner to pay costs, fees,
or charges for road work that is not specifically and uniquely attributable to
the construction of the commercial wind energy facility. Road-related fees,
permit fees, or other charges imposed by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, a road district, or other unit of local government under a road
use agreement with the facility owner shall be reasonably related to the cost
of administration of the road use agreement.
      (11)   The permitee must promptly replace or repair all drainage tiles,
fences or gates removed or damaged during all phases of the commercial wind
energy facility’s life, unless otherwise negotiated with the affected
landowner.
   (F)   Application requirements. The following items must be submitted with
the special use permit application:
      (1)   Site plan showing the following:
         (a)   Survey of property or properties included in the proposal.
         (b)   Include distance to nearest residential dwelling.
         (c)   Setback regulations of the zoning district.
         (d)   Setback regulations for each electric-generating wind device
tower.
         (e)   Any floodplain or wetland on the property.
         (f)   Any existing or proposed roads.
         (g)   Location, height and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures and fencing.
         (h)   Any easements or above-ground utilities on the property.
         (i)   Surrounding zoning and uses within 1,320 feet of the property.
      (2)   A project proposal that includes the following:
         (a)   Name, company, address and phone of the owner, developer or any
other interested party.
         (b)   Project summary including the nameplate generating capacity;
equipment manufacturer; type of electric-generating wind device and number of
electric-generating wind device; the nameplate generation for each electric-
generating wind device.
         (c)   Maximum height and ground clearance for each electric-generating
wind device.
      (3)   An avian and bat habitat study completed by an ornithologist,
chiropterologist, or wildlife biologist if not addressed within an EcoCAT
report and recommendations as provided in division (F)(8) of this section.
      (4)   Proof of compliance with noise regulations of the Illinois
Pollution Control Board.
      (5)   Determination by the Federal Aviation Administration that the
proposed structures do not interfere with or present a hazard to any public or
private aircraft.
      (6)   Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA). The facility owner
shall execute
an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) with the Illinois Department
of Agriculture. The facility owner shall file a copy of the signed AIMA to the
County of Will prior to the public hearing. Financial assurance shall be
provided to the county in accordance with the AIMA.
      (7)   Certification, affidavit by an Illinois licensed profession
engineer, or other evidence of industry standard computer modeling that
indicates any occupied community building or off-site residence will not
experience more than 30 hours per year of shadow flicker under planned
operating conditions, unless waived by written consent by each affected non-
participating property owner in accordance with 55 ILCS 5/5-12020 Counties Code
Section (e).
      (8)   The results and recommendations from consultation with the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources obtained through the Ecological Compliance
Assessment Tool (EcoCAT) or a comparable successor tool.
      (9)   The results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool.
      (10)   Evidence of consultation with the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office to assess potential impacts if any state-registered
historic sites under the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act are present on-site or in the vicinity.
   (G)   Signal interference. The permitee must minimize or mitigate any
interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone or
television signals caused by any commercial wind energy facility.
   (H)   Test wind towers.
      (1)   For the purpose of gathering information, wind generation test wind
towers may be erected without obtaining a special use permit.
      (2)   Test wind towers may not exceed 500 feet in height, as measured to
the tip of the rotor in its highest position.
      (3)   Test wind towers must be dismantled within three years of
installation.
      (4)   Test wind towers must be set back from all property lines a
distance that is equivalent to 125% of the test wind tower height.
      (5)   Building permit applications for test wind towers must be
accompanied by standard drawings of the structure, including the tower, base
and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
adopted county building codes and certified by an Illinois licensed
professional structural engineer must be submitted. A valid first generation
seal is required.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 23-70, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 155-9.270 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Siting.
      (1)   Agricultural, commercial, industrial and other nonresidential
zoning districts are the most desirable locations.
      (2)   R-zoned lots that are not used for residential purposes are the
second most desirable location.
      (3)   R-zoned lots that are two acres or more in area and used for
residential purposes are the third most desirable location.
      (4)   R-zoned zoned lots that are less than two acres in area and used
for residential purposes are the least desirable location.
   (B)   Qualifying wireless telecommunications structures. The following
regulations apply to qualifying wireless telecommunications structures.
      (1)   No minimum lot area, width or depth is required for a qualifying
structure. A facility may be located on the same zoning lot as one or more
other structures or uses and not be in violation of this ordinance. If the site
is a residentially zoned lot that is less than two acres in area and used for
residential purposes, a variance is required in accordance with §
155-16.70(M).
      (2)   No portion of a facility's supporting structure or equipment
housing may be located within 15 feet of a street lot line or within ten feet
of any other lot line.
      (3)   The overall height of the facility, including the structure cannot
be more than 15 feet taller than the height of the structure before the
installation or not more than 15 feet taller than a substantially similar,
substantially same-location replacement of an existing structure.
      (4)   No bulk regulations or lot coverage, building coverage, or floor
area ratio limitations apply to a facility or to any existing use or structure
coincident with the establishment of a facility.
   (C)   Non-qualifying structures. The following regulations apply to non-
qualifying wireless telecommunications structures.
      (1)   No minimum lot area, width or depth is required for a non-
qualifying structure. A facility may be located on the same zoning lot as one
or more other structures or uses and not be in violation of this ordinance. If
the site is a residentially zoned lot that is less than two acres in area and
used for residential purposes, a variance is required in accordance with §
155-16.70(M).
      (2)   No portion of a facility's supporting structure or equipment
housing may be located within 15 feet of a street lot line or within ten feet
of any other lot line.
      (3)   If the supporting structure is an antenna tower other than a
qualifying structure then (i) the facility must be located in a residential
district and the lot line setback distance to the nearest R-zoned lot must be
at least 50% of the height of the facility's supporting structure or (ii) the
facility must be located in a nonresidential zoning district and the horizontal
separation distance to the nearest principal residential building must be at
least equal to the height of the facility's supporting structure. The required
horizontal separation distance must be measured from the center of the base of
the facility's supporting structure to the point where the ground meets a
vertical wall of a principal residential building. For purpose of this
provision, "principal residential building" does not include any building under
the same ownership as the land of the facility lot and does not include any
structure that is not designated for human habitation.
      (4)   The height of a facility may not exceed 75 feet if the facility
will be located in a residential zoning district or 200 feet if the facility
will be located in a nonresidential zoning district.
      (5)   No bulk regulations or lot coverage, building coverage, or floor
area ratio limitations apply to a facility or to any existing use or structure
coincident with the establishment of a facility.
      (6)   The improvements and equipment comprising the facility may be
wholly or partly freestanding or wholly or partly attached to, enclosed in, or
installed in or on a structure or structures.
   (D)   Design criteria. The telecommunication carrier must consider the
following design criteria:
      (1)   No building or tower that is part of a facility should encroach
onto any recorded easement prohibiting the encroachment unless the grantees of
the easement have given their approval.
      (2)   Lighting should be installed for security and safety purposes only.
Except with respect to lighting required by the FCC or FAA, all lighting should
be shielded so that no glare extends substantially beyond the boundaries of a
facility.
      (3)   No facility should encroach onto an existing septic field.
      (4)   Any facility located in a special flood hazard area or wetland
should meet the legal requirements for those lands.
      (5)   Existing trees more than three inches in diameter should be
preserved if reasonably feasible during construction. If any tree more than
three inches in diameter is removed during construction a tree three inches or
more in diameter of the same or a similar species must be planted as a
replacement if reasonably feasible. Tree diameter must be measured at a point
four and one-half feet above ground level.
      (6)   If any elevation of a facility faces an existing, adjoining
residential use within a residential zoning district, low maintenance
landscaping should be provided on or near the facility lot to provide at least
partial screening of the facility. The quantity and type of that landscaping
should be in accordance with county landscaping regulations.
      (7)   Fencing should be installed around a facility. Security fences are
exempt from compliance with county fence regulations.
      (8)   Any building that is part of a facility located adjacent to an R-
zoned lot should be designed with exterior materials and colors that are
reasonably compatible with the residential character of the area.
      (9)   If the facility is to be manned on a regular, daily basis, one off-
street parking space must be provided for each employee regularly at the
facility. No loading facilities are required.
      (10)   The improvements and equipment comprising the facility may be
wholly or partly freestanding or wholly or partly attached to, enclosed in, or
installed in or on a structure or structures.
   (E)   Variances. See §
155-16.70(M).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-9.280 WINERIES, CRAFT BREWING AND DISTILLING.
   The regulations of this section apply to craft brewing and distilling
facilities.
   (A)   Wineries are manufacturing facilities engaged in the processing of
grapes to produce wine or wine-like beverages. Craft breweries and distilleries
are facilities that produce and distribute spirits, beer, or other fermented
malt beverages.
   (B)   Sale of beverages produced on premises for off-site consumption is a
permitted accessory use on the licensed premise. The facility may include a
tasting room for the sampling or purchase of beverages for on-site consumption.
(Ord. 15-201, passed 7-16-2015; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 18-222,
passed 8-16-2018)
§ 155-9.290 CARGO CONTAINER DWELLING UNITS.
   A cargo container may be converted into a primary structure or use in any
district subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   With an approved Special Use Permit in accordance with the procedures
of §
155-16.40, and shall address the following:
      (1)   Facade and building materials;
      (2)   Roof design and materials;
      (3)   Use of uniform exterior building materials. For example, if the
front wall contains a mixture of brick and wood, the side and rear walls shall
contain the same materials in approximately the same proportions.
   (B)   Cargo container modifications are subject to all building ordinance
requirements for the use, including, but not limited to, the provisions for
special inspections and tests, height, and final grading.
   (C)   The cargo container shall not be erected on-end vertically.
(Ord. 19-241, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 155-9.300 ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center. An adult-use cannabis
cultivation center may not be located within 2,500 feet of the property line of
a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school, or
college or university, or day care center, day care home, group day care home,
part day child care facility, or an area zoned for residential use.
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization (or dispensary). An adult-
use dispensing organization may not be located within 1,000 feet of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school, or coliege or university, or day care center, day care home,
group day care home, or part day child care facility, or an area zoned for
residential use.
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower. A registered cannabis craft grower
may not be located within 2,500 feet of the property line of a pre-existing
public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school, or college or
university, or day care center, day care home, group day care home, part day
child care facility, or an area zoned for residential use.
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization (or infuser). An infuser
organization may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of a
pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school, or
college or university, or day care center, day care home, group day care home,
or part day child care facility, or an area zoned for residential use.
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization (or processor). A
processing organization may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property
line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary
school, or college or university, or day care center, day care home, group day
care home, or part day child care facility, or an area zoned for residential
use.
(Ord. 20-266, passed 8-20-2020)
155-10 ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES
§ 155-10.10 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Accessory uses allowed. Accessory uses and structures are permitted
in connection with lawfully established principal uses unless otherwise
expressly stated.
      (2)   Incidental and subordinate nature. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to determine when a use, building or structure meets the criteria of
an accessory use or accessory structure. In order to classify a use or
structure as "accessory" the Zoning Administrator must determine that the use
or structure:
         (a)   Is subordinate to the principal building or principal use in
terms of area and function;
         (b)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and
         (c)   Is customarily found in association with the subject principal
use or principal building.
      (3)   Time of construction and establishment.
         (a)   Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use
of the property is established.
         (b)   Accessory buildings may be established in conjunction with or
after the principal building. They may not be established before the principal
building is in place.
      (4)   Location. Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same
lot as the principal use to which they are accessory, except as otherwise
expressly stated.
      (5)   Applicable regulations and standards. Unless otherwise expressly
stated, accessory uses and structures are subject to the same regulations and
standards as apply to principal uses and structures on the subject lot.
   (B)   Animals (keeping of).
      (1)   Companion animals. The keeping of a cumulative total of up to five
adult, domesticated companion animals is allowed as an accessory use to any
residential use, subject to the regulations of this section. The care or
keeping of six or more companion animals, in cumulative total, is considered
"animal care/boarding" and is allowed only in zoning districts that allow
animal care/boarding uses (See §
155-8.40(B)(1)).
      (2)   Horses and other farm animals(excluding apiculture/beekeeping).
         (a)   A-1 district.
            1.   The keeping of horses (stables), farm animals and livestock is
allowed as of right in the A-1 zoning district.
            2.   There is no zoning-based limit on the number of animals that
may be kept in the A-1 district.
            3.   Animal confinement buildings must comply with the building
setback regulations of the A-1 district (See §
155-2.30(B)).
         (b)   A-2, E-1, and E-2 districts.
            1.   The keeping of horses (stables) farm animals and livestock is
allowed as of right in the A-2, E-1 and E-2 districts.
            2.   Animal confinement buildings in the A-2, E-1 and E-2 districts
must comply with the building setback regulations of the subject zoning
district (See §
155-2.30(B) and §
155-3.30(B)).
            3.   A maximum of one animal unit is allowed per acre of lot area
in the A-2, E-1 and E-2 districts, based on the following animal unit
equivalencies:
Animal Type Animals per
            Animal Unit
                                                                          Animals
Animal Type                                                               per
                                                                          Animal
                                                                          Unit
a.   Cattle, Bison                                                     1
b.   Horse, Donkey (including Burro, Hinny, and Mule)                  1
c.   Horse (34 inches or less at withers)                              2
d.   Swine, Goats, Sheep, Llama, Alpaca                                2
e.   Large Bird Poultry e.g. Ostrich, Emu                              2
f.   All other Poultry (landfowl, waterfowl, and game birds) excluding 20
pigeons
g.   Rabbits                                                           20
h.   Mink and other similar fur-bearing animals                        20
                                                                          No
i.   Pigeons (with Illinois Department of Agriculture Permit)          animal
                                                                          density
                                                                          limit
Note: The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine the value in animal
units for mature animals not listed above.
 
         (c)   R-1 and R-2 districts.
            1.   Farm animals permitted as a special use in accordance with §
155-16.40:
Animal Type Animals per Animal Unit*
                                                                                  Animals
Animal Type                                                                       per
                                                                                  Animal
                                                                                  Unit*
a.   Cattle, excluding Bison                                                   1
b.   Horse, Donkey (including Burro, Hinny and Mule)                           1
c.   Horse (34 inches or less at withers)                                      2
d.   Swine not included in 2.e. in this subsection (c), Sheep, Llama, Alpaca   2
e.   Large Bird Poultry e.g. Ostrich, Emu                                      2
f.   All other Poultry (landfowl, waterfowl, and game birds) excluding pigeons 20
and chickens.
*Note: A maximum of one animal unit is allowed per acre of lot area in the R-1 and R-
2 districts based on the provided animal unit equivalencies.
 
            2.   Farm animals allowed as of right in the R-1 and R-2 zoning
districts:
 
Animal Type   Limits and Regulations
              1.   No Roosters Permitted.
a.   Chicke2.   Minimum lot area not less than 12,500 square feet.
              3.   Animal density limited to 1 chicken per 2,500 square feet of lot area.
              4.   All other poultry are specifically excluded.
b.   Pigeon1.   Illinois Department of Agriculture Permit required.
              2.   Animal density established by Illinois Department of Agriculture.
c.   Rabbit1.   Maximum of six adult animals over six months of age.
              2.   Must be kept in a hutch or fenced enclosure.
              1.   Maximum of two adult animals over 6 months of age.
d.   Goats 2.   Must be kept in a fenced area or enclosure.
              3.   Maximum weight shall not exceed 60 pounds.
              1.   Maximum of one adult animal over 6 months of age.
              2.   Must be kept in a fenced area or enclosure.
e.   Swine 3.   Males must be neutered.
              4.   Maximum weight shall not exceed 250 pounds.
              5.   Any deviation to these standards shall require paragraph 1.d. in this
              subsection (c) to apply.
 
            3.   Buildings and structures that house farm animals in the R-
l and R-2 districts:
               a.   Must be located at least 25 feet from all existing
dwellings (except the animal owner's);
               b.   Must comply with the building setback regulations of the
subject zoning district (See §
155-3.30(B)).
               c.   Shall not be located in a front or other street yard area.
         (d)   R-2A, R-3 and R-4 districts.
            1.   Farm animals permitted as a special use in accordance with §
155-16.40:
 
Animal Type                                                                    Limits and Regulations
                                                                            1.   Maximum of two adult animals over 6 months of
a.   Goats                                                               age.
                                                                            2.   Must be kept in a fenced area or enclosure.
                                                                            3.   Maximum weight shall not exceed 60 pounds.
                                                                            1.   Maximum of one adult animal over 6 months of
                                                                            age.
b.   Swine                                                               2.   Must be kept in a fenced area or enclosure.
                                                                            3.   Males must be neutered.
                                                                            4.   Maximum weight shall not exceed 250 pounds.
                                                                            1.   Maximum 15 animals per 1 acre.
c.   Poultry (landfowl, waterfowl, and game birds) excluding pigeons and 2.   Must be kept in a fenced area or enclosure.
chickens.                                                                   3.   Large Bird Poultry are specifically not
                                                                            permitted.
 
            2.   The keeping of the following farm animals is allowed as of
right in the R-2A, R-3, and R-4 zoning districts.
 
Animal Type   Limits and Regulations
              1.   No Roosters Permitted.
              2.   Minimum lot area not less than 12,500 square feet.
a.   Chicke3.   Animal density limited to 1 chicken per 2,500 square feet of lot area.
              4.   All other poultry (landfowl, waterfowl, large bird, and game birds) are
              specifically excluded.
b.   Pigeon1.   Illinois Department of Agriculture Permit required.
              2.   Animal density established by Illinois Department of Agriculture.
c.   Rabbit1.   Maximum of six adult animals over six months of age.
              2.   Must be kept in a hutch or fenced enclosure.
 
            3.   All animals must be confined to the owner's property.
            4.   All buildings and structures that house farm animals in the R-
2A, R-3 and R-4 districts:
               a.   Must be located at least 25 feet from all existing
dwellings (except the animal owner's).
               b.   Must comply with the building setback regulations of the
subject zoning district (See §
155-3.30(B)).
               c.   Shall not be located in a front or other street yard area.
         (e)   C-6 district.
            1.   The keeping of horses (stables) and farm animals is allowed as
of right in the C-6 district.
            2.   Animal confinement buildings in the C-6 district must be set
back at least 50 feet from all lot lines.
         (f)   Sanitation. Proper sanitation must be maintained for all horses,
farm animals and microlivestock. Proper sanitation includes:
            1.   Not allowing animal waste to accumulate;
            2.   Taking necessary steps to ensure that odors resulting from
horses, farm and microlivestock animals are not detectable beyond property
lines; and
            3.   Storing all food in metal or other pest-proof containers.
      (3)   Apiculture/beekeeping.
         (a)   General regulations. All beekeeping activities shall comply with
the following:
            1.   State registration. The beekeeper must register the colonies
and maintain valid registration with the Illinois Department of Agriculture or
as otherwise required by the State of Illinois.
            2.   Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act. All beekeepers shall be in
compliance with the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act, including, but not limited
to having all hives accessible for state inspectors to check on a routine basis
on their practice and schedule or as needed.
            3.   Fences. Any fencing used for beekeeping shall comply with §
155-14.90 Fences and Walls.
            4.   Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure a convenient source of
water is available to the bees at all times during the year so the bees will
not congregate at swimming pools, pet watering bowls, birdbaths, or other water
sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact.
            5.   General maintenance. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee
comb or other materials might encourage robbing, are left upon the grounds of
the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall
promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or
other bee-proof enclosure.
            6.   Maximum size for a single hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in
size.
            7.   Setbacks.
               a.    Where there is a wall, lattice or solid fence, dense hedge
or bushes, or similar barrier between the subject property and adjacent
property, no setback from the property line is required. Where there is no
existing barrier between the two properties, hives shall be set back at least
five feet from the property line.
               b.   No hive shall be closer than ten feet from a dedicated
road, sidewalk, or path.
            8.   Flyway barriers. Any hive within 20 feet from the principle
building of an abutting lot or from a dedicated road, sidewalk, or path, shall
have a flyway barrier consisting of:
               a.   A lattice or solid fence, wall, or dense hedge or bushes at
least six feet in height in front of the hive openings such that the bees fly
upward and away from neighboring properties or dedicated roads, sidewalks or
paths. An existing barrier described previously in this section may be
acceptable.
               b.   Set no more than five feet from the hive openings.
               c.    Extend at least two feet in width from either side of the
hive opening.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5711.png]
   Illustrative Example of Flyway Barrier.
   Flyway barrier may also be straight or curved along with V-shaped
         (b)   A-1, C-6, and SP-PO districts.
            1.   The keeping of bees is allowed as of right in the A-1, C-6,
and SP-PO zoning districts.
            2.   There is no zoning-based limit on the number of hives that may
be kept in the A-1, C-6, and SP-PO zoning districts.
            3.   Hives may be located within all yards (front, side, and rear)
in the A-1, C-6, and SP-PO zoning districts.
         (c)   A-2, E-1, and E-2 districts.
            1.   The keeping of bees is allowed as of right in the A-2, E-1 and
E-2 districts.
            2.   The limit on the number of hives that may be kept in the A-2,
E-1 and E-2 zoning districts is two hives per every one-half acre of lot area
or fraction thereof. There is no minimum lot size requirement.
            3.   Hives may be located within all yards (front, side, and rear)
in the A-2, E-1 and E-2 zoning districts.
         (d)   R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, and R-5 districts.
            1.   The keeping of bees is allowed as of right in the R-1, R-2, R-
2A, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts.
            2.   The limit on the number of hives that may be kept in the R-1,
R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts is two hives per every one acre
of lot area or fraction thereof with a minimum zoning lot size of at least
22,000 square feet.
            3.   Hives may be located within all yards (front, side, and rear)
in the R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts.
         (e)   R-6 District - The keeping of bees is prohibited in the R-
6 zoning district.
         (f)   All other zoning districts.
            1.   The keeping of bees may be approved as a special use in all
other districts not listed above (see the special use procedures of §
155-16.40).
            2.   The limit on the number of hives that may be kept in all other
zoning districts is two hives per every one acre of lot area or fraction
thereof with a minimum zoning lot size of at least 22,000 square feet.
            3.   Hives may be located in any yard or on the roof top in all
other zoning districts.
   (C)   Accessory dwelling units.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   The accessory dwelling unit regulations of this section are
intended to help promote the benefits of accessory dwelling units, while also
preserving neighborhood character and promoting predictability and certainty
for developed residential areas and security in industrial districts.
         (b)   Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) help advance the county's
housing and land use goals and policies by:
            1.    Accommodating additional housing units while preserving the
character of existing developed areas;
            2.   Allowing efficient use of the existing housing stock and
infrastructure;
            3.   Providing housing options and choices that respond to varying
income levels, changing household sizes and lifestyle needs;
            4.   Providing a means for residents - particularly seniors, single
parents, and empty-nesters - to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and
obtain extra income, security, companionship and assistance; and
            5.   Promoting a broader range of accessible and more affordable
housing.
      (2)   General regulations for all ADUs. All accessory dwelling units must
comply with the regulations of this subsection.
         (a)   Zoning district regulations. Accessory dwelling units are
subject to all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which they are
located, unless otherwise expressly stated in this section.
         (b)   Where allowed.
            1.   Accessory dwelling units are allowed in accordance with the
use table of §
155-7.30 only on lots that are occupied by a detached house or attached house.
            2.   Accessory dwelling units are not permitted on nonconforming
lots, except that accessory dwelling units may be approved on nonconforming
lots in the A-1, A-2 and E-1 districts if approved through the special use
permit procedures of §
155-16.40.
            3.   Accessory dwelling units are permitted as special uses in the
I-1, I-2, and I-3 districts with the following requirements:
               a.    Shall be owner-occupied at all times beyond the time
period specified in §
155-10.10(C)(2)(d).
               b.   Are not subject to the requirements of §
155-10.10(C)(3) unless specified in the special use permit.
         (c)   Number. No more than one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per
lot. Accessory dwelling units are not allowed on lots occupied by ECHO housing
units (see also §
155-9.110).
         (d)   Owner occupancy. The owner of record must reside in either the
principal or accessory dwelling unit for a minimum of six months of each
calendar year.
         (e)   Methods of creation. An accessory dwelling unit may be created
through any of the following methods:
            1.   Converting existing area within the interior of a house (e.g.,
attic or basement) to an ADU;
            2.   Adding floor area to an existing house to accommodate an ADU;
            3.    Constructing a detached accessory dwelling unit on a parcel
with an existing house;
            4.   Converting space within a detached accessory building; or
            5.    Constructing a new house with an internal or detached
accessory dwelling unit.
         (f)   Number of residents. The total number of residents that reside
in the accessory dwelling unit and the principal dwelling unit, combined, may
not exceed the number permitted for a household.
         (g)   Location of entrances. Only one entrance to a house containing
an accessory dwelling unit may be located on a facade that faces a street,
unless the house contained an additional street-facing entrance before the
accessory dwelling unit was created. Detached ADUs are exempt from this
regulation.
         (h)   Size. The floor area of an ADU may not exceed 49% of the gross
floor area of the principal dwelling unit on the subject lot (excluding any
attached garage), or 650 square feet, whichever is less.
         (i)   Parking. No additional parking is required for an accessory
dwelling unit. Existing required parking for the house must be maintained or
replaced on-site.
         (j)   Building permit approval. Before the issuance of a building
permit for the construction of any new accessory dwelling unit, plans must be
reviewed and approved by the director of building safety to determine
compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes.
      (3)   Regulations for new detached ADUs and building additions. The
regulations of this subsection apply to all detached buildings and building
additions proposed to be occupied by ADUs. These provisions apply only to
detached buildings and building additions constructed after January 18, 2018.
         (a)   Exterior finish materials. The exterior finish material must be
the same or visually match in type, size and placement, the exterior finish
material of the principal dwelling unit.
         (b)   Roof pitch. The roof pitch must be the same as the predominant
roof pitch of the house.
         (c)   Trim. Trim on edges of elements on the building addition to the
house or the accessory structure occupied by the ADU must be the same in type,
size and location as the trim used on the principal dwelling.
         (d)   Setbacks. A detached accessory dwelling unit must be located at
least ten feet behind the principal dwelling. This required ten-foot separation
distance must be open from the ground to the sky except that it may include
walkways, patios, decks and similar structures that do not exceed 30 inches in
height above finished grade.
         (e)   Height. The maximum allowed height of a detached accessory
dwelling unit is 20 feet or the height of the principal dwelling building,
whichever is less.
   (D)   Home occupations.
      (1)   Where allowed. One or more home occupations are allowed as
accessory uses to an allowed household living use.
      (2)   Overall regulations. Home occupations in all districts are subject
to the following regulations. These regulations apply to the property as a
whole, regardless of the number of home occupations being conducted on the
property.
         (a)   The operator of a home occupation must be a full-time resident
of the dwelling unit.
         (b)   No more than one nonresident may be engaged in the conduct of
any home occupations occurring on the subject site.
         (c)   The use of a dwelling unit for home occupation activities must
be clearly incidental and subordinate to the dwelling's use for residential
purposes by its occupants.
         (d)   Floor area devoted to any home occupations on the site may not
exceed 33% of the floor area of the dwelling unit.
         (e)   Home occupations must be conducted within the dwelling unit and
not from a detached or attached garage or other accessory structure. Equipment,
materials, samples, and vehicles incidental to the home occupation may be
stored in a detached or attached garage or other accessory structure as long as
the business activity is limited to the dwelling.
         (f)   Home occupations may not involve any outdoor storage, outdoor
display or other outdoor activity.
         (g)   There may be no visible evidence of the conduct of a home
occupation when viewed from the street or right-of-way or from an adjacent lot.
There may be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit that
houses a home occupation or site upon which it is conducted that will make the
dwelling appear less residential in nature or function. Examples of such
prohibited alterations include parking lots, or adding commercial-like exterior
lighting.
         (h)   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of a home
occupation must be met by off-street parking on the same lot where the home
occupation is located. Any and all vehicles owned or associated with the home
occupation operator or employees must also be parked off-street on the same lot
where the home occupation is located. Off-street parking means on a hard
surface or garage. Parking associated with the home occupation is prohibited in
the parkway or on the street.
         (i)   Customers may visit the site only from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
         (j)   Deliveries or pick-ups of supplies or products associated with
home occupations are allowed only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Vehicles used
for delivery and pick-up are limited to (U.S. postal carrier, parcel service or
passenger vehicle).
         (k)   No equipment or process may be used in a home occupation that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process may be used that creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
         (l)   Products incidental to a permitted home occupation may be sold
from the premises. Retail sales through telephone or mail communication, or
electronic or wireless communication are permitted.
         (m)   Consultation with the Zoning Administrator is required for
proposed home occupations. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine,
on a case-by-case basis, whether the proposed activity requires building
permits or site development permits and whether adherence to applicable
building, stormwater and water resource ordinances is required.
         (n)   Firearms dealers may be allowed as a home occupation only if
approved in accordance with the special use permit procedures of §
155-16.40.
         (o)   All of the following uses are prohibited as home occupations:
            1.   Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and kennels;
            2.   Eating and drinking establishments;
            3.   Retail stores;
            4.   Business or commercial storage of recreational vehicles,
mobile homes, vehicles or mechanical equipment;
            5.   Funeral and interment services;
            6.   Manufacturing;
            7.   Automobile or truck repair; and
            8.   Any other use that is not deemed to be a customary or
appropriate home occupation by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Home occupation signs.
         (a)   A-1, A-2, E-1 and E-2 Districts. One wall sign or one
freestanding sign if the property has access from a designated federal, state,
or county highway provided that home occupation signs shall:
            1.   Not be illuminated;
            2.   Exceed three square feet in area;
            3.   May not use changeable copy or letters.
         (b)   R-1, R-2, and R-2A Districts. One wall sign or one freestanding
sign if the property has access from a designated federal, state, or county
highway provided that home occupation signs shall:
            1.   Not be illuminated;
            2.   Exceed two square feet in area; and
            3.   May not use changeable copy or letters.
         (c)   R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 Districts. No signs for home occupations
are permitted in these districts.
   (E)   Swimming pools.
      (1)   Where allowed. Swimming pools are allowed as an accessory use to
household living uses and other uses approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Accessory swimming pools are not subject to minimum lot area or lot frontage
requirements.
      (2)   Regulations. Accessory swimming pools are subject to all of the
following regulations:
         (a)   All swimming pools must have a perimeter barrier with a minimum
height of five feet above grade or finished floor. Barriers must be installed
in accordance with the building ordinance. These barrier height regulations
supersede any other fence or wall height requirements in this zoning ordinance.
         (b)   On a corner lot, a swimming pool may be located in a street yard
that does not contain the main entrance to the residence.
         (c)   On a double-frontage lot that is located on a limited access
highway, a swimming pool may be located in the yard that does not contain the
main entrance to the residence.
         (d)   In-ground swimming pools must be set back at least 25 feet from
septic tanks and septic fields.
         (e)   Above-ground swimming pools must be set back at least ten feet
from septic tanks and septic fields.
         (f)   Swimming pools must be set back at least eight feet from the
nearest building, at least five feet from side and rear lot lines and at least
ten feet from any lot line abutting a street, exclusive of easements. These
setbacks apply to the pool as well as associated decks, patios and equipment
and supersede those setbacks established by the lot and building regulations of
the subject district.
   (F)   Accessory solar energy systems.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable
building ordinance and electrical code requirements.
         (b)   Owners of accessory solar energy systems are solely responsible
for negotiating with other property owners for any desired solar easements to
protect access to sunlight. Any such easements must be recorded with the county
recorder of deeds.
      (2)   Building-mounted solar energy systems.
         (a)   Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on
principal and accessory structures.
         (b)   All applicable setback regulations apply to building-mounted
solar energy systems. Systems mounted on principal structures may encroach into
interior side and rear setbacks in accordance with §
155-18.10(F).
         (c)   Only building-integrated and/or flush-mounted solar energy
system may be installed on street-facing building elevations.
         (d)   Solar energy systems may not extend more than three feet above
the applicable maximum building height limit for the subject building type or
more than five feet above the highest point of the roof line, whichever is
less.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5148.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5150.jpg]
 
      (3)    Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
         (a)   In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy
systems may not be located in a required street setback or street yard area.
         (b)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be located within
required interior side and rear setbacks.
         (c)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems are subject to applicable
accessory structure height and lot coverage regulations.
   (G)   Accessory wind energy systems.
      (1)   Agricultural exemption. Electric- generating wind devices that
generate 100kW or less are exempt from zoning if they are off-grid systems and
used for agricultural purposes.
      (2)   Rooftop mounted electric-generating wind devices.
         (a)   Where allowed. Rooftop mounted electric-generating wind devices
are allowed as an accessory use in all zoning districts subject to compliance
with all applicable regulations.
         (b)   Regulations. All rooftop mounted electric-generating wind
devices are subject to the following regulations:
            1.   Building permit applications for rooftop mounted electric-
generating wind devices must be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
turbine structure, including the tower and base. An engineering analysis of the
system showing compliance with the building ordinance and certified by an
Illinois licensed design professional must be submitted. This analysis is
frequently supplied by the manufacturer. A valid first generation seal is
required.
            2.   Noise levels must comply with the Illinois Pollution Control
Board regulations. Proof of compliance must be submitted as part of the
application process.
            3.   No rooftop mounted electric- generating wind device may be
installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
energy generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
            4.   Rooftop mounted electric- generating wind devices may not
exceed 15 feet in height above the highest point of the structure to which it
is attached. Rooftop-mounted electric- generating wind devices may be mounted
to the side of a structure.
            5.   In residential districts, a maximum of one rooftop mounted
electric-generating wind device is allowed per lot.
      (3)   Small wind energy systems.
         (a)   Where allowed. Small wind energy systems are allowed as an
accessory use in all zoning districts subject to compliance with all applicable
regulations.
         (b)   Regulations. All small wind energy systems are subject to the
following regulations:
            1.   No more than one small wind energy system is permitted per
lot.
            2.   All small wind energy systems must be set back from all
property lines a distance equivalent to at least 110% of the total system
height.
            3.   The blade tip of any rotor must, at its lowest point, have
ground clearance of at least 15 feet.
            4.   All climbing apparatus must be located at least 15 feet above
the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first
15 feet from the top of foundation.
            5.   Building permit applications for small wind energy systems
must be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure,
including the tower, base and footings. An engineering analysis of the system
showing compliance with the building ordinance and certified by an Illinois
licensed design professional must be submitted. This analysis is frequently
supplied by the manufacturer. A valid first generation seal is required.
            6.   Tower structure lighting is prohibited unless required by the
Federal Aviation Administration or appropriate authority.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5152.jpg]
 
            7.    Small wind energy systems must comply with applicable FAA
regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to
airports.
            8.   Noise levels must comply with the Illinois Pollution Control
Board regulations. Proof of compliance must be submitted as part of the
application process. Rooftop mounted electric- generating wind devices may not
exceed a noise level of 60dba, as measured at the owner's property line. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short-term events, such as utility
outages and severe wind storms.
            9.   No rooftop mounted electric-generating wind device may be
installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
            10.   Any small wind energy system that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months or more will be considered abandoned, and the
owners of such system must remove all structures within 90 days of receiving
notice from the county. If such facility is not removed within 90 days, the
county may remove all structures at the owner's expense.
   (H)   Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Private (restricted-access) EV charging stations are permitted
as accessory uses in all zoning districts.
         (b)   Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to
allowed nonresidential uses in all zoning districts.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward
satisfying minimum off-street parking space requirements.
         (b)   Public electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for
parking and charging electric vehicles only. Electric vehicles may be parked in
any space designated for public parking, subject to the restrictions that apply
to any other vehicle.
      (3)   Equipment. Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located
so as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety
hazards on sidewalks.
      (4)   Usage fees. Property owners are not restricted from collecting a
service fee for the use of an electric vehicle charging station.
      (5)   Signage.
         (a)   Information must be posted identifying voltage and amperage
levels and any type of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric
vehicle charging station.
         (b)   Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted with
signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging
purposes only. For purposes of this provision, "charging" means that an
electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is
connected to the battery charging station equipment.
      (6)   Maintenance. Electric vehicle charging stations must be maintained
in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or
other contact information must be provided on the equipment for reporting when
it is not functioning or other problems are encountered.
   (I)   Geothermal energy systems.
      (1)   General. Geothermal energy systems are permitted as an accessory
use in all zoning districts.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   Geothermal energy systems must be located entirely within the
lot lines of the subject property or within appropriate easements.
         (b)   No portion of a geothermal energy system may be located within a
stream or stream buffer.
      (3)   Permitting, inspections and other regulations. Geothermal wells are
regulated and inspected by the Will County Health Department. Geothermal energy
systems must comply with all applicable state and county regulations.
   (J)   Residential composting.
      (1)   The composting of landscape waste (including grass clippings,
leaves, and chipped brush) and food waste (including discarded fruits,
vegetables, and grains) is an allowed accessory use in residential zoning
districts, subject to the regulations of this section.
      (2)   Only landscape waste generated from plants grown and maintained on
the subject lot may be composted.
      (3)   Only food waste resulting from food preparation or consumption by
residents of the subject lot and their visitors may be composted.
      (4)   All food waste must be placed within rodent-resistant compost bins.
      (5)   Landscape waste compost piles may not exceed five cubic yards in
volume.
      (6)   Landscape waste compost piles must be set back at least five feet
from all lot lines. Landscape waste compost piles that are not contained within
a rodent-resistant compost bin must be set back at least 30 feet from all
dwelling units on abutting lots.
      (7)   No animal waste is allowed within compost piles or bins with the
exception of equine waste. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit
farmers or gardeners from incorporating bovine or equine waste into the soil
for fertilizer.
         (a)   Equine waste must be composted in accordance with all Illinois
Department of Agriculture regulations.
         (b)   Composting of equine waste is only allowed in areas zoned R-1,
R-2, E-1, E-2, and A-2 and where the keeping of horses is permitted. The A-
1 Zoning District is exempt from these regulations.
         (c)   All equine waste to be composted must be generated on-site. No
off-site raw equine waste may be brought onto the property for composting.
         (d)   All composting of equine waste must be conducted within a three-
sided storage area. No more than three such bins are permitted on the property.
All composting bins shall be constructed with concrete blocks, railroad ties,
wood, sheet metal, or similar durable material.
            1.   The minimum area shall be no smaller than three feet wide and
three feet deep.
            2.   The maximum area shall be no larger than five feet wide and
five feet deep.
            3.   The height of the composting piles shall not exceed five feet.
         (e)   All three-sided storage areas (bins) must be no less than 50
feet from neighboring property lines.
         (f)   There shall be a vegetation strip not less than 25 feet between
the storage bin and neighboring property line. Vegetative strips are land areas
of either planted or indigenous vegetation, situated between a potential
pollutant-source area and a surface-water body or neighboring property that
receives runoff.
         (g)   All composting of equine waste shall be turned once every two
weeks to prohibit nuisance odors.
         (h)   All composting equine waste shall be covered on a day to day
basis to prohibit leachate and runoff from the pile. The waste shall be covered
with either a roof over the storage area and/or a tarp over the waste to
prevent precipitation from getting into the pile.
         (i)   The total amount of compostable waste per lot shall not exceed
five cubic yards.
      (8)   Burning of compost piles is not allowed.
      (9)   No composting site shall encroach or be within a designated
floodplain or designated wetland.
   (K)   Cargo containers. Cargo containers may be used as accessory structures
and for accessory uses only as follows:
      (1)   Cargo containers may be used in support of agricultural production
by an active farmer as defined in ILCS Ch. 505, Act 5, § 3.01 and ILCS Ch. 505,
Act 5, § 3.06.
      (2)   Cargo containers may be used for storage of electronic recyclable
materials at governmental buildings and facilities. The use of cargo containers
for the storage of electronic recyclable materials is limited to recycling
programs administered by Will County.
      (3)   Cargo containers may be used in any zoning district for the purpose
of storing construction materials and/or equipment when associated with a valid
building permit.
      (4)   Cargo containers storage is allowed as an accessory use to an
allowed principal use in I-2 or I-3 zoning districts, subject to all of the
following requirements:
         (a)   The site is not an intermodal facility or cargo container
storage and maintenance facility;
         (b)   The site is at least ten aces in area;
         (c)   Cargo container storage areas may not exceed 15% of the lot
area;
         (d)   Cargo containers may not be stacked more than two containers in
height;
         (e)   Cargo containers must be placed on gravel or paved areas or on
concrete pads;
         (f)   Cargo containers may not be located within any required setback
or buffer area; and
         (g)   Cargo containers must be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way, any R-zoned property and any lot occupied by a residential
use.
      (5)   Cargo containers may be used for the accessory storage of goods or
materials associated with a principal use in the I-1, I-2 or I-3 zoning
districts subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Cargo containers must be placed on gravel or paved areas or on
concrete pads;
         (b)   Cargo containers may not be located within any required setback
or buffer;
         (c)   The use of cargo containers is limited to the storage of goods
or materials associated with a principal use located on the same lot;
         (d)   No more than two cargo containers are permitted on a single lot;
         (e)   Cargo containers may not be stacked;
         (f)   Cargo containers must be painted to match the principal
building; and
         (g)   Cargo containers must be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way, any R-zoned property and any lot occupied by a residential
use.
      (6)   Cargo containers may be used for the accessory storage of
commodities associated with a principal use in the C-3 and C-4 zoning
districts, subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   The cargo container must have been used to transport the subject
commodities to the site;
         (b)   Cargo containers may not be located on the premises for more
than 60 days;
         (c)   Cargo containers must be located behind the principal building
on gravel or paved areas or on concrete pads;
         (d)   No more than two cargo containers are permitted on a single lot;
         (e)   Cargo containers may not be stacked; and
         (f)   Cargo containers must be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way, any R-zoned property and any lot occupied by a residential
use.
      (7)   Cargo containers may be used as an accessory structure building
component in the A-1, A-2, E-1, E-2, R-1, R-2, R-2A and R-3 zoning districts,
subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Cargo container modifications are subject to building ordinance
requirements;
         (b)   The cargo container must be completely wrapped by stick-built
façades, with a peaked roof;
         (c)   Acceptable siding materials include wood, vinyl, metal,
engineered wood and hardboard, brick and stone, fiber cement, stucco, and other
similar materials with an exterior architectural finish;
         (d)   Prohibited siding materials include sheet metal, corrugated
metal, particle board, pressed wood, plywood, and other similar materials not
manufactured to be used as an exterior architectural finish; and
         (e)   The façades of the structure must be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the principal building.
      (8)   All cargo containers must be safe, structurally sound, stable and
in good repair.
      (9)   Any cargo container that becomes unsound, unstable or otherwise
dangerous must be immediately repaired or removed. Any cargo container stored
or kept in violation of this paragraph will be deemed a dangerous condition and
a public nuisance and may be immediately removed by the county.
      (10)   Any cost or expense associated with the removal of the violating
cargo containers is the responsibility of the property owner. All associated
costs including but not limited to legal fees and court costs, constitutes a
debt due and owed to the county and is recordable as a lien upon the land of
the cargo container storage facility and/or property owner.
      (11)   Cargo containers may be converted or modified to be an accessory
residential structure or use:
         (a)   With a Special Use Permit in accordance with the procedures of §
155-16.40;
         (b)   Shall comply with the regulations of:
            1.   Section
155-10.10(C) Accessory Uses - Accessory Dwelling Units;
            2.   Section
155-9.290 Supplementary Uses - Cargo Container Dwelling Units.
         (c)   The facades of the structure must be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the principal building; and
         (d)   Subject to the district specific requirements of this section
not dedicated to regulating accessory or temporary portions of the use or
structure.
   (L)   Donation and collection drop boxes.
      (1)   Where allowed. Donation drop boxes are allowed as an accessory use
in commercial and industrial districts.
      (2)   Regulations. Donation drop boxes are subject to the following
regulations:
         (a)   Drop boxes may only be placed with the subject property owner's
written permission.
         (b)   No more than two drop boxes are allowed on lots of less than two
acres in area. No more than three drop boxes are allowed on any other lot.
         (c)   Drop boxes may not exceed seven feet in height or cover a ground
area of more than 32 square feet. Donation drop boxes may cover a ground area
of up to 100 square feet in industrial districts.
         (d)   Drop boxes are subject to the building setback regulations of
the subject zoning district and to the intersection vision clearance
regulations of §
155-14.80.
         (e)   Drop boxes must be located on a paved surface.
         (f)   Drop boxes may not:
            1.   Obstruct vehicular, pedestrian or bicycle traffic;
            2.   Reduce any sidewalk or paved space designed for the passage of
pedestrians to less than five feet in width;
            3.   Be located within ten feet of a fire hydrant or fire
suppression connection; or
            4.   Be located in a required parking space.
         (g)   The name of the company or organization that owns and/or
controls the drop box must be prominently displayed on the drop box, along with
contact information, including a phone number and email address. The drop box
must also include a legible notice prohibiting the placement of items outside
of the drop box and identifying the drop box owner/operator. Items that are not
enclosed within a drop box are deemed a public nuisance and are subject to
removal by the county at the subject property owner's expense.
   (M)   Farm (roadside) stands. Farm stands are allowed as an accessory use to
an active farm in the A-1 district. At least 85% of the material displayed and
offered for sale at an accessory farm stand must consist of farm products or
value-added farm products that have been produced on the premises or on land
owned, rented or leased by the farm stand operator. Live animals may not be
displayed or sold as part of a farm stand. Farm stands may not exceed 600
square feet of floor area. Farm stands must be set back at least 20 feet from
the nearest road edge. Each roadside farm stand must have facilities for
vehicular ingress and egress and adequate off-street parking, as approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
   (N)   Garage sales and yard sales. Garage/yard sales are allowed as an
accessory use to a permitted household living use. No more than four garage/
yard sales are permitted in any single calendar year and each garage/yard sale
may last no longer than three consecutive days. All sale items must be removed
from public view during inactive periods.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-27, passed 2-18-2016; Ord. 16-277, passed
12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 18-192, passed 10-18-2018; Ord.
18-193, passed 7-19- 2018; Ord. 18-241, passed 9-20-2018; Ord. 19- 241, passed
9-19-2019; Ord. 20-267, passed 8- 20-2020; Ord. 21-138, passed 5-20-2021; Ord.
23-172, passed 6-15-2023)
§ 155-10.20 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Description and purpose.
         (a)   A temporary use is a use of private property that does not
require a building permit and that is not allowed by the subject zoning
district.
         (b)   The temporary use regulations of this section are intended to
permit such occasional, temporary uses and activities when consistent with the
purposes and regulations of this zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Agricultural and residential districts. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to approve temporary uses in agricultural and residential districts
in accordance with the following tables and all other applicable regulations of
this zoning ordinance.
Temporary Use A-1 A-2 and all Residential Districts
Temporary Use                        A-1 A-2 and all Residential Districts
Batch plant for specifically defined Yes Yes
construction
Carnival or circus                   Yes No
Events of public interest            Yes Yes
Real estate sales office             Yes Yes
Temporary sales                      Yes No
Emergency shelter                    Yes Yes
Residence during construction        Yes Yes
Structures for classrooms            Yes Yes
Mobile storage units                 Yes Yes
Temporary liquor sales               Yes Yes
Yes = Zoning Administrator authorized to approve | No = Zoning
Administrator may not approve
 
      (3)   Commercial and industrial districts. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to approve temporary uses in C and I districts in accordance with
the following tables and all other applicable regulations of this zoning
ordinance.
Temporary Use C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 I-1 I-2 I-3
Temporary Use             C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 I-1 I-2 I-3
Batch plant[1]            Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Carnival or circus        Yes Yes Yes Yes No  Yes No  No  No
Events of public interest Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Real estate sales office  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Temporary sales           Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No  No  No
Temporary liquor sales    Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Yes = Zoning Administrator authorized to approve | No = Zoning
Administrator may not approve
[1] During specifically defined construction projects
 
      (4)   Temporary use permit required. No temporary use may be established
unless a temporary use permit evidencing the use's compliance with the
provisions of this section and all other applicable provisions of this zoning
ordinance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
is authorized to impose conditions on temporary use permits.
      (5)   Applications, notices and decision- making.
         (a)   Applications for temporary use permits must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   Whenever this zoning ordinance states that notice must be
provided to governmental agencies and abutting property owners, applicants must
deliver notice to all owners of property abutting the subject parcel, in
accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3). Notice must also be delivered to local governments and
governmental agencies, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   If the Zoning Administrator receives a written objection to the
proposed temporary use or the use is not authorized by the temporary use
provisions of this section, the application may not be approved by the Zoning
Administrator and must be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Applicants for uses that require Planning and Zoning Commission consideration
are required to deliver notice to abutting property owners in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
      (6)   General standards. The following standards apply to all temporary
uses unless otherwise expressly stated:
         (a)   Access approval from the highway authority with jurisdiction
over the subject road is required.
         (b)   No temporary electrical supply may be installed without an
electrical permit and inspection.
         (c)   Temporary structures must be located at least four feet from any
buildings or structures on the subject property.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to require evidence of
approval from the Will County Health Department regarding temporary sanitary
facilities.
         (e)   No signs in connection with a temporary use are permitted except
in accordance with the provisions of Article
155-13. All temporary signage must be removed immediately upon cessation of the
temporary use.
         (f)   Temporary uses or structures may not encroach into any required
landscaping.
         (g)   Parking areas must be provided for the temporary use (in
addition to required parking for any principal use existing or proposed on the
site), and such areas must be capable of accommodating the number of parking
spaces that are required for the most similar use subcategory or use type under
Article
155-13.
         (h)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to suspend, revoke, or
modify a temporary use permit immediately upon determination that the
conditions and requirements set forth in the permit have been violated. Written
notice of the Zoning Administrator's determination to suspend, revoke, or
modify the permit must be promptly provided to the applicant. If the non-
compliance is not cured within three calendar days after receipt of this
determination, the determination under this division is final and conclusive.
The applicant may appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission, by filing a
notice of appeal with the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission
within ten calendar days after receipt of notice of the Zoning Administrator's
determination.
         (i)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny temporary use
permits to any person who owns property on which an uncorrected violation is
present or who applied for or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this zoning ordinance or who has demonstrated a willful history of
violations, including any condition attached to a permit or approval previously
granted by the county. This provision applies regardless of whether the
property for which the permit or other approval is sought is the property in
violation.
         (j)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to deny temporary use
permits on any land or structure or improvements thereon upon which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance, including any
condition attached to a permit or approval previously granted by the county.
This enforcement provision applies regardless of whether the current owner or
applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
         (k)   The main road from which access is taken must be kept free of
dust, dirt, mud and other debris.
         (l)   Any food service operation that sells, prepares or serves
potentially hazardous food must obtain appropriate permits from the Will County
Health Department and is subject to inspection.
   (B)   Batch plants (for specifically defined construction).
      (1)   Batch plants must be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
building used for residential purposes.
      (2)   The period for which such permit is valid must be stated on the
permit and may not exceed the duration of the construction contract by more
than 14 days.
      (3)   All facilities placed or located on the site must be removed and
the site restored to a clean and vegetated condition within the time-frame of
the permit.
   (C)   Carnivals and circuses.
      (1)   The maximum length of the permit is ten days and no more than one
permit may be issued per zoning lot in any calendar year.
      (2)   No structure or equipment may be located within 200 feet of any
(off-site) building used for residential purposes.
   (D)   Events of public interest. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
approve events of public interest, such as races for motorized vehicles, water
craft or aircraft races, haunted houses, fall festivals, gun shows, outdoor
concerts, public fireworks displays and similar activities. Note: Entertainment
and sporting events are regulated under §
155-8.40(K) and §
155-9.120. Events of public interest are subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly approved, all uses and activities are
limited to specified hours and a maximum of three consecutive days and no more
than 21 days per calendar year per zoning lot.
      (2)   All activities and uses are limited to the dates and hours of
operation specified in the permit.
      (3)   Events of public interest are permitted in residential districts
only when located on the site of a permitted nonresidential use.
      (4)   Traffic control must be arranged by the operators of the event with
the appropriate road jurisdiction and law enforcement agency.
      (5)   Public parking for the exclusive use of the facility/event must be
provided and a stabilized drive to the parking area must be maintained. It is
the responsibility of the operators to guide traffic to these areas. No parking
is allowed on any road or public right-of-way.
      (6)   Noise levels associated with events of public interest must comply
with all applicable noise regulations of the county code.
      (7)   The site must be cleared of all debris within 24 hours of the end
of the event and cleared of all temporary structures within seven days after
closing of the event. A cash bond or other assurance may be required by the
Zoning Administrator to ensure clean up. Bond amounts must be based on the
estimated costs of clean-up and site restoration.
      (8)   If liquor will be used, sold or consumed on the property, a liquor
permit must be obtained from the Will County Liquor Commissioner, as required
by the Will County Liquor Control Ordinance.
      (9)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to require proof of
insurance to ensure public safety and protection.
      (10)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to see that the area
used for the event is maintained in a condition that provides for the public
health, safety and welfare for event attendees and neighbors alike.
      (11)   In addition to the conditions listed above, a temporary use permit
for supervised public displays is subject to the terms and conditions of all
applicable county ordinances.
      (12)   Private, non-commercial events on the host's property such as
agriculture-related training, homeowners' association picnics at the
subdivision park, corporate picnics on the corporate campus, graduation
celebrations and weddings at a private residence or subdivision clubhouse,
etc., are not considered events of public interest.
   (E)   Real estate sales offices.
      (1)   Real estate sales offices are allowed in any zoning district for
any new development approved in accordance with this zoning ordinance. Unless
otherwise expressly approved by the Zoning Administrator, the real estate sales
office must be located on the site of a new development. The office may not be
used as a residence, but a model home may be used as a temporary sales office.
      (2)   The maximum length of the permit is 179 days. Permits may be
renewed throughout the sales period of the development.
      (3)   Applications to establish temporary real estate sales offices prior
to final plat approval must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the
builder and property owner acknowledging that the builder/ owner will remove
any structures, including model homes, if the preliminary plat lapses prior to
approval of the final plat. The affidavit must be in a form specified by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (F)   Off-premise seasonal farm produce sales.
      (1)   Seasonal sales of farm produce may be allowed by temporary use
permit in all zoning districts for a period not to exceed six months per
calendar year. In residential zoning districts, seasonal sale of farm produce
is allowed only on parcels with a minimum area of 80,000 square feet and a
minimum road frontage of 190 feet.
      (2)   Temporary sales are allowed only during daylight hours, with
specified hours of operation specified in the temporary use permit.
      (3)   All sales must be conducted at least 30 feet from all streets,
public rights-of-way, residential zoning districts and lots occupied by
residential uses.
      (4)   The property must be of sufficient size to provide adequate off-
street parking in addition to required parking for any existing use on the
property.
      (5)   Sales must be conducted in such a manner so as not to interfere
with traffic or cause a nuisance.
      (6)   The access drive to the site must be located at least 150 feet from
the right-of-way of any public road intersection or other major access drive
unless there is an existing access within 150 feet of the intersection and the
highway authority having jurisdiction grants approval to use the existing
access.
   (G)   Temporary holiday material sales.
      (1)   Christmas tree, pumpkin and similar customary outdoor holiday
material sales may be allowed by temporary use permit in all zoning districts
for a period not to exceed 45 days per calendar year. If the principal use of
the property is a retail greenhouse/nursery or garden center, no temporary use
permitted is required.
      (2)   All sales must be conducted at least 30 feet from the right-of-way
of any street.
      (3)   A minimum of 30 foot setback must be maintained from property use
or zoned for residential purposes.
      (4)   The property must be of sufficient size to provide adequate off-
street parking in addition to required parking for any existing use on the
property.
      (5)   Sales must be conducted in such a manner so as not to interfere
with traffic or cause a nuisance.
      (6)   The access drive to the site must be located at least 150 feet from
the right-of-way of any public road intersection or other major access drive
unless there is an existing access within 150 feet of the intersection and the
highway authority having jurisdiction grants approval to use the existing
access.
   (H)   Temporary emergency shelter. When fire or natural disaster has
rendered a residence unfit for human habitation, the temporary use of a single
mobile home located on the parcel during rehabilitation of the original
residence or construction of a new residence is permitted subject to the
following additional regulations:
      (1)   Required water and sanitary facilities must be provided.
      (2)   The maximum length of a permit is 179 days, but the Zoning
Administrator may grant extensions of the permit for up to 60 days in length
for each extension, provided reasonable construction progress has been made and
such construction progress is diligently pursued. Application for the extension
must be made prior to expiration of the original permit.
      (3)   The mobile home must be removed from the property upon issuance of
any occupancy permit for the new or rehabilitation residence. The applicant is
required to provide express consent and authorization to Will County to remove
the shelter at the owner's expense upon termination of the permit, if the
applicant has not done so voluntarily.
   (I)   Temporary residences (during house construction). Any legally existing
residential structure or mobile home may be used for residential purposes only
during the construction of a residence and must be removed within 30 days of
obtaining a certificate of occupancy or completion of construction, whichever
occurs first. In no case may the temporary residential structure, or mobile
home be permitted to remain on the premises for more than two years.
   (J)   Temporary classroom structures. The Zoning Administrator is authorized
to approve the use of temporary structures for portable classrooms, when Zoning
Administrator determines that such structures are necessary to accommodate uses
and activities of immediate necessity within the county. The maximum length of
the permit is 179 days.
   (K)   Temporary mobile signs. See §
155-13.100.
   (L)   Temporary liquor sales. An application for temporary liquor sales may
only be applied for in conjunction with temporary use permit for an event of
public interest. Applicants are also required to obtain a temporary permit from
the Will County Liquor Commission.
   (M)   Mobile storage units.
      (1)   Storage allowed. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve
a temporary use permit for short-term use of mobile storage units, as follows.
         (a)   Temporary household storage. One mobile storage unit may be used
for temporary storage of household goods, wares or materials in any
agricultural or residential zoning district when used in connection with moving
or relocation, or interior improvements that do not require a building permit.
The time period for which a mobile storage unit may be used for this purpose is
limited to a maximum of 30 consecutive days per calendar year. One additional
30-day extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   Temporary construction storage. One mobile storage unit may be
used for temporary storage of household goods, wares or materials in any
agricultural or residential zoning district in conjunction with construction
allowed through an active building permit. The time period for which a mobile
storage unit may be used for this purpose is limited to a maximum of 179
consecutive days per two consecutive calendar years, beginning in the calendar
year in which the temporary permit is issued. Extensions of this time period
may not be granted.
         (c)   Temporary emergency storage. One mobile storage unit may be used
for temporary storage of household goods, wares or materials in cases where a
residential building in any agricultural or residential zoning district becomes
uninhabitable due to acts that are not within the control of the property
owner. The time period for which a mobile storage unit may be used for this
purpose is limited to a maximum of 179 consecutive days per two consecutive
calendar years, beginning in the calendar year in which the temporary permit is
issued. Extensions of this time period may not be granted.
      (2)   Regulations. Mobile storage units must comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   Stacking of mobile storage units is prohibited.
         (b)   Mobile storage units must be accessory to a principal
residential building.
         (c)   Mobile storage units may not exceed eight feet in height, eight
feet in width or 16 feet in length.
         (d)   Mobile storage units must be placed on a driveway or other hard
surface.
         (e)   Mobile storage units may not be placed in a location that
obstructs pedestrian or vehicular movement or intersection visibility.
         (f)   Mobile storage units may not include any signage other than the
name, address and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the
business of renting or otherwise placing the mobile storage container on the
subject property.
         (g)   Mobile storage units must be maintained in a good state of
repair, free from rust, peeling paint and other forms of visible deterioration.
         (h)   Mobile storage units may not be used for the purpose of
conducting business or selling merchandise.
         (i)   Mobile storage units may not be used for the storage of toxic or
hazardous materials or flammable liquids.
         (j)   Mobile storage units may not be used for habitation.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
155-11 PARKING AND LOADING
§ 155-11.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The regulations of this article are intended to ensure provision of
off-street motor vehicle parking and loading facilities, bicycle parking areas,
and other transportation access facilities in rough proportion to the
generalized parking and transportation demands of different land uses. By
requiring such facilities, it is the intent of this article to help avoid the
negative impacts associated with spillover parking into adjacent areas, while
at the same time avoiding the negative environmental and appearance impacts
that can result from parking lots and other vehicular use areas.
      (2)   The provisions of this article are also intended to help protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare by:
         (a)   Helping avoid and mitigate traffic congestion;
         (b)   Encouraging multi-modal transportation options and enhanced
pedestrian and cyclist safety;
         (c)   Providing methods to reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in
parking areas and adequate drainage structures in order to reduce the
environmental impacts of stormwater runoff; and
         (d)   Providing flexible methods of responding to the transportation
and access demands of various land uses in different areas of the county.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   General. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations of this
article apply to all districts and uses.
      (2)   New uses and development. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
regulations of this article apply to all new buildings constructed and all new
uses established in all districts.
      (3)   Enlargements and expansions.
         (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations of this
article apply whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to
include additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, employees or
other units of measurement used for establishing off-street parking and loading
requirements.
         (b)   In the case of enlargements or expansions triggering
requirements for additional parking or loading, additional spaces are required
only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use. In
other words, there is no requirement to address lawfully existing parking and
loading space deficits.
      (4)   Change of use.
         (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the use of property
changes, additional (vehicle and bicycle) parking spaces and loading spaces
must be provided to serve the new use only when the number of spaces required
for the new use exceeds the number of spaces required for the lawful use that
most recently occupied the building, based on the regulations of this zoning
ordinance. In other words, 100% "credit" is given to the most recent lawful use
of the property for the number of parking and loading spaces that would have
been required under this zoning ordinance, regardless of whether such spaces
are actually provided. Any new parking spaces required must comply with all
applicable parking and loading area design and layout standards.
         (b)   When the number of parking or loading spaces required for the
new use exceeds the number of spaces required for the use that most recently
occupied the property, additional spaces are required only to make up the
difference between the number of spaces required for the previous use and the
number of spaces required for the new use, based on the regulations of this
zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.20 CALCULATIONS.
   The following rules apply when calculating the required number of off-street
parking and loading spaces required under this zoning ordinance.
   (A)   Multiple uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, lots occupied by
more than one use must provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the
total of the requirements for all uses that occupy the lot.
   (B)   Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result
in a fractional number, any fraction of less than ½ is rounded down to the next
lower whole number, and any fraction of ½ or more is rounded up to the next
higher whole number.
   (C)   Area measurements. All area-based (square footage) parking and loading
standards must be computed on the basis of the total gross floor area devoted
to such use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or
working space such as counters, racks, or closets, and any floor area devoted
to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to
business or professional offices. However, for the purposes of determining off-
street parking and loading space requirements the following areas are not
counted as part of the gross floor area:
      (1)   Floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as
otherwise noted herein);
      (2)   Floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities,
including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space; or
      (3)   Mechanical or storage floor area other than area devoted to
retailing activities, to the production of goods, or to business or
professional offices.
   (D)   Seating or occupancy. A seat is the space intended for a single
individual; in places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or
other similar seating arrangements, each 20 linear inches of such seating is
counted as one seat. In places without fixed seating, each eight square feet of
seating floor area is counted as one seat.
   (E)   Employees. For the purpose of computing requirements based on
employees, calculations must be based on the average number of persons working
on any single shift.
   (F)   Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not
specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the Zoning Administrator
is authorized to apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed
use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or establish a minimum off-
street parking requirement for the proposed use in accordance with division (G)
of this section.
   (G)   Establishment of other parking ratios. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to establish required minimum off-street parking ratios for unlisted
uses and in those instances where authority to establish a requirement is
expressly granted. Such ratios may be established on the basis of a similar
use/parking determination (as described in division (F) of this section), on
parking data provided by the applicant or information otherwise available to
the Zoning Administrator. Parking data and studies must include estimates of
parking demand based on reliable data collected from comparable uses or on
external data from credible research organizations (e.g., Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) or American Planning Association (APA)).
Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of
activity and location. Parking studies must document the source of all data
used to develop recommended requirements.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.30 PARKING RATIOS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. Except as otherwise expressly stated, off-street
motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the following
table:
USE CATEGORY Minimum Motor Vehicle Off-Street Parking Ratio
USE CATEGORY
Use Subcategory                                     Minimum Motor Vehicle Off-Street Parking Ratio
  LSpecific Use Type
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living (except as identified below)       2.0 spaces per dwelling unit
   LMulti-unit or Mixed-use Building (1-bedroom  1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
unit)
   LMulti-unit or Mixed-use Building (Efficiency 1.0 spaces per dwelling unit
unit)
Group Living                                        1 space per 1,000 square feet
PUBLIC/CIVIC
Airport-related Facilities                          As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
College/University                                  1 space per 4 students
Day Care                                            2 spaces plus 1 space per employee
Detention and Correctional Facilities               As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
Fraternal, Labor, Membership Organization           As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
Hospital                                            As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
Library/Cultural Facility                           3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Park/Recreation/Open Space (except as identified    As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
below)                                              155-11.20(G))
   LGolf course                                  45 spaces per 9 holes
Religious Assembly                                  1 space per 6 seats
Safety Services                                     As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
School
   LElementary & Junior High                     1 space per employee
   LHigh School                                  1 space per 6 students
Utilities and Services
   LMinor, Basic                                 None
   LMajor                                        As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities               None
COMMERCIAL
Adult Entertainment Facilities                      4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of retail sales and display area
                                                    1 space per 2.5 seats in the entertainment area
Animal Services
   LSales and Grooming                           2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
   LAnimal Shelter or Boarding Kennel            1 space per employee
   LVeterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital           4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
   LHorse Boarding                               Parking for vehicles and trailers must be on a driveway or other designated
                                                    parking area located outside of street setback
Building Maintenance Service                        1 space per employee
Building Supplies and Equipment                     2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Business Support Service                            2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Communication Service Establishments                2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Drive-in or Drive-through Uses                      Spaces required for principal use plus vehicle stacking spaces as required by §
                                                    155-11.110
Eating and Drinking Establishments
   LRestaurant                                   10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
   LBar, Tavern, Cocktail Lounge, Nightclub      15 spaces per 1,000 square feet
   LDrive-in or Drive-through Restaurant         15 spaces per 1,000 square feet, plus vehicle stacking spaces as required by §
                                                    155-11.110
Entertainment and Spectator Sports                  1 space per 10 seats
Financial Services                                  4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Food and Beverage Retail Sales                      4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Funeral and Interment Services                      1 space per 4 seats in chapel, plus one per vehicle used as part of operation
                                                    plus 1 space per employee
Lodging                                             1 space per guest room
Office, Admin., Prof., or Consumer Service          3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Office or Clinic, Medical                           4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Parking, Non-Accessory                              None
Personal Improvement Service                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Repair or Laundry Service, Consumer                 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Research Service                                   3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Residential Convenience/Support                     None
Retail Sales and Service                            4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Sports and Recreation, Participant                  As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
   LShooting Range                               2 spaces per shooting lane; none required in A-1
Vehicle Sales and Service
   LMotor Vehicle Fueling Station                1 space per gas pump plus 1 space per service bay
   LCar Wash/Cleaning Service                    Vehicle stacking spaces as required by §
                                                    155-11.110
   LHeavy Equipment Sales/Rentals                1 space per employee plus 2 spaces per service stall/bay
   LLight Equipment Sales/Rentals                1 space per employee plus 2 spaces per service stall/bay
   LMotor Vehicle Repair                         4 spaces per service stall/bay
   LVehicle Storage and Towing                   5 spaces plus 1 space per employee
INDUSTRIAL
Auto Salvage                                        3 spaces plus 1 space per employee
Manufacturing, Production and Industrial Service    1 space per employee
Mining/Quarrying                                    1 space per employee
Recycling Facilities                                1 space per employee
Self-Service Storage Facility                       1 space per 15 storage units plus 1 space per employee
Warehousing, Wholesaling and Freight Movement       1 space per employee
Waste-Related Use                                   1 space per employee
AGRICULTURAL
Agriculture, Crop or Animal                         None
Community Garden                                    None
Horticulture, Nurseries and Greenhouses             1 space per employee plus 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of customer-
                                                    accessible sales area
OTHER
Aircraft Landing Strip or Pad, Private              As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
Bus or Railroad Passenger Stations                  As determined by Zoning Administrator (See §
                                                    155-11.20(G))
 
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-258, passed 9-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-
18-2018)
§ 155-11.40 SHARED PARKING.
   (A)   Description. Shared parking represents an arrangement in which two or
more uses with different peak parking demand periods use the same off-street
parking spaces to meet their minimum off-street parking requirements.
   (B)   Authorization and criteria.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve shared parking
arrangements for uses with different hours of operation.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may permit parking required for one use to
be supplied by the off-street parking spaces provided for another use if the
Zoning Administrator determines that the uses or activities will have peak
parking demands at different periods of the day or week.
      (3)   In order to approve an alternative compliance parking plan for
shared parking, the Zoning Administrator must find, based on competent evidence
provided by the applicant, that there is no substantial conflict in the
principal operating hours of the uses for which the sharing of parking is
proposed. The Zoning Administrator may utilize the Urban Land Institute's (ULI)
Shared Parking methodology as a guide in reviewing the shared parking proposal
submitted by the applicant.
      (4)   A request for approval of a shared parking arrangement must be
accompanied by such information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary to evaluate the peak parking demand characteristics or difference in
hours and/or days of operation, including, but not limited to, a description of
the uses and their operational characteristics, a site plan, and a parking
study that justifies the reduction in parking requested, as prepared by a
licensed professional traffic engineer or other qualified professional.
   (C)   Location of shared parking. Shared parking arrangements are subject to
the location standards of §
155-11.50.
   (D)   Shared parking agreement.
      (1)   An agreement providing for the shared use of parking areas,
executed by the parties involved, must be filed with the Zoning Administrator
in a form approved by the state's attorney and recorded with the county
recorder of deeds.
      (2)   Shared parking agreements are binding upon applicants, their
successors and assigns. Amendments to parking agreements require Zoning
Administrator approval, based on whether the proposed amendment complies with
all applicable zoning ordinance provisions.
      (3)   Shared parking privileges remain in effect only as long as the
agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If a shared parking
agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as
otherwise required by this article.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.50 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   General. Except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning
ordinance, required off-street parking spaces must be located on the same lot
as the building or use they are required to serve.
   (B)   Off-site parking.
      (1)   General. All or a portion of required off-street parking for
nonresidential uses may be provided off-site, in accordance with the provisions
of this section. Required accessible parking spaces may not be located off-
site.
      (2)   Location. Off-site parking areas must be located within a 600-foot
radius of the use served by such parking, measured between the entrance of the
use to be served and the outer perimeter of the furthest parking space within
the off-site parking lot.
      (3)   Control of off-site parking area.
         (a)   The property to be occupied by the off-site parking facilities
must be under the same ownership as the lot containing the use to be served by
the parking. The off-site parking area may be under separate ownership only if
a legal agreement is provided to the Zoning Administrator guaranteeing the
long-term availability of the parking. The agreement must be in a form approved
by the state's attorney and recorded with the county recorder of deeds.
         (b)   Off-site parking agreements are binding upon applicants, their
successors and assigns. Amendments to off-site parking agreements require
Zoning Administrator approval, based on whether the proposed amendment complies
with all applicable zoning ordinance provisions.
         (c)   Off-site parking privileges remain in effect only as long as the
agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If an off-site parking
agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as
otherwise required by this article.
   (C)   Parking in setbacks and yard areas. In residential districts, parking
is prohibited in street setbacks, except that parking spaces for residential
uses may be located on a driveway leading to a garage or other allowed off-
street parking area. In all other districts, parking spaces may be located in
street setbacks unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (D)   Limit on number of vehicles parked in residential districts. No more
than five vehicles owned or controlled by the owner or occupant of the subject
property may be parked outside of an enclosed building in A-2, E-1, E-2, R-1,
R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zoning districts. All vehicles parked outside of an
enclosed building in these districts must be parked on a regularly constructed
residential driveway.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-11.60 USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS.
   (A)   Required off-street parking and loading areas may be used solely for
the temporary parking and loading/unloading of licensed motor vehicles in
operating condition.
   (B)   Required off-street parking and loading spaces are intended to serve
residents, tenants, patrons, employees, or guests of the principal use. Parking
spaces may be provided with or without charge.
   (C)   Outdoor parking spaces may not be used for sale, repair, dismantling,
or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
   (D)   Required off-street parking and loading spaces may not be used for the
display of goods for sale or lease or for storage of building materials.
   (E)   Off-street loading spaces in residential and commercial districts may
not be used for sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles,
equipment, materials, or supplies. Off-street loading spaces in industrial
districts may not be used for sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any
vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies if the loading facilities are
located within 500 feet of a residential district. Washing of vehicles and
emergency service required to start vehicles is permitted in loading spaces
located in industrial districts.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-11.65 PARKING OF TRUCKS, TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN A-2 AND
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Trucks, commercial vehicles and commercial trailers.
      (1)   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles or trucks displaying or
requiring the display of an Illinois state license plate of greater than a D
classification (or an out-of-state equivalent), including truck tractors and
tow trucks, is prohibited on lots in A-2 and residential zoning districts,
except as follows:
         (a)   When in the process of moving or delivering or receiving goods,
materials or merchandise;
         (b)   When utilized in the process of installation, repair or
maintenance of landscaping during the actual time of parking such vehicle;
         (c)   When involved in the installation, repair or maintenance of
utilities; or
         (d)   When utilized in the construction, repair or maintenance of any
building, structure or grading project, during the actual time of parking such
vehicle.
      (2)   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles displaying or requiring
the display of a Class “D” Illinois state license or less (or an out-of-state
equivalent), or commercial trailers displaying or requiring the display of a
class “TA” or “TD” Illinois state license plate or less (or out-of-state
equivalent), is subject to the following regulations when located on lots in A-
2 and residential zoning districts:
         (a)   The total number of such commercial vehicles or commercial
trailers parked or stored outside of an enclosed building in A-2 and
residential districts may not exceed the following limits:
 
Zoning                   Maximum Number of Commercial Vehicles/ Commercial
District                 Trailers (combined)
A-2, E-1, E-2, R-1, R-2  2
R-2A, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 1
 
         (b)   Commercial vehicles parked or stored outside of an enclosed
building in A-2 and residential districts must:
            1.   Be parked on a constructed driveway;
            2.   Display a valid license for the use of such vehicle on any
public road in the county;
            3.   Have no visible loads; and
            4.   Not exceed an overall vehicle height of 90 inches.
         (c)   Commercial trailers parked or stored outside of an enclosed
building in A-2 and residential districts must:
            1.   Be parked on a constructed driveway;
            2.   Not block, extend or encroach into the right-of-way or over
the public sidewalk;
            3.   Not be parked or stored in a side or rear yard, unless
completely screened from view by a fence or wall;
            4.   Not exceed an overall height of 90 inches.
         (d)   Vehicles and trailers authorized under this section are included
in the limit on the maximum number of vehicles parked on lots in A-2 and
residential zoning districts (see § 155-11.50(D)).
   (B)   Noncommercial trailers and recreational vehicles. Parking or storage
of noncommercial trailers displaying or requiring the display of a class “TA”
Illinois state license plate (or out of state equivalent), recreational
trailers displaying or requiring the display of a class “RT” Illinois state
license plate (or out-of- state equivalent), travel trailers, camping trailers,
boats, personal water crafts, all-terrain vehicles, or similar recreational
vehicles may be parked or stored, but not lived in, on lots in A-2 and
residential zoning districts, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   The total number of such noncommercial trailers and recreational
vehicles parked or stored outside of an enclosed building in A-2 and
residential districts may not exceed the following limits:
 
Zoning District          Maximum Number of Noncommercial Trailers/ RVs
                         (combined)
A-2, E-1, E-2, R-1, R-2  3
R-2A, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 2
 
      (2)   Any noncommercial trailer or recreational vehicle permitted to be
parked or stored outside of an enclosed building pursuant to this section must
be parked on a constructed driveway. The vehicle may not extend or encroach
into the right-of-way or over the public sidewalk.
      (3)   Whenever any recreational vehicles are parked or stored in
compliance with this section are commonly used in conjunction with a trailer
for towing purposes, such combination of recreational vehicle and trailer are
counted as one recreational vehicle for the purposes of this section,
regardless of whether an additional recreational vehicle is mounted on the
trailer.
      (4)   Recreational vehicles and trailers authorized under this section
are included in the limit on the number of vehicles parked on lots in A-2 and
residential zoning districts (see § 155-11.50(D)).
(Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-11.70 PARKING AREA DESIGN.
   All public and private parking areas, including non-accessory parking uses
and vehicle and equipment sales and rental uses must be designed, developed,
and maintained in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Plans for the design of parking areas are subject to approval by the
county.
   (B)   Parking areas must be graded for proper drainage and provided with an
all-weather surface material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds
maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust and
to be free of dust, trash and debris. The use of pervious paving material is
encouraged.
   (C)   Parking areas must be provided with entrances and exits of at least 12
feet in width and located to minimize traffic congestion. Except on residential
lots, each off-street parking space must open directly upon an aisle or
driveway at least 12 feet in width or such additional width and design to
provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to parking spaces.
   (D)   Parking areas must be designed with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with traffic
movement.
   (E)   Except for parallel parking spaces, each required off-street parking
space must be at least nine feet in width and at least 18 feet in length,
exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office or work space.
Parallel parking spaces must be 22 feet in length. All parking spaces must have
a vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.80 ACCESSIBLE PARKING (FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES).
   Accessible parking facilities must be provided in accordance with the
Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Illinois Administrative Code Ch. I, § 400.310).
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.90 BICYCLE PARKING.
   (A)   General. This section establishes requirements for short-term bicycle
parking and incentives for long-term bicycle parking and storage facilities.
   (B)   Spaces required. Short-term bicycle parking is required in accordance
with the following minimum ratios:
 
Use                          Minimum Short-term Bicycle Parking Spaces
Multi-dwelling Residential   1 space per 5 dwelling units in projects with over
                             8 units
Commercial, Public and Civic 1 per 10 motor vehicle spaces in projects with 10
                             or more spaces
Industrial                   1 per 25 motor vehicle spaces in projects with 25
                             or more spaces
 
   (C)   Short-term bicycle parking spaces.
      (1)   Purpose. Short-term bicycle parking is generally intended to serve
the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for short time periods, including
customers, clients, students and other short-term visitors.
      (2)   Design and location.
         (a)   General. Required short-term bicycle parking spaces must:
            1.   Consist of bike racks or lockers that are anchored so that
they cannot be easily removed;
            2.   Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion,
hammers, and saws;
            3.   Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with
the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock;
            4.   Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle;
            5.   Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to
adjacent bicycles; and
            6.   Be in highly visible, active, well-illuminated areas that do
not interfere with pedestrian movements.
         (b)   Location. At least 50% of required bicycle parking spaces must
be located within 50 feet of a customer entrance, and the remainder must be
located within 100 feet of any entrance. If required short-term bicycle parking
spaces are not visible from the abutting street or the main customer entrance,
signs must be posted indicating their location.
         (c)   Size. All required short-term bicycle parking spaces must have
minimum dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in length, with a minimum
overhead vertical clearance of seven feet.
   (D)   Long-term bicycle parking and storage spaces. Long-term bicycle
parking is generally intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their
bicycles for long time periods. As a means of encouraging the provision of
long-term bicycle parking spaces for nonresidential uses, off-street motor
vehicle parking space requirements based on the number of employees may be
reduced by one space for each eight long-term bicycle parking spaces provided.
Off-street parking requirements based on other measures (e.g., floor area) may
be reduced by one space for each ten long-term bicycle parking spaces provided.
These provisions may not be used to reduce motor vehicle parking requirements
by more than 33%. Long-term bicycle parking spaces must comply with the
following provisions.
      (1)   Design and location.
         (a)   General. Long-term bicycle parking spaces must:
            1.   Be protected from weather and access by unauthorized persons;
            2.   Consist of bike racks or lockers anchored so that they cannot
be easily removed;
            3.   Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion,
hammers, and saws;
            4.   Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with
the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock;
            5.   Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle; and
            6.   Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to
adjacent bicycles.
         (b)   Location. Required long-term bicycle parking must be provided in
at least one of the following locations:
            1.   In covered stationary racks or lockers that comply with the
short-term bicycle parking location requirements of §
155-11.90(C)(2)(b).
            2.   In a locked room;
            3.   In a covered, locked area that is enclosed by a fence or wall
with a minimum height of seven feet;
            4.   In a private garage or private storage space serving an
individual dwelling unit within a multi-dwelling (residential) building;
            5.   In a covered area within clear view of an attendant or
security personnel;
            6.   In a covered area continuously monitored by security cameras;
or
            7.   In a covered area that is visible from employee work areas.
      (2)   Size. Required long-term bicycle parking spaces must have minimum
dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in length, with a minimum overhead
vertical clearance of seven feet. Bicycle lockers are exempt from overhead
clearance requirements.
   (E)   Authorized administrative adjustments. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to approve an administrative adjustment reducing the number of
bicycle spaces required and to modify the bicycle parking design and location
requirements of this section in accordance with the administrative adjustment
procedures of §
155-16.60.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.100 MOTORCYCLE PARKING.
   In parking lots containing over 20 motor vehicle parking spaces, motorcycle
parking may be substituted for up to ten automobile parking spaces or 10% of
required motor vehicle parking, whichever is less. For every four motorcycle
parking spaces provided, the automobile parking requirement is reduced by one
space. Each motorcycle space must have minimum dimensions of four feet by eight
feet. This provision applies to existing and proposed parking lots.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.110 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES AND VEHICLE STACKING SPACES.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The regulations of this section apply to all uses that include
drive-through facilities and to all portions of a development that comprise the
drive-through facility.
      (2)   The regulations apply to new developments, the addition of drive-
through facilities to existing developments, and the relocation of existing
drive-through facilities.
   (B)   Parts of a drive-through facility. A drive-through facility is
composed of two parts:
      (1)   The stacking lanes (the space occupied by vehicles queuing for the
service to be provided); and
      (2)   The service area, where the service occurs. In uses with service
windows, the service area starts at the service window. In uses where the
service occurs indoors, the service area is the area within the building where
the service occurs. For other facilities, such as gas pumps, air compressors,
and vacuum cleaning stations, the service area is the area where the vehicles
are parked during the service or operation.
   (C)   Setbacks and landscaping.
      (1)   Service areas and stacking lanes on parcels abutting residential
zoning districts must be set back at least 50 feet and landscaped in accordance
with the landscape buffer requirements of §
155-12.70.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5154.jpg]
 
   (D)   Stacking lanes. These regulations help ensure that there is adequate
on-site maneuvering and circulation areas, that stacking vehicles do not impede
traffic on abutting streets and that stacking lanes will not have nuisance
impacts on nearby residential uses.
      (1)   All drive-through facilities must provide at least four stacking
spaces for vehicles at the pick-up or teller window and at least four spaces
from the order box. Each stacking space must be at least 20 feet in length.
      (2)   A stacking lane is not required for accessory facilities where
vehicles do not routinely queue up while waiting for the service. Examples are
window washing, air compressor and vacuum cleaning stations.
      (3)   Stacking lanes must be designed and laid out in accordance with all
applicable ordinance requirements and engineering standards and specifications.
      (4)   All stacking lanes must be clearly identified, through such means
as striping, landscaping, pavement design and signs. Such identification must
comply with all applicable ordinance requirements and engineering standards and
specifications.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5156.jpg]
 
   (E)   Noise. Speakers associated with drive-through facilities must be
located and designed to minimize noise levels on nearby uses. Sound attenuation
walls, landscaping or other mitigation measures may be required to ensure that
the facility will not have adverse noise-related impacts on nearby residential
uses.
   (F)   Site plans. Site plans must show the location of drive-through windows
and associated facilities (for example: communications systems and access
aisles), as well as adjacent residential uses.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.120 CROSS-ACCESS.
   (A)   Description and purpose. Cross-access refers to providing vehicular
access between two or more contiguous sites so that motorists and pedestrians
are not required to reenter the public road system to gain access to an
abutting site. Cross-access between abutting properties reduces vehicular
conflicts between motorists on the street and motorists entering and leaving
driveways. Reduced traffic conflicts result in fewer accidents and improved
traffic flow on the public road network.
   (B)   Requirements. Vehicular and/or pedestrian access between abutting
parcels may be required in accordance with all applicable county requirements.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-11.130 OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Required.
      (1)   Off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas must be provided for
any new proposed public/ civic, commercial or industrial use or building
expansion that would result in a building with a floor area of 20,000 square
feet or more.
      (2)   Off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas must be provided for
any new proposed residential use or building expansion that would result in
project containing 50 or more dwelling units.
   (B)   Plans required. Off-street loading plans must be submitted with site
plans, building permits and zoning certificates involving any use required or
proposing to provide off-street loading facilities. Plans must accurately
designate the required or proposed off-street loading spaces, dimensions and
clearance, and access to the loading spaces. Plans for the design of loading
areas are subject to approval by the county.
   (C)   Location and design. The following location and design regulations
apply to all off-street loading facilities regardless of whether they are
required to be provided by this zoning ordinance.
      (1)   Required off-street loading facilities must be located on the same
lot as the use served.
      (2)   All loading areas adjacent to residential zoning districts must be
screened from view of the residential zoning district in accordance with the
ground-mounted equipment screening standards of §
155-12.80(A)(1).
      (3)   No loading spaces may be located within 30 feet of the nearest
point of intersection of any two streets.
      (4)   Loading spaces may not be located in a required street setback.
      (5)   Loading areas and access drives must be paved and maintained with
concrete, asphalt, or similar material of sufficient thickness and consistency
to support anticipated traffic volumes and weights unless otherwise approved by
the county engineer.
      (6)   Each required off-street loading berth must be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement, and are subject to approval by the
Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-12 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
§ 155-12.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The landscaping and screening regulations of this section
establish minimum requirements for landscaping and screening. The regulations
are intended to advance the general purposes of this ordinance and specifically
to:
      (1)   Enhance quality of life for residents and visitors;
      (2)   Protect property values;
      (3)   Enhance the quality and appearance of new development;
      (4)   Mitigate possible adverse impacts of higher intensity land uses
abutting lower intensity land uses;
      (5)   Promote the preservation, expansion, protection and proper
maintenance of landscaping, including the wise use of water resources;
      (6)   Improve air quality;
      (7)   Protect water quality and reduce the negative impacts of stormwater
runoff by reducing impervious surface area and providing vegetated areas that
filter and retain greater amounts of stormwater on site;
      (8)   Moderate heat by providing shade;
      (9)   Reduce the impacts of noise and glare;
      (10)   Promote sustainable landscape practices including the use of non-
invasive native and regionally adaptable plants; and
      (11)   Encourage the use of landscape architects licensed in the State of
Illinois.
   (B)   Applicability. The landscaping and screening regulations of this
article apply as set forth in the individual sections. In general, the
regulations apply to new development that requires permitting or review by the
county and significant expansion of existing uses and developments.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the landscaping and
screening regulations of this article:
      (1)   Detached houses, townhouses and two-unit residential buildings,
provided that new residential subdivisions must provide landscaping in
accordance with Article 29 of the subdivision ordinance;
      (2)   Group care homes with no more than six residents;
      (3)   Public parks, forest preserves and other public open spaces, except
for parking, loading and outdoor service areas; and
      (4)   Agricultural uses, except for public parking areas associated with
such uses.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-12.20 REMOVAL OF EXISTING TREES.
   The removal of trees with a single-stem diameter breast height (DBH) of six
inches or greater must be mitigated by providing one or more replacement trees
with a total combined DBH equal to at least 125% of the total DBH of trees that
are removed. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to waive this tree
replacement requirement when it is determined that inadequate area exists for
healthy growth of replacement trees or when they determine that the removed
trees are diseased or of an undesirable species.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-12.30 GENERAL SITE LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Applicability. The general site landscaping standards of this section
apply when any of the following occurs:
      (1)   When new development occurs that will result in more than 25,000
square feet of impervious surface coverage; or
      (2)   When 25,000 square feet or more additional impervious surface
coverage is added to an existing development site.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   General site landscaping must be provided on at least 15% of the
total developed area of a lot. If less than 15% of the developed area of the
lot is available for landscaping, the applicant must provide general site
landscaping on the entire developed area of the lot that is available for
landscaping. For the purpose of this provision, "developed area" is that
portion of a property that is disturbed for development purposes including
areas covered by buildings, impervious surfaces and other areas graded or
excavated to support the development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5158.jpg]
 
      (2)    Landscaping must be provided throughout the required general site
landscape area. Such landscaping may consist of trees, shrubs, vines, flowers,
groundcover and other landscape materials or landforms provided for
environmental or aesthetic effect.
      (3)   At least one tree and four shrubs must be provided per 1,000 square
feet of required general site landscaping area. Groundcover plants may be
substituted for required shrubs at a ratio of three groundcover plants per each
required shrub.
      (4)   Landscape areas and plant material provided to meet the road
frontage landscaping requirements of §
155-12.40, the perimeter vehicular use area landscaping requirements of §
155-12.50, the interior vehicular use area landscaping requirements of §
155-12.60, the land use buffer requirements of §
155-12.70 and the screening requirements of §
155-12.80 count toward satisfying the general site landscaping requirements of
this section.
   (C)   Materials, design and maintenance. General site landscape areas are
subject to the regulations of §
155-12.90.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.40 ROAD FRONTAGE LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Applicability. The road frontage landscaping standards of this section
apply when any of the following occurs:
      (1)   When new development occurs; or
      (2)   When the gross floor area, number dwelling units or area of
impervious surface on an existing development site is expanded by more than
50%.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Road frontage landscape areas must have a minimum average depth of
at least ten feet, measured inward from the edge all road rights-of-way. The
depth of the road frontage landscape area may be averaged, but it may never be
less than five feet.
      (2)   Parking lots and paved vehicular use areas may not encroach into
required road frontage landscape areas, nor may parked vehicles encroach into
required road frontage landscape areas. Berms or swales may be located within
road frontage landscape areas.
      (3)   Required road frontage landscape areas must include at least one
deciduous canopy tree per 40 feet of road frontage. For road frontages of less
than 40 feet, a minimum of one tree is required. Required trees may be
clustered or irregularly spaced, but the maximum spacing of trees may not
exceed 60 feet on-center.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5665.jpg]
      (4)   For industrial land uses, if the immediately surrounding
development pattern does not include road frontage landscaping, the Zoning
Administrator may authorize trees and landscaping otherwise required as part of
road frontage landscaping to be located elsewhere on the site.
      (5)   Depressed bioretention areas used for landscaping and stormwater
management are strongly encouraged.
   (C)   Materials, design and maintenance. Road frontage landscape areas are
subject to the regulations of §
155-12.90.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.50 PERIMETER VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Applicability. Perimeter vehicular use area landscaping must be
provided in accordance with the standards of this section when parking stalls,
other than those provided in bus terminals, truck terminals and recreational
vehicle storage areas, are located within 100 feet of the right-of-way and when
the stalls are part of any of the following:
      (1)   The construction or installation of any new vehicular use area
containing 12 or more parking spaces or more than 4,200 square feet of area;
      (2)   The expansion of any existing vehicular use area if the expansion
would create 12 or more new parking spaces or more than 4,200 square feet of
additional paved area, in which case the requirements of this section apply
only to the expanded area; and
      (3)   The excavation and reconstruction of existing vehicular use areas
containing 12 or more parking spaces or more than 4,200 square feet of area if
such excavation and reconstruction involves more than 50% of the paved surface,
in which case the requirements of this section apply only to the portion of the
vehicular use area that is excavated and reconstructed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5162.jpg]
 
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Perimeter vehicular use area landscaping standards may be satisfied
by providing at least one of the following options abutting the vehicular use
area:
         (a)   A landscape strip with a minimum depth of ten feet that includes
a hedge, dense shrub planting, masonry wall or combination of such features
that results in a continuous visual screen to a height of at least 30 inches
above the grade of the vehicular use area along the length of the vehicular use
area frontage; or
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5164.jpg]
 
         (b)   A landscape strip with a minimum depth of 20 feet that includes
at least two trees and five shrubs per 40 feet of vehicular use area frontage.
A berm may be substituted for the trees required in this paragraph. Berms must
comply with §
155-12.90(M).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5166.jpg]
 
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve reductions in
height for vehicular use area perimeter buffers to improve sight distance at
intersections.
      (3)   Landscape areas and plant material provided to meet the road
frontage landscaping requirements of §
155-12.40 count toward satisfying the perimeter vehicular use area landscaping
requirements of this section.
      (4)   Depressed bioretention areas used for landscaping and stormwater
management are strongly encouraged.
   (C)   Materials, design and maintenance. Perimeter vehicular use area
landscaping is subject to the regulations of §
155-12.90.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.60 INTERIOR VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Applicability. The interior vehicular use area landscaping standards
of this section apply to all of the following except that they do not apply to
parking areas in bus terminals, truck terminals or recreational vehicle storage
areas:
      (1)   The construction or installation of any new vehicular use area
containing 12 or more parking spaces or more than 4,200 square feet of paved or
impervious area;
      (2)   The expansion of any existing vehicular use area if the expansion
would create 12 or more new parking spaces or more than 4,200 square feet of
additional area, in which case the requirements of this section apply only to
the expanded area; and
      (3)   The excavation and reconstruction of existing vehicular use areas
containing 12 or more parking spaces or more than 4,200 square feet of area if
such excavation and reconstruction involves the removal of more than 50% of the
paved surface, in which case the requirements of this section apply only to the
portion of the vehicular use area that is excavated and reconstructed.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Vehicular use areas. Vehicular use areas include parking spaces,
drive aisles, driveways and drive-through lanes. Vehicular use areas that are
covered by canopies or similar structures must be included when calculating
minimum interior vehicular use area landscaping requirements, but installation
of landscaping is not required beneath canopies or other structures that block
sunlight and rainfall. Parking and circulation areas located within a parking
structure are not counted as vehicular use areas for purposes of these interior
vehicular use area landscaping requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5168.jpg]
 
      (2)    Minimum interior landscape area. Landscaping must be provided
within the interior of vehicular use areas in accordance with the following
minimum ratios:
 
Size of Vehicular Use Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Interior Landscaping (pct.)
3,501-49,999                         5.0
50,000-149,999                       7.5
150,000+                             10.0
 
      (3)   Landscape islands. Interior vehicular use area landscaping must be
provided in the form of landscape islands.
         (a)   Landscape islands must have an area of at least 135 square feet
and be at least eight feet in width. Only pervious area within landscape
islands may be counted toward meeting minimum area and width requirements.
Combining landscape islands to form larger interior landscape areas is
encouraged.
         (b)   At least one deciduous canopy tree must be provided per
landscape island or per 150 square feet of landscape island, whichever results
in more trees.
         (c)   Landscape areas located outside the perimeter of the vehicular
use area may not be counted toward satisfying interior vehicular use area
landscaping requirements. Landscaped areas within the corners of the vehicular
use area may be counted up to a maximum of 200 square feet for each corner, if
at least one deciduous canopy tree is located within the area.
         (d)   Landscape islands must be dispersed so that the distance between
landscape islands is no greater than 12 parking spaces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5170.jpg]
 
         (e)   If landscape islands are combined to form larger bioretention
areas the maximum allowable distance between such bioretention landscape
islands is increased to 20 parking spaces.
         (f)   Deciduous canopy trees must be provided in interior landscape
islands at a minimum rate of one tree per 250 square feet of required interior
landscape area.
         (g)   Depressed bioretention areas used for landscaping and stormwater
management are strongly encouraged.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5172.jpg]
 
   (C)   Materials, design and maintenance. Interior vehicular use area
landscaping is subject to the regulations of §
155-12.90.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.70 LAND USE BUFFERS.
   Land use buffers are intended to mitigate the possible adverse effects
(e.g., noise, visual, lighting, and other site-related and operational impacts)
that can occur when high-intensity development occurs abutting residential
areas.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Land use buffers are required when new development occurs or new
uses are established on lots that abut a residential zoning district or lot
used for residential purposes; or
      (2)   When the gross floor area, number dwelling units or area of
impervious surface on an existing development site is expanded by more than 50%
and such site abuts a residential zoning district or lot used for residential
purposes.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Land use buffers must be provided along the entire property line of
the subject lot that abuts a lot that is zoned or used for residential
purposes.
      (2)   Any of the following three options may be used to satisfy the land
use buffer requirements of this section:
         (a)   Provide a landscaped area at least ten feet in width with at
least one shrub per five linear feet of land use buffer area, plus at least one
evergreen tree and one deciduous (shade or understory) tree per 30 linear feet
of land use buffer area. Shrubs must be at least three feet in height at time
of planting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5174.jpg]
 
         (b)   Provide a landscaped area at least ten feet in width with a
solid wall or fence with a minimum height of six feet along the interior of the
land use buffer area. At least one evergreen tree and one deciduous (shade or
understory) tree is required per 30 linear feet of fence or wall.
         (c)   Provide a landscape berm at with at least one evergreen or
deciduous (shade or understory) tree per 30 linear feet of berm. Berms must
comply with §
155-12.90(M).
      (3)   Land use buffers may be located in required building setback areas.
   (C)   Materials, design and maintenance.  Land use buffer landscaping is
subject to the regulations of §
155-12.90.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.80 SCREENING.
   (A)   Features to be screened. The following features must be screened from
view of public rights-of-way, public open spaces and from lots used or zoned
for residential purposes.
      (1)   Ground-mounted mechanical equipment. Ground-mounted mechanical
equipment over 30 inches in height may not be located within 15 feet of the
property line of a lot used or zoned for residential purposes. Ground-mounted
mechanical equipment, including non-exempt utility installations, more than 30
inches in height and located within 25 feet of a street or a lot used or zoned
for residential purposes must be screened from view by a solid fence, solid
wall, dense hedge, or combination of such features. The hedge, fence or wall
must be tall enough to screen the equipment.
      (2)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment. Roof-mounted mechanical
equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, cooling, ventilation, exhaust and
similar equipment, but not solar panels, wind energy or similar renewable
energy devices) over 30 inches in height and located within 50 feet of a lot
used or zoned for residential purposes must be screened from the lot used or
zoned for residential purposes in one of the following ways:
         (a)   A parapet along façades facing the lot used or zoned for
residential purposes that is as tall as the tallest part of the equipment;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5176.jpg]
 
         (b)   A solid screen around the equipment that is as tall as the
tallest part of the equipment, with the screen an integral part of the
building's architectural design; or
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5178.jpg]
 
         (c)   An equipment setback from roof edges facing lots used or zoned
for residential purposes that is at least three feet in depth for each one foot
of equipment height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5180.jpg]
 
      (3)   Refuse/recycling containers. Refuse/ recycling containers must be
screened from view of streets and all abutting lots with a solid wall or fence
at least six feet in height. Refuse/recycling containers may not be located in
street setbacks. These location and screening requirements do not apply to
containers used on a temporary basis.
      (4)   Outdoor storage areas. All outdoor storage of materials, supplies,
merchandise, vehicles, equipment, or other similar materials not on display for
direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate consumer or user must be screened
by a fence, wall, dense hedge, or combination of such features.
   (B)   Outdoor storage shall be screened from view of public rights-of-way,
public open spaces and all adjoining lots regardless of use or zoning as per §
155-14.100(B)(3).
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   All plant material used for screening must be at least three feet
in height at time of planting.
      (2)   Screens may be broken only as necessary to accommodate gates,
approved access drives and walkways.
   (D)   Materials, design and maintenance. Required landscaping and screening
elements are subject to the regulations of §
155-12.90.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.90 LANDSCAPE MATERIAL AND DESIGN.
   (A)   Landscaping within required landscape areas. Required landscaped areas
must be covered with biodegradable mulch, ornamental grasses, forbs, native
prairie plants, native wetland plants, grass or other perennial herbaceous or
shrub planting combinations. Landscape-grade stone or aggregate material may
also be used within landscape areas. In areas subject to erosion, erosion-
reducing blankets or reinforced mulch must be used.
   (B)   Existing trees and vegetation. Existing non-invasive, non-noxious
trees and shrubs count toward satisfying the landscaping and screening
regulations of this article if they are located within the subject area (e.g.,
existing trees within the road frontage landscape area may be used to meet
those requirements) and they comply with the plant height and size requirements
of §
155-12.90.
   (C)   Installation.
      (1)   Landscaping must be installed and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of this section and the approved landscape plan.
      (2)   Required landscaping must be installed in complete and healthy
condition before a certificate of occupancy may be issued.
   (D)   Plant selection; invasive and noxious plants prohibited in Will
County.
      (1)   Trees and plants selected for required landscape areas must be
well-suited to the microclimate and on-site soil conditions.
      (2)   Trees and plant material must comply with the specifications found
in American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI).
      (3)   Woody plants must be rated to survive in USDA Hardiness Zones 1, 2,
3, 4, or 5.
      (4)   The county finds that invasive and noxious plant species are a
public nuisance that degrade landscaped and natural areas. Invasive or noxious
plant species may not be used to meet the landscape requirements of this
article. Moreover, the planting or maintenance of invasive and noxious plant
species is prohibited. The county may require the owner of the property to
remove any invasive and noxious plant species regardless of the property
owner's roles in introducing it to the property.
      (5)   If more than 30 trees will be used, a mixture of three or more tree
species must be used.
      (6)   If more than 50 shrubs will be used, a mixture of three or more
shrub species must be used.
   (E)   Maximum plant height generally.
      (1)   Plant height is limited to a maximum of ten inches within all of
the following areas:
         (a)   Within ten feet of the public right- of-way;
         (b)   Within five feet of a lot line; and
         (c)   Within five feet of any fixed utility equipment or similar
structure or property.
      (2)   The ten-inch maximum plant height requirements of this division (E)
do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Woody plants, such as trees and shrubs;
         (b)   Plants located directly along opaque fences or walls or provided
to satisfy the requirements of this landscaping and screening article;
         (c)   Vines attached to woody plants, fences or walls;
         (d)   Areas used for scientific and educational purposes through
accredited programs;
         (e)   Areas of public open space or open space governed by a
homeowners association, land trust or within a conservation easement that is
covered under the provisions and regulations of the Subdivision Ordinance;
         (f)   Areas that contain documented state or federally listed
threatened and/or endangered species;
         (g)   Buffers associated with lakes and wetlands;
         (h)   Buffers and filter strips associated with channels, creeks,
streams, and rivers;
         (i)   Cemeteries;
         (j)   Golf courses;
         (k)   Heavily wooded property;
         (l)   Public-owned property;
         (m)   Regulatory mitigation areas; or
         (n)   Properties two and one-half acres or more in area.
   (F)   Trees.
      (1)   Deciduous. Deciduous trees used to satisfy the requirements of this
article must have a minimum caliper size of two and one-half inches (measured
six inches above the root ball) and a minimum clear stem of five feet, except
in vision clearance areas where a minimum clear stem of feet is required. Only
those deciduous trees identified on the following list with a "Y" may be used
to satisfy the landscaping and screening requirements of this article, provided
that the Zoning Administrator is authorized to permit the use of other
deciduous tree species if such trees are not invasive species or listed as
prohibited (“N”) in the following list.
Deciduous Trees            Landscaping Requirement
                                         Vehicular Use Land Use
Botanical Name Common Name Road Frontage Area          Buffer   Replacement
                                         (Interior)
Deciduous Trees                Landscaping Requirement
                                             Vehicular Use Land Use
Botanical Name   Common Name   Road Frontage Area          Buffer   Replacement
                                             (Interior)
Deciduous Canopy Trees
Acer nigrum      Black Maple   N             Y             Y        Y
Acer             Sycamore      N             N             Y        Y
pseudoplatanus   Maple
Acer miyabei     Miyabe Maple  Y             N             Y        Y
Acer rubrum      Red Maple     Y             Y             Y        Y
                 Varieties
Acer saccharum   Sugar Maple   N             N             Y        Y
Aesculus glabra  Ohio Buckeye  N             N             Y        Y
Aesculus         Horsechestnut N             N             Y        Y
hippocastanum
Carya species    Hickory       N             N             Y        Y
Celtis           Hackberry     Y             Y             Y        Y
occidentalis
Cladrastis lutea Yellowwood    N             N             Y        Y
Fagus            American      N             N             Y        Y
grandifolia      Beech
Fagus sylvatica  European      N             N             Y        Y
                 Beech
Ginkgo biloba    Ginkgo        Y             N             Y        N
(male)
Gymocladus       Kentucky      N             N             Y        Y
dioicus          Coffeetree
Juglans cinerea  Butternut     N             N             Y        Y
Liquidambar      Sweetgum      N             N             Y        Y
styraciflua
Liriodendron     Tuliptree     N             Y             Y        Y
tulipifera
Metasequoia      Dawn Redwood  N             N             Y        Y
glyptostroboides
Nyssa sylvatica  Tupelo        N             N             Y        Y
Platanus         Planetree     Y             Y             Y        Y
acerifolia
Platanus         American      Y             Y             Y        Y
occidentalis     Sycamore
Pyrus calleryana Flowering     Y             N             Y        N
                 Pear
Quercus alba     White Oak     Y             Y             Y        Y
Quercus bicolor  Swamp White   Y             Y             Y        Y
                 Oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak   N             N             Y        Y
Quercus          Hill's Oak    N             N             Y        Y
ellipsoidalis
Quercus          Shingle Oak   N             Y             Y        Y
imbricaria
Quercus          Bur Oak       Y             Y             Y        Y
macrocarpa
Quercus          Chinkapin Oak Y             Y             Y        Y
muehlenbergii
Quercus prinus   Chestnut Oak  Y             Y             Y        Y
Quercus robur    English Oak   Y             Y             Y        Y
Quercus rubra    Red Oak       Y             Y             Y        Y
Quercus velutina Black Oak     Y             Y             Y        Y
Taxodium         Bald Cypress  N             N             Y        Y
distichum
Tilia americana  American      Y             Y             Y        Y
                 Basswood
Tilia cordata    Little Leaf   Y             Y             Y        Y
                 Linden
Deciduous Understory Trees
Acer ginnala     Amur Maple    N             N             Y        Y
Amelanchier      Serviceberry  N             N             Y        Y
species
Betula           Yellow Birch  N             N             Y        Y
alleghaniensis
Betula nigra     River Birch   N             N             Y        Y
Alnus            Alder         N             N             Y        Y
Carpinus         American      N             N             Y        Y
caroliniana      Hornbeam
Cercis           Eastern       N             N             Y        Y
canadensis       Redbud
Crataegus        Hawthorn      N             N             Y        Y
species
Hammamalis       Common        N             N             Y        Y
virgineana       Witchhazel
Larix decidua    Larch         N             N             Y        Y
Malus            Crab Apple    N             N             Y        N
Magnolia species Magnolia      N             N             Y        Y
Ostrya           Hophornbeam   N             N             Y        Y
virginiana
 
      (2)   Evergreen. Evergreen trees used to satisfy the requirements of this
article must have a minimum height of five feet at time of planting. There is
no minimum caliper size for evergreen trees at time of planting. Only those
evergreen trees identified on the following list with a "Y" may be used to
satisfy the landscaping and screening requirements of this article, provided
that the Zoning Administrator is authorized to permit the use of other
evergreen tree species if such trees are not invasive species or listed as
prohibited (“N”) in the following list.
Evergreen Trees            Landscaping Requirement
                                         Vehicular Use Land Use
Botanical Name Common Name Road Frontage Area          Buffer   Replacement
                                         (interior)
Evergreen Trees               Landscaping Requirement
                                            Vehicular Use Land Use
Botanical Name Common Name    Road Frontage Area          Buffer   Replacement
                                            (interior)
Abies concolor Concolor Fir   N             N             Y        Y
Juniperus      Red Cedar      N             N             Y        Y
virginiana
Picea abies    Norway Spruce  N             N             Y        Y
Picea glauca   White Spruce   N             N             Y        Y
Picea omorika  Serbian Spruce N             N             Y        Y
Picea pungens  Colorado       N             N             Y        Y
               Spruce
Pinus nigra    Austrian Pine  N             N             Y        Y
Pinus resinosa Red Pine       N             N             Y        Y
Pinus strobus  White Pine     N             N             Y        Y
Pinus          Scotch Pine    N             N             Y        Y
sylvestris
Pseudotsuga    Douglas Fir    N             N             Y        Y
menziesii
Tsuga          Canadian       N             N             Y        Y
canadensis     Hemlock
 
   (G)   Shrubs.
      (1)   Deciduous/broadleaf. Deciduous/broadleaf shrubs used to satisfy the
requirements of this article must have a minimum height of three feet or be a
minimum five-gallon size.
      (2)   Evergreen. Evergreen shrubs used to satisfy the requirements of
this article must have a minimum width of two feet or be a minimum five-gallon
size.
      (3)   Plant list. Only those shrubs identified on the following list may
be used to satisfy the landscaping and screening requirements of this article,
provided that the Zoning Administrator is authorized to permit the use of other
shrub species if they are not invasive species or listed as prohibited (“N”) in
the following list.
Shrubs                     Landscaping Requirement
Botanical Name Common Name Road Frontage Vehicular Use Land Use Replacement
                                         Area          Buffer
Shrubs                        Landscaping Requirement
Botanical Name Common Name    Road Frontage Vehicular Use Land Use Replacement
                                            Area          Buffer
Aronia         Chokeberry     Y             Y             Y        Y
Betula pumila  Dwarf Birch    N             N             Y        Y
Cephalanthus   Buttonbush     Y             Y             Y        Y
occidentalis
Chaenolmeles   Flowering      N             N             Y        N
speciosa       Quince
Clethra        Summersweet    Y             Y             Y        Y
alnifolia
Cornus species Dogwood        N             N             Y        Y
Corylus        American       Y             Y             Y        Y
americana      Filbert
Corylus        Beaked         Y             Y             Y        Y
cornuta        Hazelnut
Cotoneaster    Cotoneaster    Y             Y             Y        Y
species
Deutzia        Deutzia        Y             Y             Y        Y
Forsythia      Forsythia      Y             Y             Y        N
Euonymus       Euonymous      Y             Y             Y        Y
species
Hamamelis      Vernal         Y             Y             Y        Y
vernalis       Witchhazel
Hydrangea      Oakleaf        Y             Y             Y        Y
quercifolia    Hydrangea
Ilex opaca     American Holly Y             Y             Y        Y
Ilex           Winterberry    Y             Y             Y        Y
verticillata
Itea virginica Sweetspire     Y             Y             Y        Y
Juniperus      Juniper        Y             Y             Y        Y
species
Lindera        Spicebush      Y             Y             Y        Y
benzoin
Myrica         Northern Bay   N             N             Y        Y
pennsylvanica  Berry
Physocarpus    Common         Y             Y             Y        Y
opulifolius    Ninebark
Potentilla     Bush           Y             Y             Y        Y
fruticosa      Cinquefoil
Rhus species   Sumac          Y             Y             Y        Y
Ribes          Current        Y             Y             Y        Y
Rosa species   Rose varieties Y             Y             Y        Y
Salix discolor Pussy Willow   N             N             Y        Y
Sambucus       Elderberry     N             N             Y        Y
canadensis
Spirea species Spirea         N             N             Y        N
Symphoricarpos Snowberry      Y             Y             Y        Y
albus
Syringa        Lilac          N             N             Y        N
species
Taxus species  Yew            N             N             Y        N
Thuja species  Arborvitae     N             N             Y        N
Viburnum       Viburnum       Y             Y             Y        Y
species
 
   (H)   Groundcover plants. Groundcover plants are deciduous or evergreen
plants that grow low and spread horizontally, not including turf. Groundcover
plants used to satisfy the requirements of this article must be at least one-
gallon size.
   (I)   Mulch. All required trees and shrubs must be located within a
(biodegradable) mulched area and be separated from turf by a minimum distance
of five feet.
   (J)   Fences and walls. All fences and walls are subject to the regulations
of §
155-14.90 and all other applicable regulations. Chain-link or other open wire
fences may not be used to satisfy any of the requirements of this article
unless improved with slats.
   (K)   Curbs and vehicle barriers. Landscaped areas in or abutting vehicular
use areas must be protected by concrete curbing, anchored wheel stops, or other
durable barriers approved by the Zoning Administrator. Wood timbers that are
not part of a structural retaining wall may not be used to meet this
requirement. Alternative barrier designs that provide improved infiltration or
storage of stormwater are encouraged. Curbs protecting landscape islands within
vehicular use areas may be designed to allow stormwater runoff to pass through
them. Curbs may be perforated or have gaps or breaks.
   (L)   Bioretention. When landscape islands are used for bioretention the
ponding area should be six inches to 18 inches in depth and planted with salt-
tolerant native wildflowers/forbs and grasses suited to the micro-hydrology of
the bioretention area.
   (M)   Berms. Berms used to satisfy the requirements of this article must
consist of a mound or bank of formed earth at least 30 inches in height, a
slope not exceeding one foot of vertical rise for each three feet of horizontal
run, with a five-foot wide (minimum) plantable area on top and adequate ground
cover on side slopes to prevent erosion.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5182.jpg]
 
   (N)   Intersection vision clearance. Plantings and landscape material, other
than trees, located within the vision clearance area established by §
155-14.80 within a sight triangle may not exceed a height of 30 inches. Trees
within the required vision clearance area must have all branches trimmed to
provide clear vision for a vertical height of at least eight feet above the
highest adjacent roadway or driveway surface. Evergreen trees are not permitted
within required vision clearance areas.
   (O)   Fire hydrants and utilities. Landscaping must be placed to allow full
access to fire hydrants and utility systems. A minimum five-foot clear space
must be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants and from any
access point to a utility system (e.g., water shutoff valve box, sanitary/storm
sewer manhole).
   (P)   Water conservation. To promote resource- efficient landscaping for the
conservation of water and other natural resources, the following principles and
practices are encouraged:
      (1)   Practical turf areas;
      (2)   Use of water-conserving plant material;
      (3)   Grouping of plants with similar water requirements;
      (4)   Installation of pervious paving to encourage groundwater recharge
and reuse, and to discourage run-off;
      (5)    Rainwater harvesting techniques;
      (6)   Use of mulches;
      (7)   Use of soil amendments based on soil analysis; and
      (8)   Use of reclaimed water.
   (Q)   Maintenance. It is the responsibility of the property owner to
maintain required landscaping in accordance with an approved maintenance plan.
The maintenance plan must include, at a minimum, methods for providing the
following:
      (1)   Necessary irrigation,
      (2)   Integrated pest management,
      (3)   Fertilization,
      (4)   Tree care and pruning,
      (5)   Replacement of lost vegetation, and
      (6)   Weed management.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-12.100 LANDSCAPE PLAN.
   A landscape plan must be submitted at the time of site development permit
review. If a site development permit is not required, the landscape plan must
be submitted with the building permit application. The landscape plan must have
a minimum scale of 1" = 50' and include at least the following information:
   (A)   Location, species, and size of existing trees with a DBH of six inches
or greater that are proposed to be removed and the location, species and size
of replacement trees.
   (B)   Location of trees and vegetation proposed for use within required
landscape areas in sufficient detail for a determination that the plan conforms
with this article.
   (C)   The vehicular use areas clearly identified and dimensioned for the
purpose of determining compliance with the landscape requirements for each
vehicular use area and a tabulation in chart form of each vehicular use area
including the square footage of each vehicular use area, the square footage of
each interior landscape area, and the number of trees proposed to meet interior
and perimeter requirements.
   (D)   A plant list of proposed landscape materials showing caliper sizes,
root type (bare root, balled and burlapped, container size), height of
material, botanical and common names, type and amount of mulch, ground cover
and grasses.
   (E)   Specifications for treatment of compacted soil within required
landscape areas.
   (F)   Specifications for planting media in required landscape areas.
   (G)   The location of walls, fences, walks and other hard landscaping
materials.
   (H)   Irrigation plan or location of water outlets.
   (I)   Planting and staking details to ensure proper installation and
establishment of proposed plant materials.
   (J)   Identification of a landscape maintenance program including a
statement that all diseased, damaged, or dead material will be replaced by the
end of the following planting season, in perpetuity.
   (K)   Identification of snow storage areas including a statement that snow
will not be pushed onto interior landscape islands unless designed for and
identified on the landscape plan for snow storage.
   (L)   Other information or data determined necessary by the Zoning
Administrator, such as construction details and/or cross-sections sufficient to
resolve specific site conditions. These conditions include, but are not limited
to berms, retaining walls, screen walls, fences, or culverts to maintain
natural drainage patterns.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-12.110 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
   The landscaping and screening regulations of this article are not intended
to be arbitrary, physically impossible or economically impractical. The Zoning
Administrator is authorized to approve alternative compliance landscape plans
when the Zoning Administrator determines that one or more of the following
conditions is determined to be present:
   (A)   The site or sites involve space limitations or unusually shaped lots;
   (B)   Conditions on or adjacent to the site such as topography, soils,
vegetation or existing structures or utilities are such that full compliance is
impossible or impractical;
   (C)   Safety considerations such as intersection visibility, utility
locations, etc., make alternative compliance necessary; or
   (D)   Alternative creative landscaping applications will provide an equal or
better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and screening
regulations.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-13 SIGNS
§ 155-13.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The sign regulations of this section are intended to achieve
balance among the following differing, and at times, competing goals:
      (1)   To support the desired character of Will County, as expressed in
adopted plans, policies and regulations;
      (2)   To promote an attractive visual environment;
      (3)   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
for businesses, organizations and individuals;
      (4)   To provide a means of way-finding, thus reducing traffic confusion
and congestion;
      (5)   To provide for adequate business identification, advertising, and
communication;
      (6)   To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they
obscure one another to the detriment of the economic and social well-being of
county and its residents, property owners and visitors;
      (7)   To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing the
hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
      (8)   To differentiate among those signs that, because of their location,
may distract drivers on public streets and those that may provide information
to them while they remain in their cars but out of active traffic;
      (9)   To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public
and private property; and
      (10)   To provide broadly for the expression of individual opinions
through the use of signs on private property.
   (B)   Scope and applicability.
      (1)   All signs within unincorporated Will County are subject to the
regulations of this section and all other applicable provisions of this zoning
ordinance.
      (2)   ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq. is an act that relates to the
control of the erection and maintenance of billboards and other outdoor
advertising devices on lands adjacent to the Federal-Aid Primary System and the
National System of Interstate and Defense Highways in Illinois. Consequently,
the ordinance is applicable and enforceable only in commercially and
industrially zoned areas along these roads and highways and in all zones along
all other roads and highways in Will County.
   (C)   Content neutrality. Any sign allowed under this section may contain,
in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that
does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product,
commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or
activity, so long as the sign complies with the size, height, area and other
requirements of this article.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.20 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND SIGN CHARACTERISTICS.
   The following signs and sign characteristics are prohibited except as
otherwise expressly stated:
   (A)   Signs that obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door
opening used as a means of egress;
   (B)   Signs that interfere with an opening required for ventilation, except
that signs may cover transom windows when not in violation of building and fire
prevention codes;
   (C)   Signs, other than allowed campaign signs, special event signs and
advertising signs (see §
155-13.30(C)(3) and (C)(4) and §
155-13.60), that direct attention to a business, commodity service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises
where such sign is located or to which it is affixed;
   (D)   Signs larger than two square feet in area that are suspended by
chains, ropes, or other means designed to allow the sign to swing or move
freely;
   (E)   Signs affixed directly to a tree, pole, fence or traffic control
device;
   (F)   Signs that obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or
that may be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or
device;
   (G)   Signs that violate the vision clearance provisions of §
155-14.80;
   (H)   Signs attached to or painted on an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle
(motorized or non-motorized) located in view of the right-of-way;
   (I)   Signs attached to or painted on a licensed vehicle that is located in
view of the right-of-way when the Zoning Administrator determines that the
vehicle is parked solely for the purpose of displaying the sign to passing
motorists or pedestrians (this prohibition is not intended to apply to vehicles
regularly used for deliveries or otherwise integral to the operation of a
legally operated business on the subject property);
   (J)   Search lights and rotating beams of light, including those that
resemble emergency lights;
   (K)   Signs located in or that extend into the public right-of-way or that
project beyond property lines (this prohibition on signs in the right-of-way
does not apply to signs established by, or by order of, any governmental
agency); and
   (L)   Signs that include flashing lights, projected or moving images, moving
parts or that emit noise, unless otherwise expressly authorized by regulations
of this section.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.30 SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT SIGN PERMITS.
   Signs that comply with all regulations of this section are allowed without a
sign permit and are not counted as signs for the purpose of calculating the
number and amount of signage on a site, unless otherwise expressly stated.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, such signs may not be illuminated. All
illuminated signs allowed by this ordinance require a sign permit
   (A)   Governmental/institutional signs, flags, emblems and plaques. The
following signs are allowed without a sign permit:
      (1)   Signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency;
      (2)   Flags, emblems or insignia of any nation or political subdivision,
provided they contain no commercial message;
      (3)   Commemorative plaques and memorial signs up to six square feet in
area.
   (B)   Directional signs.
      (1)   One directional sign may be installed at each vehicle entrance and
exit. Such signs may be illuminated, but they may not exceed four square feet
in area or five feet in height. Commercial messages may comprise no more than
50% of the area of a directional sign.
      (2)   Off-street parking areas with a capacity of more than four vehicles
may display signs that do not exceed nine square feet in area or ten feet in
height. Such signs are intended to direct and inform patrons and visitors about
parking rates and rules, the location of stairways and elevators, pedestrian
routes, restrooms, telephones, and other facilities. Such signs may not be
illuminated and may not contain any commercial messages.
   (C)   Temporary signs. The following temporary signs are allowed without a
sign permit.
      (1)   Sale/lease signs. One "For Sale," "For Rent" or similar real estate
sign is allowed per street frontage. Such signs must be removed within seven
days after the sale, rental, or lease has been accomplished.
         (a)   "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs on lots containing a single-
family dwelling unit or zoned for single-family residential development are
limited to a maximum area of nine square feet per sign.
         (b)   "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs on lots containing agricultural,
multi-family, public/ quasi-public, commercial, or industrial use or that are
zoned for such use may not exceed the greater of 32 square feet or 0.25 square
feet of sign area per each linear foot of street frontage for the first 150
feet of street frontage and 0.10 square feet of sign area for each linear foot
of street frontage for street frontage in excess of 150 feet. These area
calculations must be based on the street frontage to which the sign is
oriented. No such sign may exceed 150 square feet in area.
      (2)   Construction signs. One construction sign is allowed per street
frontage during the time that construction or development activity is occurring
on the subject lot, as follows:
         (a)   Construction signs on a lot containing a single dwelling unit or
a lot zoned for single-family residential development may not exceed 24 square
feet in area.
         (b)   Construction signs on a lot containing multiple dwelling units,
public/quasi- public, commercial or industrial uses or a lot zoned for such
uses may not exceed may not exceed the greater of 32 square feet or 0.25 square
feet of sign area per each linear foot of street frontage for the first 150
feet of street frontage and 0.10 square feet of sign area for each linear foot
of street frontage for street frontage in excess of 150 feet. These area
calculations must be based on the street frontage to which the sign is
oriented. No such sign may exceed 150 square feet in area.
         (c)   Construction signs for new residential subdivisions or planned
unit developments consisting of fewer than 100 dwelling units may not exceed
100 square feet. For subdivisions or planned unit developments of more than 100
dwelling units, up to two signs totaling no more than 200 square feet are
permitted.
         (d)   Construction signs must be removed within two weeks of
completion of the construction or development.
      (3)   Campaign signs. Temporary campaign (candidate or ballot issue)
signs are allowed for a period of not more than 60 days before an election,
referendum, or similar voting event. Temporary campaign signs must be removed
no later than six days after the voting event. The total copy area for all
campaign signs allowed without a sign permit may not exceed 32 square feet per
lot and campaign signs allowed without a sign permit may not exceed six feet in
height.
      (4)   Special event (temporary) signs. Temporary signs and banners may be
allowed for on-site special events such as grand openings, festivals, special
promotions and similar events located on the site on which the sign is located.
These signs may be in place no more than 21 days per calendar year.
      (5)   Window signs. Temporary window signs are allowed when a sale of
goods or services is being conducted by a business establishment located on the
premises. Such signs are allowed in addition to all other authorized signs,
provided they do not exceed 33% of the area of the window to which they are
affixed. Temporary window signs may not exceed 64 square feet in area,
regardless of the size of the window to which it is affixed, and no
establishment may have more than 100 square feet of temporary window signs
displayed at any one time. No temporary window sign may be affixed to the
exterior of any window, wall or other exterior surface of the structure.
Temporary window signs that advertise or pertain to sales or events that have
already occurred or that are substantially tattered, discolored, frayed,
ripped, or otherwise in a state of visible disrepair are prohibited and must be
removed.
      (6)   Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations on private property
clearly incidental, customary, and commonly associated with national, local or
religious holidays are allowed, provided they are displayed for a period of not
more than 60 days for each holiday.
      (7)   Agricultural test plot signs. Signs used to mark test plot areas
within a farm field, including seed test areas are allowed without a permit.
Such signs may not exceed 32 square feet in area.
   (D)   Other signs. The following additional signs are allowed without a sign
permit and are not counted as signs for the purpose of calculating the number
and amount of signage on a site:
      (1)   Signs that are not legible from any public right-of-way or from
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel;
      (2)   Signs within completely enclosed buildings that contain no
commercial message;
      (3)   Wall signs identifying allowed home occupations, provided the sign
conforms to the regulations identified in § 155- 10.10(D), Home Occupations;
      (4)   Address signs and name plates not exceeding two square feet in
area;
      (5)   "No trespassing," "no dumping" and similar warning/security signs,
including the warning of beekeeping on premises, that do not to exceed four
square feet in area; and
      (6)   Non-illuminated awnings with no more than six square feet of sign
(copy) area on the border of the awning.
      (7)   Signs on scoreboards, fences and walls associated with sports
fields and recreation and entertainment venues if such signs are primarily
oriented and visible to participants and spectators within the venue.
      (8)   Non-illuminated murals on side and rear building facades and on
fences and walls if such murals do not contain a commercial message.
Illuminated murals and murals containing a commercial message are regulated as
signs and require a permit.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Am. Ord. 15-202, passed 7-16-2015; Ord. 18-1, passed
1-18-2018; Ord. 18-192, passed 10-23-2018; Ord. 18-241, passed 9-20-2018)
§ 155-13.40 RESIDENTIAL USES AND ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this division apply to signs
accessory to residential uses in all zoning districts and to all uses in
agricultural, residential and SP-PO zoning districts.
   (B)   Single-family and two-family. Signs accessory to single-family and
two-family residential uses are subject to the regulations of §
155-13.30, which allows real estate (for sale/for rent) signs, home occupation
signs and other sign types commonly associated with single-family and two-
family residential uses.
   (C)   Multi-family. Signs accessory to multi-family residential uses are
subject to the regulations of §
155-13.30. In addition, multi-family buildings or developments containing from
three to ten dwelling units are allowed one wall or ground sign with a maximum
area of nine square feet. Multi-family buildings or developments containing
more than ten dwelling units are allowed one or wall or ground sign with a
maximum area of 50 square feet.
   (D)   Neighborhood/subdivision identification signs. Neighborhood or
subdivision identification signs are allowed as entrance features to
neighborhoods or subdivisions. Neighborhood/ subdivision identification signs:
      (1)   Must be monument signs; and
      (2)   May not exceed eight feet in height or 40 square feet of area.
   (E)   Nonresidential uses. The following regulations apply to all
nonresidential uses allowed in residential and agricultural zoning districts,
except for home occupations. Home occupation signs are subject to the
regulations of §
155-13.30(D):
      (1)   Wall signs. Nonresidential uses may have a maximum of one wall sign
per public building entrance. Such signs may not exceed 32 square feet in area.
      (2)   Freestanding signs. Nonresidential uses may have a maximum of one
monument sign per street frontage. Allowed monument signs may not exceed 64
square feet in area or eight feet in height. All freestanding signs must be set
back at least ten feet from street rights-of-way.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-13.50 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this division apply to signs
accessory to all commercial and industrial zoning districts.
   (B)   Wall signs.
      (1)   Maximum number. A maximum of one wall sign is allowed per 100 feet
of building frontage or fraction thereof. See §
155-13.130(B) for "building frontage" calculation rules.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5186.jpg]
 
      (2)    Maximum area. Except as expressly stated in division (B)(3) of
this section, the cumulative maximum area of all allowed wall signs is
determined by multiplying the applicable maximum sign area ratio by the length
of the subject building frontage. Different maximum sign area ratios are
established for different sign types, as follows:
 
                                       Maximum Sign Area Ratio
Wall Sign Type                         (sq. ft. of sign area per foot of
                                       building frontage)
Box sign                               0.50
Screened box sign w/raised or recessed 0.75
letters
Raceway-mounted channel letter signs   1.00
Pin-mounted channel letter sign        1.25
Distinctive materials/design sign      1.50
Other (unclassified) sign              0.50
 
      (3)   Alternative maximum area.
         (a)   Regardless of the maximum wall sign area allowance calculated
pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section, the maximum area of a wall sign
may not exceed 250 square feet.
         (b)   Conversely, all allowed wall signs may be at least 16 square
feet in area, regardless of the length of the subject building frontage.
      (4)   Location. Except as otherwise expressly stated, wall signs may be
placed on any wall as long as the sign does not cover more than 20% of the area
of the wall or more than 70% of the building frontage to which it is attached.
This provision does not apply to wall signs using the alternative maximum area
allowance of division (B)(3)(b) of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5188.jpg]
 
   (C)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   When allowed. Projecting signs may be substituted for allowed wall
signs, provided that the total number of wall signs and projecting signs
combined may not exceed one per 100 feet of building frontage or fraction
thereof. See §
155-13.130(B) for "building frontage" calculation rules.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5190.jpg]
 
      (2)   Sign area calculation. In calculating the sign area of a multi-
faced projecting sign, the area of the largest sign face must be counted twice.
      (3)   Maximum projection. Projecting signs may not project more than ten
feet beyond the wall of the subject building.
      (4)   Vertical clearance. The bottom of a projecting sign must be at
least nine feet above the ground elevation beneath the sign.
   (D)   Awning and canopy signs.
      (1)   When allowed. Non-illuminated awnings with no more than six square
feet of sign (copy) area on the border of the awning may be used in addition to
wall signs. Other awning signs or canopy signs may be substituted for allowed
wall signs, provided that the total combined number of wall signs, projecting
signs, awning signs and canopy signs may not exceed one per 100 feet of
building frontage or fraction thereof. See §
155-13.130(B) for "building frontage" calculation rules.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5192.jpg]
 
      (2)   Maximum area. Letters, logos, and symbols on awning or canopy signs
are limited to a maximum area of one square foot per one foot of awning length
or 25% of the awning area, whichever is less. The total combined length of
letters, logos and symbols may not exceed 70% of awning or canopy length. In
calculating the length and area of an awning or canopy only the single longest
plane of the awning or canopy may be counted. This generally means that the
valance and sides (ends) of the awning or canopy will not be counted for
purposes of measuring length or area.
   (E)   Freestanding signs.
      (1)   Maximum number. A maximum of one freestanding sign is allowed per
lot. If a lot has more than 1,000 feet of street frontage, a maximum of two
freestanding signs are allowed.
      (2)   Maximum area. Freestanding signs are subject to the following
maximum sign area standards:
 
Freestanding Sign Type                            Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
Box sign                                          60
Screened box sign with raised or recessed letters 120
Distinctive materials/ design sign                150
Other (unclassified) sign                         60
Dynamic display                                   See §
                                                  155-13.70(C)
 
      (3)   Maximum height. Freestanding signs may not exceed 40 feet in
height.
      (4)   Location.
         (a)   Freestanding signs must be set back at least ten feet from all
public rights-of-way and from the back of curb or outer edge of all drive-ways.
         (b)   Freestanding signs must be set back at least 50 feet from all
residential zoning districts.
         (c)   Freestanding signs are subject to the vision clearance
provisions of §
155-14.80.
      (5)   Design.
         (a)   Poles or pylons used to support freestanding signs must be
covered or concealed by a decorative cover that is architecturally compatible
with the overall design of the sign and the architectural character of
buildings on the site, in terms of style, colors, and materials.
         (b)   The ground area surrounding the base of all freestanding signs
must be landscaped. The landscape area must be at least as large as the sign
area. The landscape area must include shrubs, perennial and/or annual flowers,
ornamental grasses, and/or vegetative ground cover. Landscape plans, indicating
plant materials and location must be submitted with the sign permit
application. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve alternative
landscape or base treatments if the Zoning Administrator determines that
landscaping at the base of the freestanding sign is impractical because of soil
conditions, space constraints or other factors beyond the reasonable control of
the applicant. Alternative landscape treatments may include additional
landscaping elsewhere on the site, the use of masonry materials to conceal the
base of the sign or other treatments that provide an equivalent or higher level
of visual amenity than the otherwise required sign base landscaping
requirements.
      (6)   Address. All freestanding signs must include the street address
(number) of the subject property. Street address numbers will not be counted as
part of the sign's area.
   (F)   Multi-tenant developments. Multi-tenant developments are subject to
the regulations of divisions (B), (C) and (E) of this section, except as
expressly modified or supplemented by the regulations of this division.
      (1)   Directory signs. In addition to other allowed signs, multi-tenant
developments may have up to one directory sign for each driveway within the
development. Directory signs may not exceed 15 square feet in area and, if
freestanding, may not exceed six feet in height. Directory signs are intended
to convey information to pedestrians and motorists within the boundaries of the
development.
      (2)   Freestanding signs on outlots and outparcels. A maximum of one
freestanding sign is allowed per outlot or outparcel in a multi-tenant
development. Freestanding signs on outlots and outparcels are subject to the
following regulations:
         (a)   Maximum area. Freestanding signs on outlots or outparcels are
subject to the following maximum sign area standards:
 
Freestanding Sign Type                            Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
Box sign                                          32
Screened box sign with raised or recessed letters 64
Distinctive materials/ design sign                96
Other (unclassified) sign                         32
 
         (b)   Maximum height. Freestanding signs on outlots or outparcels may
not exceed 16 feet in height.
         (c)   Location.
            1.   Freestanding signs must be set back at least ten feet from all
public rights-of-way and from the back of curb or outer edge of all driveways.
            2.   Freestanding signs must be set back at least 50 feet from all
residential zoning districts.
            3.   Freestanding signs are subject to the vision clearance
provisions of §
155-14.80.
         (d)   Design.
            1.   Poles or pylons used to support freestanding signs on outlots
or outparcels must be covered or concealed by a decorative cover that is
architecturally compatible with the overall design of the sign and the
architectural character of buildings on the site, in terms of style, colors,
and materials.
            2.   The ground area surrounding the base of all freestanding signs
on outlots or outparcels must be landscaped. The landscape area must be at
least as large as the sign area. The landscape area must include shrubs,
perennial and/or annual flowers, ornamental grasses, and/or vegetative ground
cover. Landscape plans, indicating plant materials and location must be
submitted with the sign permit application. The Zoning Administrator is
authorized to approve alternative landscape or base treatments if the Zoning
Administrator determines that landscaping at the base of the freestanding sign
is impractical because of soil conditions, space constraints or other factors
beyond the reasonable control of the applicant. Alternative landscape
treatments may include additional landscaping elsewhere on the site, the use of
masonry materials to conceal the base of the sign or other treatments that
provide an equivalent or higher level of visual amenity than the otherwise
required sign base landscaping requirements.
      (3)   Master sign plans. Master sign plans are required for multi-tenant
developments in accordance with §
155-13.80.
   (G)   Menu board signs. Menu board signs accessory to allowed drive-through
uses are permitted in addition to other allowed signs, as follows:
      (1)   Number and dimensions. One primary menu board not to exceed 36
square feet in area or eight feet in height is allowed per order station up to
a maximum of two primary menu boards. One secondary menu board not to exceed 15
square feet in area or six feet in height is allowed.
      (2)   Residential separation. Menu board signs must be set back at least
75 feet from residential zoning districts.
      (3)   Visibility. Menu board signs are intended to convey information to
motorists within the boundaries of the development and therefore may not be
located or oriented to be visible from off site.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-13.60 ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   Advertising signs are subject to the regulations of this subsection.
   (A)   Where allowed. Advertising signs are allowed only in the C-4, I-1, I-
2 and I-3 districts and only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the
special permit use procedures of §
155-16.40.
   (B)   Area. Advertising signs may not exceed the following maximum area
requirements for signs readable and intended to be viewed from the following
types of highways and streets:
 
Highway/Street Type         Maximum Area (sq. ft.)
Interstate Highway          700
Federal Aid Primary Highway 378
All other streets/highways  200
 
   (C)   Lease. Whenever the applicant for a permit does not own the proposed
site, a fully executed site lease or other proof of consent to erect and
maintain an advertising sign on the site must accompany the permit application.
   (D)   State permit. If the advertising sign site is adjacent to a Federal-
Aid Primary or Interstate Highway, a county sign permit may not be issued until
the applicant provides proof that a state permit has been approved by the
Illinois Department of Transportation in accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440,
and Title 92 Part 522 of the Illinois Administrative Code.
   (E)   Spacing and separation.
      (1)   No advertising sign may be located within a 5,280-foot radius of
any other advertising sign. For purposes of interpreting this spacing
requirement advertising signs attached to the same freestanding sign structure
are not considered separate signs.
      (2)   No advertising signs are permitted within a 1,320-foot radius of
any public park of more than five acres in area, as measured from the nearest
point of the advertising sign to the nearest park property line.
      (3)   No advertising signs are permitted within a 1,320 foot radius of
any residential zoning district, as measured from the nearest point of the
advertising sign to the nearest residential zoning district.
      (4)   No advertising signs are permitted within a 1,320 foot radius of
any school, as measured from the nearest point of the advertising sign to the
nearest property line of a lot occupied by a school.
   (F)   Height. The maximum allowed height of an advertising sign is 40 feet
above curb level or four feet above the roof or top of the parapet of the
nearest building, whichever is higher.
   (G)   Setbacks. All portions of advertising signs, including their
pedestals, must be set back from the street right-of-way line (or easement line
on undedicated streets) a distance of at least 15 feet or one foot per 20
square feet of a sign face area, whichever setback distance is greater.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-13.70 DYNAMIC DISPLAYS.
   The regulations of this section govern the use of dynamic displays.
Different regulations are established for advertising signs and all other
signs.
   (A)   Advertising signs. The regulations of this division (A) apply to
dynamic display advertising signs. See division (C) of this section for
regulations governing other signs that incorporate dynamic displays.
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   There are few, if any, opportunities to establish new (static
display or dynamic display) advertising signs in unincorporated Will County
because of long-standing regulations that require advertising signs to be
separated from one another and from certain protected land uses. At the same
time, the county is extremely limited in its ability to require the removal of
existing nonconforming advertising signs. The provisions of this section
establish fair and objective regulations governing the use of dynamic displays
on advertising signs.
         (b)   Among other things, these regulations allow some advertising
signs to be converted from static to dynamic displays. Such regulations are
intended to provide an incentive for the voluntary and uncompensated removal of
nonconforming advertising signs under certain circumstances and to help reduce
the number of nonconforming signs in the county, thereby improving its overall
appearance. In doing so, these provisions are intended to advance the goals of
the Land Resource Management Plan, the overall purposes of this zoning
ordinance and specific purposes of this section.
      (2)   Where allowed.
         (a)   A new advertising sign that incorporates a dynamic display may
be established only if approved as a special use (in accordance with the
procedures of §
155-16.40), subject to compliance with all applicable advertising sign and
dynamic display regulations of this section.
         (b)   An existing, conforming advertising sign face may be converted
to incorporate a dynamic display if approved as a special use (in accordance
with the procedures of §
155-16.40), subject to compliance with all applicable advertising sign and
dynamic display regulations of this section.
         (c)   A single existing, conforming advertising sign face may be
converted to incorporate a dynamic display as of right in exchange for the
removal of at least two square feet of nonconforming advertising sign face area
for each one square foot of dynamic display sign face area without obtaining
special use approval, subject to compliance with all applicable advertising
sign and dynamic display regulations of this section.
         (d)   A single existing, nonconforming advertising sign face may be
converted to incorporate a dynamic display as of right in exchange for the
removal of at least four square feet of nonconforming advertising sign face
area for each one square foot of dynamic display sign face area without
obtaining special use approval, provided that all of the following requirements
are met:
             1.   The propose d advertis ing sign dynami c display sign face
shall not be located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district as
measured in a semicircular arc with a 300-foot radius as measured from the
dynamic display sign face. The 300-foot radius shall be measured from the
midpoint of the length of the dynamic displace sign face;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5295.jpg]
            2.   The advertising sign must be located at least one mile from
any existing dynamic display advertising sign face facing the same direction
along the same roadway;
            3.   The advertising sign must be located at least 660 feet from
another dynamic display advertising sign on an intersecting roadway; and
            4.   The dynamic display advertising sign complies with all
applicable advertising sign and dynamic display regulations of this section.
         (e)   A nonconforming advertising sign face may be converted to
incorporate a dynamic display if approved in accordance with the special use
procedures of §
155-16.40. Such conversions are subject to compliance with all applicable
advertising sign and dynamic display regulations of this section and the
"conversion" provisions of §
155-15.40(G).
         (f)   Advertising signs removed through the process of eminent domain
or other similar process whereby monetary compensation from a federal, state or
local government agency is received by the sign owner in exchange for removal
of an advertising sign, are not eligible to use the static to dynamic display
sign conversion regulations of divisions (A)(2)(c), (A)(2)(d) or (A)(2)(e) of
this section.
         (g)   For the purpose of counting the square footage of a removed sign
face area, the sign face area that is being replaced with a dynamic display
sign face cannot be counted towards fulfilling the removal requirement.
      (3)   Voluntary removal of advertising signs.
         (a)   Before issuance of a sign permit for an advertising sign that
incorporates a dynamic display, applicants who elect to remove nonconforming
advertising signs in exchange for permission to convert a static display to a
dynamic display must agree in writing to permanently remove, within 180 days
after issuance of the sign permit, the number of advertising sign faces
required to be removed pursuant to divisions (A)(2)(c) or (A)(2)(d) of this
section.
         (b)   Signs to be removed must be owned or leased by the applicant for
the dynamic display. Removal must include the complete removal of the above-
grade structure and the foundation to at least one foot below grade.
         (c)   The applicant must also agree in writing that the county may
remove the sign if the applicant does not do so within the time required, and
the application must be accompanied by a financial guarantee acceptable to the
Land Use Department to cover the county's costs of removing the signs.
         (d)   The applicant must also agree in writing that they are removing
the sign voluntarily in order to receive a dynamic display sign permit as
compensation for the removed sign and that they have no right under any law to
financial compensation for the removed sign.
         (e)   If the removed sign face is one for which an Illinois state
permit is required, the applicant must surrender the permit to the state upon
removal of the sign. The dynamic display may not be operated until proof is
provided to the county that the state permit has been surrendered.
         (f)   An owner of an advertising sign face also has the right to
remove a conforming or nonconforming sign face in a Will County municipality
that was originally permitted by Will County, provided that the advertising
sign face is located wholly within the boundaries of Will County. The new
dynamic display sign face must be installed on a sign structure that is located
in unincorporated Will County. The removal of any sign located within a
municipality must be done solely to fulfill the requirements of divisions (A)
(2)(c) or (A)(2)(d) and cannot be combined to fulfill any municipal
requirements.
         (g)   At a minimum, one advertising sign structure must be removed
within a five-mile radius of the advertising sign face that is converted to a
dynamic display to comply with divisions (A)(2)(c) or (A)(2)(d). If the
advertising sign owner does not have any sign structures within a five-mile
radius, then the radius will be increased in one-mile increments until the
closest advertising sign owned is removed. Additional sign faces may be removed
outside of the five-mile radius.
         (h)   A sign owner may remove an existing static advertising sign in
advance before applying for a dynamic display building permit. In such cases
the Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve a credit for the sign face
area removed and apply that credit towards a future dynamic display permit for
the sign owner. The sign owner must provide 30 days advance written notice to
the Land Use Department before removing the static advertising signs; nighttime
brightness levels must be verified when adjacent to a residential zoning
district. The sign owner must provide written notification including property
location, number of signs and faces (including area of sign faces, before and
after photographs of each sign structure, and date of removal to the Land Use
Department. The Land Use Department must then determine whether the
requirements for receiving credit have been met and issue a letter to the sign
owner acknowledging any sign face square footage that will be allowed to be
counted towards a future dynamic display. A removed advertising sign may not be
re-erected on the subject property without Land Use Department approval. The
credit the sign owner receives is valid for no more than two years from the
date of removal.
   (B)   Additional regulations. In addition to all other applicable
regulations of this section, advertising signs that include dynamic displays
are subject to the following additional regulations:
      (1)   If regulations governing dwell time of dynamic displays are
modified by the Illinois Department of Transportation, advertising sign owners
and operators are required to bring dynamic display advertising signs into
compliance with those dwell time regulations. In no case may dwell time be less
than ten seconds.
      (2)   If an Illinois licensed design professional determines that it is
necessary to have an advertising sign upgraded or rebuilt to accept a dynamic
display sign face, this work may be performed on the subject property only if a
dynamic display sign face is being attached to the advertising sign structure
in conformance with all the dynamic display regulations of this section. A
special use permit is not required for an advertising sign that is upgraded or
rebuilt to have a dynamic display sign face attached to it, the advertising
structure will not have to conform to the current sign regulations except the
advertising structure may not exceed the current size of the sign faces and the
overall height of the advertising sign. Any sign structure that is rebuilt must
be located on the same parcel and may not be located more than 10% of the
parcel's lineal frontage or 200 feet from the center of the existing sign
structure that is being replaced, whichever is the lesser distance.
      (3)   Dynamic display advertising signs are subject to the general
dynamic display regulations of division (D) of this section.
   (C)   Other signs. The regulations of this division (C) apply to dynamic
display in all signs except advertising signs. See division (A) of this section
for regulations governing advertising signs that incorporate dynamic displays.
      (1)   Where allowed.
         (a)   Prohibited locations. Dynamic displays are prohibited in
agricultural and residential zoning districts, except as may be approved as a
special use permit.
         (b)   Allowed locations. Dynamic displays are permitted for all
allowed uses in commercial and industrial zoning districts, subject to the
dynamic display regulations of this division. Dynamic displays may be approved
as a special use permit in agricultural and residential zoning districts.
      (2)   Maximum dynamic display area. The dynamic display portion of a sign
may not exceed 48 square feet or 50% of the total area of the sign, whichever
is less. The dynamic display element must be computed as part of the sign's
total area. The remainder of the sign may not have the capability to have
dynamic displays even if not used. Only one, contiguous dynamic display is
allowed on a sign face.
      (3)   Orientation. The dynamic display sign face shall not be located
within 300 feet of a residential structure as measured in a semicircular arc
with a 300-foot radius as measured from the dynamic display sign face. The 300-
foot radius shall be measured from the midpoint of the length of the dynamic
displace sign face.
   (D)   General regulations. The general regulations of this division (D)
apply to all dynamic displays, whether incorporated in advertising signs or in
other signs.
      (1)   The images and messages displayed on a dynamic display must have a
minimum dwell time of at least ten seconds and may not contain any movement,
animation, audio, video, pyrotechnics or other special effects.
      (2)   The transition or change from one message to another must occur in
one second or less and involve no animation or special effects.
      (3)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in and of
themselves within the required dwell time.
      (4)   Dynamic displays must be equipped with a default mechanism that
freezes the display in one position or presents a static or blank display if a
malfunction occurs.
      (5)   Dynamic displays may not have a brightness of such intensity or
brilliance that they impair the vision or endanger the safety and welfare of
any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle.
      (6)   Dynamic displays must be equipped with a light detector/photocell
that automatically adjusts the display's brightness according to natural
ambient light conditions.
      (7)   The maximum brightness level of a dynamic display may not exceed
5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 250 nits
between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, as those times
are determined by the National Weather Service (Actual Time). Brightness must
be measured from the brightest element of the sign's face. Before the issuance
of a sign permit, the applicant must provide written certification from the
sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set so that it
will not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter).
         (a)   The maximum nighttime brightness level, measured in nits, of a
dynamic display sign that is permitted by division (A)(2)(d) of this section
may not exceed the nighttime brightness level, measured in nits, of the sign
that is converted if the dynamic display sign is adjacent to and faces a
residential zoning district.
         (b)   For the purpose of verifying compliance with maximum brightness
level requirements, the Zoning Administrator will measure brightness levels
with the dynamic display sign set to run full white copy with a luminance meter
positioned at a location perpendicular to the sign face center. When taking the
luminance reading, the sign face must be the only subject visible in the
viewfinder.
         (c)   If the measurement is more than the maximum allowed, the
brightness level is in violation of this ordinance and must be adjusted
downward. Failure to make such adjustments may result in other available
enforcement actions to be taken by the county.
      (8)   Regulations governing dynamic displays are subject to ongoing
monitoring and future modification in the exercise of the county's police
powers. No vested right is ever created in an existing dynamic display. If
regulations governing operational aspects of dynamic displays (e.g., dwell
time, transitions, illumination/brightness, etc.,) are modified by the county,
sign owners and operators are required to bring dynamic display advertising
signs into compliance with all applicable dynamic display regulations.
      (9)   Proposals for dynamic displays must be reviewed and approved by the
Land Use Department for compliance with all applicable building, safety and
electrical codes. Applications must include appropriate documentation from an
Illinois licensed design professional of the sign structure's ability to
accommodate the dynamic display technology.
      (10)   Light trespass from any dynamic display may not cause the light
level along any residential zoning district, as measured at a height of 60
inches above grade in a plane at any angle of inclination, to exceed 0.1
footcandles above ambient light levels at the residential property line.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012: Ord. 13-265, passed 10-17-2013; Am. Res. 15-38,
passed 2-19-2015; Am. Ord. 19-51, passed 3-21-2019)
§ 155-13.80 MASTER SIGN PLANS.
   (A)   Applicability. No sign permit may be issued for a new multi-tenant
development until a master sign plan has been reviewed and approved by the
county. A master sign plan is not required for existing multi-tenant
developments except when the development is being rehabilitated or expanded and
the value of such rehabilitation or expansion exceeds three times the equalized
assessed valuation of the development (based upon information obtained from the
Will County Supervisor of Assessments or Township Assessor) for the most recent
tax year.
   (B)   Contents of master sign plans. Master sign plans must indicate the
number, location, materials, colors and dimensions of all freestanding and wall
signs in the multi-tenant development. The master sign plan must also identify
the types proposed and any other information necessary to determine whether the
proposed signs comply with the sign regulations of this article.
   (C)   Design. Master sign plans must describe and illustrate a consistent
pattern of signage in the development. All signs within the development must
have at least three of the following design elements in common:
      (1)   Common colors on the background or text;
      (2)   Common lettering style;
      (3)   Common size (e.g., a height or wall location common to each sign);
or
      (4)   Common materials.
   (D)   Sign structure color. All sign cabinets, trim caps, returns and all
sign supports such as poles and braces must be of a common color.
   (E)   Plan approval and amendments. The Zoning Administrator is authorized
to approve master sign plans and amendments to master sign plans. Amendments to
master sign plans may be approved by the Zoning Administrator only if all signs
approved under the existing master sign plan are in conformance or are brought
into conformance with the provisions of the amended master sign plan.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.90 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person proposing to erect any sign requiring a sign permit must
submit a sign permit application to the Zoning Administrator. Application for
such permit must be accompanied by detailed plans, including scaled drawings of
the proposed sign and other information deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to determine compliance with all applicable regulations.
   (B)   All freestanding signs and illuminated signs require review and
approval and the issuance of a building permit.
   (C)   Where a proposed sign includes elements of two different sign types
(e.g., box signs, raceway-mounted channel letter signs, distinctive materials/
design signs), the Zoning Administrator must determine the appropriate
classification of the sign based on the dominant characteristics of the
proposed sign.
   (D)   Where this section requires the submission of master sign plan, such
sign plan must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and
approval.
   (E)   Sign permit fees must be paid prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
      (1)   The calculation of the sign permit fee for an on-premise
freestanding sign or projecting sign is based on each sign face.
      (2)   For wall signs, only the actual copy is counted in calculating the
sign permit fee.
      (3)   The calculation of the sign permit fee for an advertising sign is
based on the gross area of each sign face. A sign permit must be obtained for
each sign face.
      (4)   An annual registration fee must be submitted by the sign owner to
the county by February 1 of each year for each sign face on an advertising sign
structure. The annual registration fee will be doubled if paid after February
1.
      (5)   In accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440, and Title 92 Part 522 of
the Illinois Administrative Code, applicants for sign permits for advertising
signs adjacent to the federal-aid primary or interstate system must provide
verification that an Illinois state permit was issued and are subject to all
applicable permits and fees required. No sign permits may be issued until such
verification is provided to the Zoning Administrator.
   (F)   If the work associated with a sign permit has not been completed
within one year of the date of the issuance of the permit, such permit will
lapse and become null and void.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.100 TEMPORARY MOBILE SIGNS.
   The use of temporary mobile signs is allowed only in commercial zoning
districts and is limited to no more than 21 days per calendar year. No more
than two temporary use permits for a temporary mobile sign may be issued for a
lot within a single calendar year.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.110 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Nonconforming signs are subject to the nonconforming sign regulations of §
155-15.60.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-13.120 UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this division describe a variety of
unlawful signs. Upon determination that a sign is unlawful, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to take any action allowed by this zoning
ordinance, the building ordinance and state law to enforce the provisions of
this article, including requiring the sign's removal. For purposes of these
provisions, sign removal means removing the entire sign and, in the case of
freestanding signs, removing all supporting structures or elements.
   (B)   Revocation of sign permit. Any sign for which a sign permit has been
revoked is unlawful.
   (C)   Signs installed without permit. Any sign installed without required
permits, including those that may be required by this zoning ordinance or the
building code is unlawful.
   (D)   Signs constructed in violation. Any sign installed in violation of
county regulations, including this zoning ordinance or the building code, is
unlawful.
   (E)   Signs in right-of-way. Except as otherwise expressly allowed, any sign
installed or placed on public property or within public rights-of-way will be
forfeited to the public and are subject to confiscation.
   (F)   Obsolete or abandoned signs.
      (1)   Any sign that advertises a business no longer conducted on the
premises will be considered abandoned and must be removed by the owner within
30 days of written notification from the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Any advertising sign that has not been used to display a message
for a period of one year or more will be considered abandoned and must be
removed at the sign owner's expense within 30 days of written notification from
the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   In all cases, the sign structure must be kept in good repair at all
times, with adequate painting and secure structure. If the provisions of this
division (F) are not met, all portions of the sign and support structures must
be brought into compliance or removed.
   (G)   Sign maintenance. All signs (including nonconforming signs) must be
maintained in safe, presentable, and good structural material condition at all
times, including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning, and other acts required for sound maintenance and appearance of the
sign. Any sign that is deemed by the county to be in violation of these
maintenance provisions or other applicable regulations of this ordinance may be
ordered to be removed by the property owner after notice has been given by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (H)   Responsibility for removal. When removal of a sign is required, both
the owner of the property on which the sign is located and the owner of the
sign, if different, are jointly and severally responsible for removal.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.130 RULES OF MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   Sign area. This section sets forth rules for measuring sign area and
other regulated dimensional features.
      (1)   Box or signs. The area of a box sign is determined based on the
outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the sign face. However,
screened box signs with raised or routed out letters, may be measured as
described in division (A)(2) below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5196.jpg]
 
      (2)   Channel (individual) letter signs. The area of a sign comprised of
individual letters or elements attached to a building wall is determined by
calculating the area of the smallest geometric figure (e.g. square, rectangle,
circle, polygon, etc.) that can be drawn around the letters and/or elements.
Signs consisting of individual letters and/or elements will be measured as one
sign when the distance between the letters and/or elements is less than the
largest dimension of the largest sign letter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5198.jpg]
 
      (3)   Multi-sided signs. Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the sign
faces of a multi-sided sign are parallel or within 30 degrees of parallel, only
one side is counted. If the sign faces are not parallel or within 30 degrees of
parallel, all sign faces are counted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5200.jpg]
 
   (B)   Building frontage. Many of the wall sign regulations of this ordinance
are based on "building frontage." The following rules govern the measurement of
building frontage.
      (1)   For buildings occupied by a single tenant or multiple tenants that
access the building via a common entrance, building frontage is the exterior
building wall (or walls) that: (1) is adjacent to a street or a parking area or
other vehicle circulation area that is accessory to and serves the subject
building and (2) contains either windows or a public building entrance. Allowed
wall sign area for a building that has two or more building frontages must be
calculated on the basis of each individual building frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5202.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5204.jpg]
 
      (2)   On buildings housing more than one tenant where each tenant has
their own outside entrance, a tenant's building frontage is the exterior
building wall (or walls) that directly abut the tenant's interior floor space
and that: (1) abuts, parallels, or is the nearest to parallel with a street or
a parking area or other vehicle circulation area that is accessory to and
serves the subject building and (2) contains either windows or a public
building entrance. A tenant that has two or more building frontages must
calculate the permitted sign area on the basis of each individual building
frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5206.jpg]
 
      (3)   Regardless of the height, number of stories, or number of tenants
in a building, building frontage will be determined by one measurement of the
horizontal length of the wall at finished grade. Building walls must be
measured along a flat, unbroken plane, regardless of the presence of recesses
or projections along the building wall.
      (4)   As an alternative to the allocation of permitted sign area on the
basis of individual building frontages, a differing allotment of sign area may
be assigned to the various tenants upon receipt and approval by the Zoning
Administrator of written authorization from the owner or authorized management
firm of the building or development. Such written authorization must be in the
form of a master sign plan that complies with the provisions of §
155-13.80.
      (5)   In no instance may the total combined sign area for all signs
exceed the maximum allowed sign area for the individual building frontages.
   (C)   Wall area. The area of a wall is calculated by multiplying the
building frontage by the building's height or 15 feet, whichever is less.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5208.jpg]
 
   (D)   Window area. The area of a window includes only the glass or glazed
elements of the window. Frames, mullions and similar features are not counted
as part of the window area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5210.jpg]
 
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-13.140 EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION.
   (A)    Externally illuminated signs may be illuminated only with stationary,
downward-cast, shielded light sources that direct light solely onto the face of
the sign. Light bulbs or light tubes, excluding neon, used for illuminating
such signs must be shielded or positioned so that they are not visible from
public rights-of-way or residential zoning districts.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5669.jpg]
 
 
Poorly designed upward-cast lighting wastes light/energy and contributes to
unwanted light pollution. All external lighting signs must be mounted on the
top of the sign and aimed downward toward the sign face. Light sources must be
shielded to prevent glare on nearby road-ways and residential property.
 
   (B)   Light trespass from any sign may not cause the light level along any
residential zoning district, as measured at a height of 60 inches above grade
in a plane at any angle of inclination, to exceed 0.1 footcandles above ambient
light levels at the residential property line.
(Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
155-14 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§ 155-14.10 (RESERVED)
§ 155-14.20 STREET FRONTAGE AND ACCESS.
   Every lot must have frontage on a public street and must be provided with
facilities for ingress and/or egress to and from that public street conforming
to all applicable requirements of the Superintendent of Highways and approved
by the road authority onto whose road or street such ingress and/or egress is
to be made.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.30 TRAFFIC STUDIES.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may require the submittal of trip generation
data for proposed developments using data from the Institute of Transportation
Engineers' publication Trip Generation.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator or any review and decision-making body
involved in the review of a development or permit application may require a
traffic study for any proposed development that generates 250 or more average
daily (week-day) trips or 100 or more peak-hour trips.
   (C)   Required traffic studies must provide adequate information to allow
the county engineer to assess the impact of the proposed development on nearby
roads and intersections, including its impacts on pedestrians and bicyclists.
   (D)   Decision-making bodies may require traffic control improvements,
including off-site access and traffic control and require the applicant to
finance and construct those traffic improvements that are directly attributable
to the proposed development.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.40 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS.
   A system of pedestrian walkways must be provided to connect each principal
building on a site with the following: adjacent public sidewalks, on-site
parking lots or parking structures, other on-site primary use buildings,
bicycle storage areas, and common outdoor use areas. The pedestrian walk-way
system must comply with all applicable county requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5212.jpg]
 
(Ord. effective 10-1- 2012)
§ 155-14.50 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Every new and existing use must provide water supply and sewage disposal
facilities conforming to standards of design and location approved by the Will
County Health Department and Illinois Department of Public Health. These
regulations may, in some cases, impose larger minimum lot area requirements
than this zoning ordinance and/or require connection to central water and
sanitary sewer facilities when such infrastructure is located nearby.
Compliance with applicable health regulations will be confirmed prior to
issuance of building permits.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.60 ACCESS ACROSS PROPERTY.
   No lot may be used for vehicle access to any other lot unless the proposed
accessway ensures perpetual access to the subject property.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.70 DIVISION OF LOTS.
   No lot may be divided into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, unless the division complies with all applicable regulations of this
zoning ordinance and the subdivision ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.80 VISION CLEARANCE.
   At the intersection of roads or at the point of ingress and egress onto
roads, no structure, parked vehicle, or plant material may obstruct a clear
path of motor vehicle drivers' vision of approaching vehicles within a
triangular square determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured
75 feet equidistant from the point of intersection with the center lines of the
roads and the points of ingress and egress. These "vision clearance" provisions
prohibit structures that obstruct a clear path of motor vehicle drivers' vision
within the sight triangle area illustrated below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5214.jpg]
 
(Ord. effective 10-1- 2012)
§ 155-14.90 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   Fences and walls up to seven feet in height are permitted in side and
rear yard areas in residential and agricultural districts.
   (B)   Fences and walls up to eight feet in height are permitted in side and
rear yard areas in commercial and industrial districts.
   (C)   Fences and walls up to four feet in height above natural grade level
are permitted in street yard areas of all zoning districts. Street yard fences
in agricultural zoning districts may be up to five feet in height.
   (D)   For double-frontage lots (in a yard from which street access is not
allowed), fences may be up to six feet in height in the rear yards.
   (E)   No permits are required for fences.
   (F)   Erecting fences in drainage easements is not recommended.
   (G)    Barbed wire, razor concertina, concertina wire fences are prohibited
in residential zoning districts and on lots abutting residential zoning
districts. Electric wire fences are prohibited in residential zoning districts
and on lots abutting residential zoning districts, except in the E-1 and E-
2 zoning districts when used for the containment of horses, farm animals, and
micro-livestock as may be authorized by §
155-10.10.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 17-257, passed 10-19-2017)
§ 155-14.100 OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Outdoor (sales) display.
      (1)   Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all outdoor
display areas in commercial and industrial districts except the following:
         (a)   The sale of food, flowers, newspapers, periodicals and similar
materials that are not left outdoors overnight; and
         (b)   Temporary sales events, such as weekend sidewalk sales (on
private sidewalks), seasonal vegetable sales, Christmas tree sales and sales of
customary holiday items. See §
155-10.20 for temporary use regulations.
      (2)   Type 1 outdoor display. Type 1 outdoor displays are areas where the
majority of items for sale to the general public are displayed outdoors, such
as garden nurseries, vehicle and equipment sales lots, mobile home sales, play
equipment sales and other similar uses. Type 1 outdoor displays are permitted
as of right in C-3, C-4 and industrial districts and may be approved by special
use permit in the C-2 district. All Type 1 outdoor displays are subject to the
following regulations:
         (a)   Location. Type 1 outdoor display areas are prohibited in drive
aisles, fire lanes, required parking spaces and required landscape areas.
         (b)   Height limitations. Individual items attached to a building wall
surface may not exceed eight feet in height. Stacked items may not exceed eight
feet in height, provided that this height limit does not apply to items stored
on racks or shelves.
      (3)   Type 2 outdoor display. Type 2 outdoor displays are areas outside
of a completely enclosed building or structure used to display goods for sale
to the general public that are subordinate to the retail establishment, such as
garden supplies, building supplies and plants. Type 2 outdoor displays are
permitted in any C or I district that permits retail sales uses, subject to the
following regulations:
         (a)   Location. Type 2 outdoor display areas are prohibited in drive
aisles, fire lanes, required parking spaces, required landscape areas, required
setbacks and within three feet of a building entrance.
         (b)   Area and height.
            1.   Outdoor display areas may not exceed 15% of the indoor floor
area of the principal use.
            2.   Individual items attached to a building wall surface may not
exceed eight feet in height. Stacked items may not exceed eight feet in height,
provided that this height limit does not apply to items stored on racks or
shelves.
   (B)   Outdoor storage. The outdoor storage regulations apply to items stored
outside of an enclosed building or structure when the items are not accessible
to the general public. Outdoor storage is subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Where allowed. Outdoor storage, unless otherwise specified, is
allowed as of right in C-4, I-1, I-2 and I-3 districts and may be approved by
special use permit in A-1, C-2 and C-3 districts.
      (2)   Location. Outdoor storage areas are prohibited in drive aisles,
fire lanes, and required parking spaces.
      (3)   Screening. Outdoor storage areas must be screened in accordance
with §
155-12.80.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 20-478, passed 12-
17-2020)
§ 155-14.110 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Applicability and exemptions. The provisions of this section apply to
all outdoor lighting except the following, which are expressly exempt:
      (1)   Public street lights;
      (2)   Single-family detached houses and agricultural uses identified as
exempt under §
155-1.50(A);
      (3)   Lighting in swimming pools and other water features governed by the
building ordinance;
      (4)   Exit signs and other exit illumination required by the building
ordinance;
      (5)   Lighting for stairs and ramps required by the building ordinance;
      (6)   Temporary holiday lighting, used fewer than 30 days in one calendar
year;
      (7)   Low-voltage landscape lighting; and
      (8)   Active outdoor recreational facilities within a public park and
schools, subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   The mounted height of outdoor lighting associated with such uses
may not exceed 60 feet.
         (b)   Lights may not be illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
         (c)   All light sources must be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover to adjacent property and abutting rights-of-way.
   (B)   Standards. Non-exempt outdoor lighting must comply with the following
standards:
      (1)   Outdoor lighting may not exceed 0.50 footcandles at any point on
the abutting property if the subject property abuts a residential zoning
district or a lot containing a residential use.
      (2)   Outdoor lighting may not exceed 1.00 footcandles at the right-of-
way line or at any point on the abutting property if the subject property abuts
a non-residential zoning district or lot containing a nonresidential use.
      (3)   All light sources must be shielded to prevent light and glare
spillover to adjacent property and abutting rights-of-way.
      (4)   Flickering lights, flashing lights, search lights and laser source
lights are prohibited.
      (5)   If a complaint is received by the county regarding any
nonconforming outdoor lighting, said nonconforming outdoor lighting shall be
brought into compliance with this ordinance no later than January 1, 2022.
   (C)   Measurements.
      (1)   Metering equipment. Lighting levels must be measured in footcandles
with a direct-reading, light meter. The meter must be read within an accuracy
of plus or minus 5%.
      (2)   Method of measurement. The meter sensor must be mounted or
maintained not more than six inches above ground level in a horizontal position
at the property line. Readings may be taken only after the cell has been
exposed long enough to provide a constant reading. Measurements must be made
after dark with the light sources in question on, then with the same sources
off. The difference between the two readings must be compared to the maximum
permitted illumination. This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and
other ambient light.
   (D)   Photometric plan. To ensure compliance with this section, as part of
the submission of building permit applications to install outdoor lighting
fixtures, except for those associated with detached houses, townhouses and two-
unit residential buildings, the applicant must submit a lighting plan including
a photometric study and data on the types of lighting fixtures to be used which
is stamped and certified by a licensed professional. The photometric plan must
include all of the following unless the Zoning Administrator determines that a
competent and thorough review is possible without such information:
      (1)   Scale drawing of the site with all outdoor lighting fixture
locations identified;
      (2)   Fixture specifications indicating the type of fixture, height,
shielding, lighting type and wattage;
      (3)   Lamp type and size; and
      (4)   A point-by-point illumination array along the property lines of the
subject site. The point-by-point array must identify illumination levels at
(minimum) ten-foot intervals along the property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5216.jpg]
 
(Ord. effective 10-1- 2012; Am. Ord. 15-168, passed 6- 18-2015; Ord. 18- 1,
passed 1-18- 2018; Am. Ord. 18-194, passed 7-19-2018)
§ 155-14.120 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT.
   See the Water Resource Ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.130 MUNICIPAL PROVISIONS.
   For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, boundary lines of incorporated
villages, cities, and municipalities are those that have been determined upon
adoption by due process of law and made a matter of record in the office of the
Will County Recorder.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-14.140 JUNK CARS.
   Inoperable automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles may not be stored for a
period exceeding seven days unless located in a zoning district that allows
auto salvage.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
155-15 NONCONFORMITIES
§ 155-15.10 GENERAL.
   (A)   Scope. The regulations of this article govern nonconformities, which
are lots, uses and structures that were lawfully established but—because of the
adoption of new or amended regulations—no longer comply with one or more
requirements of this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Intent. Occasionally, lots, uses, and structures that were lawfully
established (i.e., in compliance with all regulations in effect at the time of
their establishment) have been made nonconforming because of changes in the
zoning regulations that apply to the subject property (e.g., through zoning map
amendments or amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance). The regulations
of this article are intended to clarify the effect of such nonconforming status
and avoid confusion with "illegal" buildings and uses (those established in
violation of applicable zoning regulations). The regulations of this article
are also intended to:
      (1)   Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property for uses and activities that were lawfully established;
      (2)   Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing
buildings; and
      (3)   Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential
to adversely affect surrounding properties.
   (C)   Authority to continue. Any nonconformity that existed on the effective
date specified in §
155-1.20 or any situation that becomes nonconforming upon adoption of any
amendment to this zoning ordinance may be continued in accordance with the
regulations of this article unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (D)   Determination of nonconformity status.
      (1)   The burden of proving that a nonconformity exists (as opposed to a
violation of this zoning ordinance) rests entirely with the subject owner.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine whether
adequate proof of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject owner.
      (3)   Building permits, zoning certificates, lawfully recorded plats,
aerial photography owned by the county and other official government records
that indicate lawful establishment of the use, lot or structure constitute
conclusive evidence of nonconforming status. If such forms of conclusive
evidence are not available, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to consider
whether other forms of evidence provided by the applicant are reliable and
adequate to document nonconforming status. Common examples of evidence that may
be determined to be reliable and adequate include:
         (a)   Professional registrations or business licenses;
         (b)   Utility billing records;
         (c)   Rent records;
         (d)   Advertisements in dated publications;
         (e)   Listings in telephone or business directories; and
         (f)   Notarized affidavits affirming the date of lawful establishment
of the use, lot or structure.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator's determination of nonconforming status
must be supported by written findings. Appeals of the Zoning Administrator's
determination may be appealed in accordance with §
155-16.100.
   (E)   Repairs and maintenance.
      (1)   Nonconformities must be maintained to be safe and in good repair.
      (2)   Repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a nonconformity in
sound condition are permitted unless the work increases the extent of the
nonconformity or is otherwise expressly prohibited by this zoning ordinance.
      (3)   Nothing in this article is intended to prevent nonconformities from
being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance
with an order from a duly authorized order of a public official.
   (F)   Replacement values.
      (1)   Except as otherwise expressly stated, replacement value for all
structures is deemed to be three times the equalized assessed valuation of the
improvement (based upon information obtained from the Will County Supervisor of
Assessments or Township Assessor) for the tax year in which the loss occurred,
unless the applicant provides replacement valuation data prepared by a
certified appraiser.
      (2)   For structures eligible for agricultural exempt status under §
155-1.50(A)(1) and in instances in which valuation data is not available from
the Will County Supervisor of Assessments or Township Assessor, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to use building permit records, contractor
estimates, or other information deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be
reliable and reflective of actual replacement costs.
   (G)   Change of tenancy or ownership. Nonconforming status runs with the
land and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-15.20 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming lot is a lot that was lawfully created in
accordance with lot area and lot frontage regulations in effect at the time of
the lot's establishment but that does not comply with currently applicable lot
area or lot frontage regulations.
   (B)   Use of and building on nonconforming lots. Zoning certificates and
building permits may be issued for any principal or accessory uses and
structures allowed in the subject zoning district without bringing the
nonconforming lot into compliance with the lot area or lot frontage standards
of the subject zoning district.
   (C)   Lot and building standards.
      (1)   Development on all nonconforming lots must comply with the lot and
building standards of the subject zoning district except as expressly stated in
division (B) of this section.
      (2)   Nonconforming lots may not be adjusted in size or shape to increase
the extent of nonconformity for lot area lot frontage, setback or other
applicable lot and building standards. Lot area or shape adjustments that
decrease the extent of nonconformity are allowed.
   (D)   Merger of contiguous lots. When two or more contiguous nonconforming
lots are held in common ownership and one or more of the lots is not occupied
by a principal use, the lots will be deemed a single zoning lot and must be
used as a single lot in order to meet or come closer to meeting applicable lot
area and lot frontage requirements.
   (E)   Effect of public acquisition. If a portion of a lawfully established
lot is acquired by a public agency, the remainder of the lot is deemed to be a
conforming lot.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-15.30 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming use is a land use that was lawfully
established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of
its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the
zoning district in which the use is now located. Lawfully established uses that
do not comply with any applicable separation (or spacing) distance requirements
(e.g., those that require one land use to be located a certain minimum distance
from another land use) are also deemed nonconforming uses.
   (B)   Change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use
that is allowed in the subject zoning district. Once changed to a conforming
use, a nonconforming use may not be re-established.
   (C)   Expansion of use.
      (1)   Except as otherwise expressly stated, a nonconforming use may be
expanded into another part of the same building as that building existed on the
date that the use became nonconforming, provided that the Zoning Administrator
determines such expansion:
         (a)   Will not result in a violation of off-street parking or loading
requirements; and
         (b)   That no floor area is being added to the building to accommodate
the use expansion.
      (2)   Nonconforming open-air uses may not be expanded beyond the area
occupied by the use at the time it became nonconforming.
      (3)   Expansion for the sole purpose of complying with off-street parking
standards of this zoning ordinance is not considered expansion of a
nonconforming use.
   (D)   Remodeling and improvements. A building in which a nonconforming use
is located may be remodeled or otherwise improved as long as the remodeling or
improvements do not violate the other regulations of this article.
   (E)   Moving. A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not
increase the extent of the nonconformity. A nonconforming use may be moved to
another lot only if the use is allowed under the zoning regulations that apply
to that (relocation) lot.
   (F)   Loss of nonconforming status.
      (1)   Abandonment.
         (a)   Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, its nonconforming status
is lost and any new, replacement use must comply with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
         (b)   A nonconforming use is presumed abandoned when the use is
discontinued or ceases for a continuous period of one year or more.
         (c)   The presumption of abandonment may be rebutted upon showing, to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator, that during such period the owner
of the land or structure has been:
            1.   Maintaining the land and structure in accordance with all
applicable county requirements and did not intend to discontinue the use;
            2.   Actively and continuously marketing the land or structure for
sale or lease for that particular nonconforming use; or
            3.   Engaged in other activities that affirmatively prove there was
not intent to abandon.
         (d)   Any period of discontinued use caused by government action,
unintended fire or natural disaster will not be counted in calculating the
length of discontinuance.
         (e)   No court decreed land use will be considered to have been
abandoned due to discontinuance.
      (2)   Change to conforming use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a
conforming use, no matter how short the period of time, all nonconforming use
rights are lost and re-establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited.
      (3)   Accidental damage or destruction. When a building containing a
nonconforming use is accidentally destroyed or damaged by causes that are not
within the control of the property owner or tenant, the building may be
restored or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that
the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to
reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within 18 months
of the date of occurrence of such damage.
      (4)   Intentional destruction. When a building containing a nonconforming
use is intentionally damaged or destroyed by causes within the control of the
owner and the extent of damage or destruction is more than 50% of the
replacement cost of the structure, the use may not be reestablished except in
compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it
is located.
   (G)   Continued farming of rezoned land. The nonconforming use provisions of
this section are not intended and will not be interpreted to prohibit continued
agricultural use on vacant land that has been rezoned for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes. This provision is intended to clarify
that previously established agricultural uses may continue on property that has
been rezoned prior to the time that the property is actually developed.
   (H)   Accessory uses. No use that is accessory to a principal nonconforming
use may continue after the principal nonconforming use has ceased.
   (I)   Conversion to special use. A nonconforming use may be converted to a
special use by the granting of a special use permit, in accordance with the
special use permit procedures of §
155-16.40. This conversion may occur only when it is shown that the
nonconforming use is providing a particular service to the residents of Will
County and that the use is not detrimental to the county as a whole or to
surrounding properties.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-15.40 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming structure is any building or structure
that was lawfully established but no longer complies with the lot and building
standards of the zoning district in which it is located. Signs that do not
comply with the sign regulations of Article
155-13 are also subject to the nonconforming structure regulations of this
zoning ordinance. Structures that comply with building or setback lines
indicated on recorded final subdivision plats rather than the minimum setbacks
of the subject zoning district are considered conforming structures. Permits
may be issued for new buildings and building additions that comply with
building or setback lines indicated on recorded final subdivision plats,
subject to compliance with all other applicable regulations of this zoning
ordinance.
   (B)   Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use that is
permitted by right in the zoning district in which the structure is located. A
nonconforming structure may be used for any use classified as a special use if
such use is approved in accordance with the special use procedures of §
155-16.40.
   (C)   Swimming pools. Any swimming pool constructed on or before April 10,
2009, and not located in floodplain, wetland or any recorded easement, that
does not comply with setback and separation requirements of §
155-10.10(E) is considered a nonconforming structure.
   (D)   Alterations and expansions. Alterations, including enlargements and
expansions, are permitted if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with
all applicable lot and building standards and does not increase the extent of
the nonconformity. A building with a nonconforming street setback, for example,
may be expanded to the rear as long as the rear expansion complies with
applicable rear setback standards and all other applicable lot and building
standards. On the other hand, a multi-dwelling building that is nonconforming
with regard to density (i.e., contains more dwelling units than allowed by the
underlying zoning) may not be expanded to add additional dwelling units.
   (E)   Moving. A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to
another location only if the movement or relocation does not increase the
extent of the nonconformity. This provision is not intended to prohibit
elevation of a nonconforming structure for the purpose of floodproofing or
repair.
   (F)   Loss of nonconforming status.
      (1)   Accidental damage or destruction. If a nonconforming structure is
accidentally destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than 50% of the
replacement cost of the structure, it may not be reestablished except in
compliance with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it
is located. When a nonconforming structure is accidentally destroyed or damaged
by causes that are not within the control of the owner, the structure may be
restored or repaired, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that
the existing extent of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit to
reconstruct a destroyed or damaged structure must be obtained within 18 months
of the date of occurrence of such damage.
      (2)   Intentional damage or destruction. When a nonconforming structure
is intentionally destroyed or damaged by causes within the control of the owner
and the extent of damage or destruction is more than 50% of the replacement
cost of the structure, the use may not be reestablished except in compliance
with all regulations applicable to the zoning district in which it is located.
This provision does not apply to agriculturally exempt structures, as
identified in §
155-1.50(A).
      (3)   Damage or destruction after right-of-way acquisition. If a
structure is rendered nonconforming or made more nonconforming by a public
agency's acquisition of right-of-way and the structure is subsequently damaged
or destroyed by any means, the structure may be reestablished, provided that no
new nonconformities are created and that the existing extent of nonconformity
is not increased. A building permit to reconstruct a destroyed or damaged
structure must be obtained within 18 months of the date of occurrence of such
damage.
      (4)   Water resource ordinance. Compliance with the Water Resource
Ordinance is required for all structures, including structures that are
identified as agriculturally exempt.
   (G)   Conversion to special use. A nonconforming structure may be converted
to a special use by the granting of a special use permit, in accordance with
the special use permit procedures of §
155-16.40. This conversion may occur only when it is shown that the
nonconforming structure is providing a particular service to the residents of
Will County and that the use is not detrimental to the county as a whole or to
surrounding properties.
   (H)   Conversion of nonconforming advertising signs to dynamic displays.
Alterations, modifications or conversions of a nonconforming advertising sign
to incorporate a dynamic display are prohibited unless the advertising sign is
brought into full compliance with all applicable regulations of this zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-
18-2018)
§ 155-15.50 NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURES.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a
development—other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming
structure or nonconforming sign—that was lawfully established, in accordance
with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that no
longer complies with one or more standards of this zoning ordinance. Common
examples of nonconforming development features are off-street parking or
loading areas that contain fewer spaces than required by current standards or
otherwise do not comply with applicable regulations, and sites that do not
comply with current landscaping and screening requirements.
   (B)   General. Nonconforming development features may remain except as
otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, but the nature and extent
of nonconforming site features may not be increased except as otherwise
expressly stated in this zoning ordinance.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-15.60 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully
established but that no longer complies with applicable zoning ordinance
regulations because of the adoption or amendment of regulations after the sign
was established.
   (B)   Advertising signs. Nonconforming advertising signs may continue
subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   If an advertising sign is nonconforming by reason of restrictions
on its brightness or illumination or its use of dynamic displays, strobe or
beacon lights, the sign must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      (2)   If a nonconforming advertising sign is damaged or partially
destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of
damage, the sign must be removed or made to conform to all applicable
regulations within 90 days of the date of damage or destruction.
      (3)   If a nonconforming advertising sign is not used for advertising
purposes for a period of 180 consecutive days, the nonconforming advertising
sign is deemed to have been abandoned and must be removed. A sign that directs
attention to the sign owner's outdoor advertising business, commodity, or
service is not considered “advertising” for purposes administering and
enforcing the provisions of this paragraph.
   (C)   Other signs. The regulations of this subsection apply to all signs
except advertising signs. Such signs may continue subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   If sign is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on its
brightness or illumination or its use of dynamic displays, strobe or beacon
lights, the sign must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      (2)   A window sign that is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on
its sign area must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      (3)   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or partially destroyed to the
extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of damage, the sign
must be removed or made to conform to all applicable regulations within 90 days
of the date of the date of damage or destruction.
      (4)   If the on-premise sign is not used for advertising purposes for a
period of 180 consecutive days, the sign is deemed abandoned and must be
removed.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
155-16 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 155-16.10 COMMON PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. The "common provisions" of this section apply to all of
the procedures in this article unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (B)   Review and decision-making authority (summary table). The following
table provides a summary of the review and approval procedures of this article.
In the event of conflict between this summary table and the detailed procedures
contained elsewhere in this article, the detailed procedures govern.
                                                       Notice Requirement
Procedure Zoning        Planning & Zoning County Board (N)ewspaper
          Administrator Commission                     (D)elivered
                                                       (P)osted
                                                             Notice Requirement
Procedure       Zoning        Planning & Zoning County Board (N)ewspaper
                Administrator Commission                     (D)elivered
                                                             (P)osted
Text Amendments R             <R>               DM           N
Zoning Map      R             <R>               DM           N,D,P
Amendments
Special Use     R             <R>               DM           N,D,P
Permits
Administrative  DM                                           D
Adjustments
Variances       R             <DM>              DM[1]        N,D,P
Zoning          DM
Certificates
Appeals of
Administrative                <DM>                           N
Decisions
R = Review Body (responsible for review and recommendation)
DM = Decision-Making Body (responsible for final decision to approve or deny)
< > = Public Hearing Required
[1]   The County Board acts as the final decision-making body on all variances
denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission and appealed by the applicant, and
all wireless telecommunications facility variances are decided by County Board
after review by Planning and Zoning Commission.
 
   (C)   Applications and fees.
      (1)   Form of application.
         (a)   Applications required under this zoning ordinance must be
submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator must develop checklists of application
submittal requirements and make those checklists available to the public.
      (2)   Application filing fees. Applications must be accompanied by the
fee amount that has been established by the County Board.
      (3)   Application completeness, accuracy and sufficiency.
         (a)   An application will be considered complete and ready for
processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes
all required information and is accompanied by the required filing fee.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator must make a determination of
application completeness within seven business days of application filing.
         (c)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator must provide written notice to the applicant along with an
explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the
application will occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the
deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 60 days, the application
will be considered withdrawn.
         (d)   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the
deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next
processing cycle.
         (e)   Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the
processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-
making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of
this zoning ordinance.
         (f)   The Zoning Administrator may require that applications or plans
be revised before being placed on an agenda for possible action if the Zoning
Administrator determines that:
            1.   The application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
plan's/application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other
regulations;
            2.   The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/
application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other
regulations; or
            3.   The decision-making body does not have legal authority to
approve the application or plan.
   (D)   Public hearings (process and notices).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5219.jpg]
      (1)   Application processing cycles.
         (a)   For zoning applications for commercial solar energy facilities
(see §
155-9.245) and commercial wind energy facilities (see §
155-9.260), the Zoning Administrator shall:
            1.   Determine completeness of application.
            2.   Schedule and hold at least one public hearing in accordance
with §
155-16.10(D)(2) and §
155-16.10(D)(3) within 45 days of receipt of complete application.
            3.   Schedule and hold a County Board decision vote within 30 days
after the conclusion of the public hearing.
         (b)    For variance applications for wireless telecommunications
facilities (see §
155-9.270), the provisions of §
155-16.70(M) shall apply.
         (c)    For all other zoning applications, the Zoning Administrator,
after consulting with review and decision-making bodies, is authorized to
promulgate reasonable cycles and timelines for processing applications.
Processing cycles may establish:
            1.   Deadlines for receipt of complete applications;
            2.   Dates of regular meetings;
            3.   The scheduling of staff reviews and reports; and
            4.    Time-frames for review and decision-making.
      (2)   Public hearings.
         (a)   Interested parties and citizens must be given an opportunity to
appear and be heard at required public hearings, to present evidence and to
cross-examine witnesses, subject to reasonable rules of procedure.
         (b)    Subject to division (D)(2)(d) of this section, a public hearing
for which proper notice was given may be continued to a later date without
providing additional notice as long as the continuance is set for a specified
date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the
continuance.
         (c)   If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite
period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new
public notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing. If the
applicant requests a postponement, the applicant must pay any costs of
renotification.
         (d)   In furtherance of the intent of division (D)(2)(a) of this
section, in the sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator, with costs to be
borne by the applicant, new public hearing notice shall again be provided by
the applicant pursuant to the provisions of division (D)(3) of this section,
when the original public hearing has been continued.
      (3)   Public hearing notices.
         (a)   Newspaper notice. Whenever the provisions of this zoning
ordinance require that newspaper notice be provided, the notice must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in Will County at least 15 days
before and no more than 30 days before the public hearing.
         (b)   Delivered notice.
            1.   Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever the provisions of
this zoning ordinance require that notices be delivered to property owners, the
notices must be sent by the applicant via United States Postal Service
Certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service or hand
delivery. Notices must be deposited in the mail or delivered at least 15 days
before and no more than 30 days before the public hearing.
            2.   Addresses must be based on the latest property ownership
information available. Delivered notice is required to be provided as a
courtesy. Alleged failure of parties to receive such notice does not constitute
grounds to invalidate any action taken.
            3.   Prior to the public hearing, the applicant must provide
certified mail receipts, courier service receipts, property owner signatures or
other verification that notice was delivered in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
         (c)   Posted notice (signs). When the procedures of this zoning
ordinance require that posted notice be provided, the applicant is responsible
for posting signs provided by Zoning Administrator in accordance with the
following requirements. Failure to post signs in accordance with these
requirements constitutes grounds for deferral or denial of the application.
            1.   At least one sign must be posted per 500 linear feet of street
frontage with a minimum of one sign on each street abutting the subject
property.
            2.   Signs must be posted at least 15 days before and no more than
30 days before the public hearing.
            3.   Prior to the public hearing, the applicant must provide a
sworn certification to the Planning and Zoning Commission secretary that notice
was posted upon the subject property in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
            4.   The applicant is responsible for removing notice signs within
five days of the conclusion of the public hearing. If the applicant fails to
remove signs in accordance with these requirements, the Zoning Administrator is
authorized to have the signs removed and to bill the applicant for the cost of
removal.
            5.   The Zoning Administrator may modify the sign posting
requirements of this section when the requirements are found to be
inappropriate or ineffective in providing the intended notice to passersby.
This authority rests solely with the Zoning Administrator and not with the
applicant. Modifications may include sign content, format, size, material,
quantity, and location.
         (d)   Content of notices. All required public hearing notices must:
            1.   Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing or
date of action that is the subject of the notice;
            2.   Describe any property involved in the application by address
or by general description of the location;
            3.   Describe the general nature, scope and purpose of the
application or proposal; and
            4.   Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
   (E)   Action by review bodies and decision-making bodies.
      (1)   Review and decision-making bodies may take any action that is
consistent with:
         (a)   The regulations of this zoning ordinance;
         (b)   Any rules or by-laws that apply to the review or decision-making
body; and
         (c)   The notice that was given.
      (2)   Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to defer action or
continue a public hearing in order to receive additional information or further
deliberate.
      (3)   Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to defer action,
continue the public hearing or deny an application whenever the applicant fails
to appear for a scheduled and advertised public hearing or whenever the
applicant fails, at more than one meeting, to provide the documentation
necessary to demonstrate compliance with the notice requirements of this zoning
ordinance.
   (F)   Conditions of approval. When decision-making bodies approve
applications with conditions, the conditions must relate to a situation created
or aggravated by the proposed use or development and must be roughly
proportional to the impacts of the use or development.
   (G)   Decision-making criteria; burden of proof or persuasion. Applications
must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the
bur-den is on the applicant to show that an application complies with all
applicable review or approval criteria.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 23-70, passed 3-
16-2023)
§ 155-16.20 ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5221.jpg]
   (A)   Authority to file. Amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance may
be initiated only by the County Board or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Review and report—Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator must
prepare a report and recommendation that evaluates the proposed zoning
ordinance text amendment in light of the review criteria of §
155-16.30(G). The report must be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission before their public hearing on the proposed text amendment.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a zoning ordinance text amendment must be published
in the newspaper in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
   (D)   Hearing and recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed text
amendment. Following the close of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must act by simple majority vote to recommend that the proposed text
amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its
findings and recommendations to the County Board.
   (E)   Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission may not recommend
approval of a zoning ordinance text amendment unless it finds that the proposed
amendment is in the public interest. The Planning and Zoning Commission must
make findings based on the evidence presented to it in each specific case with
respect to the following matters:
      (1)   Whether the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment corrects an
error or inconsistency in the zoning ordinance or meets the challenge of a
changing condition; and
      (2)   Whether the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment is consistent
with adopted plans and policies of the county.
   (F)   Final action—County Board.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's findings and
recommendation, the County Board may act to approve the proposed zoning
ordinance text amendment, approve the proposed text amendment with
modifications or deny the proposed text amendment. The County Board may also
return the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further
consideration, together with a written explanation of the reasons for doing so.
      (2)   Zoning ordinance text amendments may be approved by a simple
majority vote of the entire County Board, except that in the following cases
approval of a zoning ordinance text amendment requires at least a three-fourths
majority vote of the entire County Board:
         (a)   If a written protest petition (See also division (G) of this
section) against the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment is signed and
acknowledged by at least 5% of the land owners of the county; or
         (b)   An objection to the zoning ordinance text amendment is passed by
the governing body of a zoned municipality within the county and filed in
writing with the County Clerk prior to the County Board meeting at which action
is taken on the proposed text amendment.
      (3)   If no action is taken by the County Board within six months after
receipt of the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the proposed text
amendment is deemed to have been denied.
   (G)   Protest petitions.
      (1)   A written protest petition opposing a zoning ordinance text
amendment must be submitted to the County Clerk or on the public record before
the County Board's vote, allowing sufficient time for the County Clerk to
determine the validity of the petition.
      (2)   When a written protest petition has been submitted, the protest
must be served by the protestors upon the applicant and upon the applicant's
attorney, if any, by certified mail at the applicant's and attorney's addresses
shown on the application.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-16.30 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS).
   (A)   Authority to file. Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated only
by the County Board, the Planning and Zoning Commission or by any other person,
firm, or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled
to exclusive possession, or any exclusive possessory interest that is
specifically enforceable on the property that is the subject of the proposed
zoning map amendment. Rezoning petitions may be filed by the property owner
(described above) or by the owner's authorized agent.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5223.jpg]
 
   (B)   Application filing. Complete applications for zoning map amendments
must be filed with the Zoning Administrator. A separate application must be
made for each noncontiguous parcel of land.
   (C)   Notice to Soil and Water Conservation District. Applicants requesting
a proposed zoning map amendment must furnish a copy of the application to the
Will/South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District. No hearing may proceed on
the zoning map amendment until the Soil and Water Conservation District has
submitted a written opinion on the application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission or until at least 30 days have passed from the date of receipt of
the application by the Soil and Water Conservation District, whichever occurs
first.
   (D)   Review and report—Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator must
prepare a report and recommendation that evaluates the proposed zoning map
amendment in light of the review criteria of division (G) of this section. The
report must be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission before their
public hearing on the proposed rezoning.
   (E)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a zoning map amendment must be published in the
newspaper in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
      (2)   Delivered notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a zoning map amendment must be delivered to the
subject property owner and all owners of property abutting the subject parcel,
in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3). Notice must also be delivered to the clerk of each
municipality whose corporate limits are within one and one-half miles of the
land proposed to be rezoned.
      (3)   Posted notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a zoning map amendment must be posted on the subject
property in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
   (F)   Hearing and recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed
zoning map amendment. Following the close of the hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission must act by simple majority vote to recommend that the
proposed map amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and
transmit its findings and recommendations to the County Board.
   (G)   Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission may not recommend
approval of a zoning map amendment unless it finds that the proposed amendment
is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant.
The Planning and Zoning Commission must make findings based on the evidence
presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following matters:
      (1)   Existing uses of property within the general vicinity of the
subject property.
      (2)   The zoning classification of property within the general vicinity
of the subject property.
      (3)   The suitability of the subject property for the uses allowed under
the existing zoning classification.
      (4)   The trend of development, if any, in the general vicinity of the
subject property, including changes, if any, that may have taken place since
the time the subject property was placed in its present zoning classification.
      (5)   Consistency (or inconsistency) with officially adopted plans of the
county.
      (6)   The Land Evaluation and Site Assessment (LESA) findings, computed
by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and the land use department,
based on soil conditions, soil groupings, existing and proposed land use,
surrounding zoning, availability of urban services, compatibility and impact of
the proposed use, and consistency with adopted county and municipal plans.
   (H)   Final action—County Board.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's findings and
recommendation, the County Board may act to approve the proposed zoning map
amendment, approve the proposed zoning map amendment with modifications (e.g.,
reducing the land area or recommending another zoning classification) or deny
the proposed zoning map amendment. The County Board may also return the
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration,
together with a written explanation of the reasons for doing so. 
      (2)   Zoning map amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote of
the entire County Board, except that in the following cases approval of a
zoning map amendment requires at least a three-fourths majority vote of the
entire County Board:
         (a)   If a written protest petition (see also division (I) of this
section) against the proposed zoning map amendment is signed and acknowledged
by:
            1.   The owners of 20% or more of the land area proposed to be
rezoned; or
            2.   The owners of land immediately touching or immediately across
a street, alley, or public right-of-way from at least 20% of the perimeter of
the land proposed to be rezoned.
         (b)   If the land that is the subject of the zoning map amendment lies
within one and one-half miles of the limits of a zoned municipality and an
objection to the zoning map amendment is passed by the governing body of the
zoned municipality and filed in writing with the County Clerk prior to the
County Board meeting at which action is taken on the proposed amendment.
      (3)   If no action is taken by the County Board within six months after
receipt of the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the application is
deemed to have been denied.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, if a zoning
map amendment is proposed solely to correct an error made by the county as a
result of a comprehensive rezoning, the map amendments may be passed at a
County Board meeting by a simple majority of the entire County Board.
   (I)   Protest petitions.
      (1)   A written protest petition opposing a zoning map amendment must be
submitted to the County Clerk or on the public record before the County Board's
vote, allowing sufficient time for the County Clerk to determine the validity
of the petition.
      (2)   When a written protest petition has been submitted, the protest
must be served by the protestors upon the applicant and upon the applicant's
attorney, if any, by certified mail at the applicant's and attorney's addresses
shown on the application.
   (J)   Successive applications. In the event that a rezoning application is
denied, no application may be accepted that proposes reclassification of any of
the same property for the same zoning district for 12 months from the date of
the previous Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-16.40 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Intent. The special use permit approval procedure of this section is
intended to provide a transparent, public review process for land uses that,
because of their widely varying design and operational characteristics, require
case-by-case review in order to determine whether they will be compatible with
surrounding uses and development patterns.
   (B)   Authority to file. Special use permit applications may be filed by any
person, firm, or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession, or any exclusive possessory interest that is
specifically enforceable on the property that is the subject of the proposed
special use permit. Applications may be filed by the property owner (described
above) or by the owner's authorized agent.
   (C)   Application filing. Complete applications for special use permits must
be filed with the Zoning Administrator. A separate application must be made for
each noncontiguous parcel of land.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5225.jpg]
   (D)   Notice to Soil and Water Conservation District. Applicants requesting
approval of a special use permit must furnish a copy of the application to the
Will/South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District. No hearing may proceed on
the special use permit application until the Soil and Water Conservation
District has submitted a written opinion on the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or until at least 30 days have passed from the date of
receipt of the application by the Soil and Water Conservation District,
whichever occurs first.
   (E)   Review and report—Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator must
prepare a report and recommendation that evaluates the proposed special use in
light of the standards of division (I) of this section. The report must be
transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission before their public hearing
on the proposed special use permit.
   (F)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a special use permit application must be published
in the newspaper in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
      (2)   Delivered notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a special use permit application must be delivered
to the subject property owner and all owners of property abutting the subject
parcel, in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3). Notice must also be delivered to the clerk of each
municipality whose corporate limits are within one and one-half miles of the
land that is the subject of the special use permit application.
      (3)   Posted notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a special use permit application must be posted on
the subject property in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
   (G)   Hearing and recommendation—Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on
the special use permit application.
      (2)   Following the close of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must act by simple majority vote to recommend that the proposed
special use permit be approved, approved with modifications and/or conditions,
or denied and transmit its findings and recommendations to the County Board.
   (H)   Final action—County Board.
      (1)   County Board decision process.
         (a)   For special use zoning applications for commercial solar energy
facilities (see §
155-9.245) and commercial wind energy facilities (see §
155-9.260), the County Board shall, within 30 days after the completion of the
Public Hearing, approve the request if the standards and conditions of the
zoning ordinance and the conditions imposed under state and federal statutes
and regulations are met.
         (b)   For all other special use zoning applications.
            1.   Upon receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's findings
and recommendation, the County Board may act to approve the proposed special
use permit application, approve the special use permit with conditions and/or
modifications or deny the special use permit.
            2.   The County Board may also return the application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration, together with a
written explanation of the reasons for doing so.
      (2)   The County Board is authorized to impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a special use permit as the Board
determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of division
(I) of this section, to reduce or minimize the effect of the special use upon
other properties in the area, and to better carry out the general public and
intent of this zoning ordinance.
      (3)   The County Board may act by a simple majority vote of the entire
County Board.
      (4)   If no action is taken by the County Board within six months after
receipt of the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the application is
deemed to have been denied.
   (I)   Review criteria and standards. No special use permit may be
recommended for approval or approved unless:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public's health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare.
      (2)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (3)   Establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted
in the district.
      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other necessary
facilities have been or will be provided to serve the proposed use.
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
      (6)   The special use in all other respects conforms to the applicable
regulation of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may in each instance be modified by the County Board pursuant to the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (J)   Lapse of approval.
      (1)   An approved special use permit will lapse and have no further
effect two years after it is approved by the County Board, unless:
         (a)   A building permit or site development permit has been issued (if
required);
         (b)   A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or
         (c)   The special use has been lawfully established.
      (2)   The County Board is authorized to extend the expiration period for
good cause on up to four separate occasions, by up to 180 days each. Requests
for extensions must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator before the special
use permit expires. No hearings, notices or fees are required for extensions.
      (3)   A special use permit also lapses upon revocation of a building
permit for violations of conditions of approval or upon expiration of a
building permit to carry out the work authorized by the special use permit.
      (4)   If any special use is abandoned, or is discontinued for a
continuous period of one year or more, the special use permit for such use is
void, and such use may not be reestablished unless and until a new special use
permit is obtained in accordance with the procedures of this section.
   (K)   Successive applications. In the event that a special use permit
application is denied, no application may be approved for substantially the
same use on substantially the same site for 12 months from the date of denial
by the County Board, unless the County Board determines that conditions in the
area have substantially changed.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018; Ord. 19-89, passed 4-
18-2019; Ord. 22-226, passed 9-15-2022; Ord. 23-70, passed 3-16-2023)
§ 155-16.50 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5227.jpg]
   (A)   Overview. There are two types of planned unit developments: one that
requires concurrent approval of a special use permit and subdivision plat
(because the property is being subdivided and is subject to county subdivision
regulations) and one that requires concurrent approval of a special use permit
and a development plan (because the property is not being subdivided and is
subject to county subdivision regulations).
   (B)   Approvals required. Approval of special use permits and preliminary
and final plats or development plans must occur before any building permit is
issued and before any development takes place in a PUD. Permits may be issued
for a development phase if a PUD preliminary plat or development plan has been
approved for the entire PUD and a PUD final plat or development plan has been
approved for the subject phase.
   (C)   Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is required before
filing of a PUD preliminary plat or development plan application. See Article
42 of the subdivision ordinance for information on preapplication meetings.
   (D)   Preliminary plats and development plans.
      (1)   Preliminary plats must be processed in accordance with the
preliminary plat procedures of the subdivision ordinance (See Article 43).
      (2)   Preliminary plans (for single lot PUDs and developments that are
not required to be subdivided) must be processed in a similar manner as
preliminary plats, except that the Zoning Administrator assumes the role of the
chief subdivision engineer (for administrative purposes) and the County Board
assumes the role of the plat committee. The chief subdivision engineer
continues to have authority over all engineering issues.
      (3)   Final approval of the preliminary plat or preliminary development
plan is contingent on approval of a special use permit for the PUD.
      (4)   The following information must be submitted with the preliminary
plat, unless waived by the Zoning Administrator based on a determination that
specific item of information are irrelevant to the subject application or that
a thorough and competent review of the application can be conducted without
receiving the specific information:
         (a)   Architectural plan. Preliminary architectural plans for all
principal buildings in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the
style of the development, the design of the buildings, and the number, size,
type of dwelling units, location, and height, except for single-family
structures proposed to be constructed in compliance with the applicable zoning
district structural requirements.
         (b)   Plan compliance. Demonstration that the PUD will conform with
the intent and spirit of the county comprehensive plan and the comprehensive
plans of municipalities within one and one-half miles.
         (c)   School impact analysis. Information on the student count and
financial impact on local school districts.
         (d)   Tax impact analysis. Information on the taxes to be generated by
the proposed project and the cost for the various taxing bodies to provide the
necessary services.
         (e)   Traffic study. A traffic study, in accordance with §
155-14.30.
         (f)   Economic feasibility. An economic feasibility study of the
proposed development, including information on land utilization and marketing
potential.
         (g)   Objectives. A statement of objectives to be achieved by the PUD.
This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed
development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices of the
developer.
         (h)   Character. Explanation of the character of the PUD and the
manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of
these regulations and referencing the specific public benefits that will be
provided if the PUD is approved.
         (i)   Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all
land within the project, including present tract designation according to
official records in offices of the County Recorder of Deeds. The site must be
under single ownership and/or unified control at the time of final plat
approval.
         (j)   Schedule. A development schedule indicating:
            1.   Stages in which the project will be built with emphasis on
area, density, use, and public facilities such as open space to be developed
with each stage. Overall design of each stage must be shown on the plat/plan
and through supporting graphic material.
            2.   Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
            3.   If different land use types are to be included within the PUD,
the schedule must include the mix of uses to be built in each stage.
         (k)   Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants that
will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the PUD.
         (l)   Density. Data on the density (including density bonuses) of
residential uses, including the number of dwelling units per acre, the number
of dwelling units by type, the number of buildings by type, and the number of
bedrooms in each building and dwelling unit type. The base number of units
allowed must be calculated by yield plan or yield formula in accordance with
Article 31 of the subdivision ordinance.
         (m)   Nonresidential and common open space. Information on the type
and amount of ancillary and nonresidential use, including the amount of common
open space, if applicable.
         (n)   Service facilities. Information on all service facilities and
off-street parking facilities.
   (E)   Special use permit. Special use approval for the PUD is required, in
accordance with the procedures of §
155-16.40. A (tentatively) approved preliminary plat or preliminary development
plan must be submitted as evidence before the Planning and Zoning Commission at
the required public hearing. Proposed aspects of the project that do not comply
with county regulations must also be identified at or before the hearing.
Departure from any requirement specified in this zoning ordinance may be
granted only upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
final approval by the County Board. Special use permits for PUDs may be
approved only if proposed development is found to comply with PUD regulations
of §
155-9.200.
   (F)   Improvement plans. Improvement plans for PUDs involving the
subdivision of land must be approved in accordance with Article 44 of the
subdivision ordinance. A site development permit must be obtained prior to any
construction.
   (G)   Final plat and development plan.
      (1)   Final plats must be processed in accordance with the final plat
procedures of the subdivision ordinance (see Article 45).
      (2)   Final plans (for single lot PUDS and developments that are not
required to be subdivided) must be processed in a similar manner as final
plats, except that the Zoning Administrator assumes the role of the chief
subdivision engineer (for administrative purposes) and the County Board assumes
the role of the plat committee. The chief subdivision engineer continues to
have authority over all engineering issues.
      (3)   All common open space must be conveyed to a municipal or public
corporation, or conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or entity established
for the purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the PUD, or retained
by the developer with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the
State's Attorney, verifying that the common open space will be permanently
preserved as open area. All land conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or
like entity is subject to the right of the entity to impose a legally
enforceable lien for maintenance and improvements of the common open space.
   (H)   Amendments.
      (1)   Major amendments. Major amendments may be approved only through the
procedure required for approval of the PUD. Major amendments are those that
materially alter the approved PUD, including increases in density, increases in
overall building coverage, substantial change of use or traffic circulation
pattern, reductions in off-street parking and loading spaces, increases in the
height of buildings (other than changes in roof design), reduction of proposed
open space, changes in total bedroom count, substantial changes in the
development schedule, changes in road standards, or changes in the final
governing agreements, provisions, or covenants.
      (2)   Minor amendments. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve
minor amendments that do not involve engineering issues. The chief subdivision
engineer has authority to approve minor amendments that involve engineering
issues. Minor amendments are those that are not classified as major amendments
and that do not, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator or chief
subdivision engineer, materially alter the approved PUD in a way that is likely
to result in significant impacts on surrounding property.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-16.60 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. Administrative adjustments (sometimes referred to as
"administrative variances") are intended to provide a streamlined approval
procedure for minor modifications of zoning ordinance regulations.
Administrative adjustments are further intended to:
      (1)   Allow development that is in keeping with the general purpose and
intent of zoning ordinance regulations and the established character of the
area in which it is located; and
      (2)   Provide flexibility that will help promote property owner
investment and economic development when such flexibility will not adversely
affect nearby properties or neighborhood character.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5230.jpg]
 
   (B)   Applicability; authorized administrative adjustments.
      (1)   Through the administrative adjustment procedures of this section,
the Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant relief from any numerical or
quantitative standard in this zoning ordinance by up to 10%, except the
administrative adjustment procedure may not be used to:
         (a)   Vary or modify any definition or use classification;
         (b)   Vary or modify any of the review and approval procedures;
         (c)   Vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or
requirement imposed by an authorized county decision-making body or the state
or federal government; or
         (d)   Vary or modify applicable "minimum lot area per unit" (density)
standards (Note: this provision is not intended to prohibit administrative
adjustments of minimum lot area requirements for individual lots).
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator is also authorized to approve an
administrative adjustment reducing the number of bicycle spaces required and to
modify the bicycle parking design and location requirements of §
155-11.90.
   (C)   Authority to file. Administrative adjustment applications may be filed
by any person, firm, or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession, or any exclusive possessory interest
that is specifically enforceable on the property that is the subject of the
proposed administrative adjustment. Applications may be filed by the property
owner (described above) or by the owner's authorized agent.
   (D)   Application filing. Complete applications for administrative
adjustments must be filed with the Zoning Administrator. A separate application
must be made for each noncontiguous parcel of land.
   (E)   Notice of filing/intent to approve. At least 15 days before taking
action on an administrative adjustment request, notice of application filing
and of the Zoning Administrator's authority or intent to approve the
administrative adjustment must be delivered to all owners of property abutting
the subject parcel. The notice must be provided in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3), except that in the case of an administrative adjustment, the
mailed notice must be provided by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (F)   Action by Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator must review each application for an
administrative adjustment and act to approve the application, approve the
application with conditions, deny the application or refer the application to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration as a variance.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may not take final action to approve or
deny an administrative adjustment application until at least 15 days after the
date that required notices were received. If an adjoining landowner files a
written objection with the Zoning Administrator during the 15-day period, then
the administrative adjustment may not be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Instead, it must be heard and decided as a variance, in accordance with the
variance procedures of §
155-16.70.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator's decision to approve or deny an
administrative adjustment must be based on the approval criteria and standards
of division (G) of this section and accompanied by written findings of fact.
   (G)   Review criteria and standards. The administrative adjustment may not
be approved unless the Zoning Administrator makes all of the following
findings:
      (1)   That strict compliance with the applicable requirement poses a
hardship in which there are particular difficulties; and
      (2)   Using aerial photographs, plot plans, visual inspection or other
reliable means, that the requested administrative adjustment:
         (a)   Will not have significant adverse impacts on the health, safety,
or general welfare of surrounding property owners or the general public; and
         (b)   That any adverse impacts resulting from the administrative
adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. In granting an administrative adjustment, the
Zoning Administrator may impose conditions upon the subject property that are
necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on other
property in the surrounding area, and to carry out the stated purpose and
intent of this zoning ordinance.
   (I)   Transferability. Administrative adjustment approval runs with the land
and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
   (J)   Amendments. A request for changes in conditions of approval of an
administrative adjustment must be processed as a new administrative adjustment
application, including the requirements for fees and notices.
   (K)   Lapse of approval.
      (1)   An approved administrative adjustment will lapse and have no
further effect one year after it is approved by the Zoning Administrator,
unless:
         (a)   A building permit has been issued (if required); or
         (b)   Or the use or structure has been lawfully established.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to extend the expiration
period for good cause on up to two separate occasions, by up to 180 days each.
Requests for extensions must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator before
the administrative adjustment expires. No hearings, notices or fees are
required for extensions.
      (3)   An administrative adjustment also lapses upon revocation of a
building permit for violations of conditions of approval or upon expiration of
a building permit to carry out the work authorized by the administrative
adjustment.
   (L)   Appeals. If an administrative adjustment request is denied, the
applicant may file an application for a zoning variance, in accordance with the
variance procedures of §
155-16.70.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-16.70 VARIANCES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5232.jpg]
   (A)   Intent. Zoning variances (sometimes referred to as variations) are
intended as a way to provide relief from practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships resulting from strict application of zoning ordinance requirements.
   (B)   Applicability; authorized variances. The Planning and Zoning
Commission is authorized to grant a variance to any regulation in this zoning
ordinance in accordance with the variance procedures of this section, except
that the variance procedures may not be used to:
      (1)   Permit a principal use in a zoning district that is not otherwise
allowed in that zoning district (i.e., "use variances" are prohibited);
      (2)   Waive, modify or amend any definition or use classification;
      (3)   Waive, modify or otherwise vary any of the review and approval
procedures;
      (4)   Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval
or requirement imposed by an authorized decision-making body or the state or
federal government; or
      (5)   Waive, vary or modify applicable "minimum lot area per unit"
(density) standards (Note: this provision is not intended to prohibit variances
of minimum lot area requirements for individual lots).
   (C)   Authority to file. Variance applications may be filed by any person,
firm, or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled
to exclusive possession, or any exclusive possessory interest that is
specifically enforceable on the property that is the subject of the proposed
variance. Applications may be filed by the property owner (described above) or
by the owner's authorized agent.
   (D)   Application filing. Complete applications for variances must be filed
with the Zoning Administrator. A separate application must be made for each
noncontiguous parcel of land.
   (E)   Notice to Soil and Water Conservation District. Applicants requesting
a proposed zoning variance must furnish a copy of the application to the Will/
South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District. No hearing may proceed on the
variance until the Soil and Water Conservation District has submitted a written
opinion on the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission or until at
least 30 days have passed from the date of receipt of the application by the
Soil and Water Conservation District, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing on a variance must be published in the newspaper in
accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
      (2)   Delivered notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing must be delivered to the subject property owner and all
owners of property abutting the subject parcel, in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3). Notice must also be delivered to the clerk of each
municipality whose corporate limits are within one and one-half miles of the
land that is the subject of the special use permit application.
      (3)   Posted notice. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing must be posted on the subject property in accordance
with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
   (G)   Hearing and final decision—Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing to
consider the variance request.
      (2)   Following the close of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must make its findings of fact and act to approve the requested
variance, approve the variance with modifications and/or conditions, or deny
the variance request based on the standards and review criteria of division (I)
of this section.
      (3)   Approval of a variance requires an affirmative vote of at least
four members of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (H)   Appeals.
      (1)   If a variance is not approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the County Board by filing
a written appeal with the Zoning Administrator. The appeal must be filed within
15 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission decision.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete appeal application, the Zoning
Administrator must forward the appeal to the County Board.
      (3)   The County Board may overturn the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission (i.e., approve the variance) only if approved by at least a
three-fourths majority vote of the entire County Board.
      (4)   Every variance decision must be based on the standards and review
criteria of division (I) of this section and be accompanied by written findings
of fact.
      (5)   Any decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission not appealed to
the County Board within 15 days of the date of the Planning and Zoning
Commission decision will be considered a final administrative determination and
will be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable Illinois
Statutes.
   (I)   Standards and review criteria.
      (1)   No variance may be approved unless the Planning and Zoning
Commission makes both of the following findings based upon the evidence
presented:
         (a)   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
         (b)   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      (2)   For the purpose of supplementing the two preceding standards for
approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission, must also weigh and consider the
extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been
established by the evidence presented:
         (a)   That the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the subject property results in a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
         (b)   That the conditions upon which the variance application is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
         (c)   That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         (d)   That the alleged difficulty or hardship was not created by any
person presently having an interest in the property;
         (e)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or unduly injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; and
         (f)   That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or
otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
   (J)   Transferability. Approved variances run with the land and are not
affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
   (K)   Amendments. A request for changes in conditions of approval of
variance must be processed as a variance application, including the
requirements for fees and notices.
   (L)   Lapse of approval.
      (1)   An approved variance will lapse and have no further effect one year
after it is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless:
         (a)   A building permit has been issued (if required); or
         (b)   The use or structure has been lawfully established.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to extend the
expiration period for good cause on up to two separate occasions, by up to 180
days each. Requests for extensions must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator before the variance expires. No hearings, notices or fees are
required for extensions.
      (3)   A variance also lapses upon revocation of a building permit for
violations of conditions of approval or upon expiration of a building permit to
carry out the work authorized by the variance.
   (M)   Wireless telecommunications facilities. Variances involving wireless
telecommunications facilities must be processed in accordance with the variance
procedures, as set forth in divisions (A) through (L) of this section, except
as expressly stated in this section.
      (1)   Application contents. Applications must include or be accompanied
by at least the following information:
         (a)   The legal description and address (if available) of the
premises;
         (b)   The variance sought;
         (c)   The present and proposed land use;
         (d)   The present zoning classification;
         (e)   The surrounding zoning classifications;
         (f)   The names and addresses of owners of petitioned property;
         (g)   An explanation of the need for the variance;
         (h)   A site plan of one inch = 20 feet, which shows all existing and
proposed buildings and structures on the site;
         (i)   A copy of such site plan at reproducible size not to exceed 11 x
17 inches; and
         (j)   The location of and distance to surrounding communication towers
and antennas within 0.25 miles of the proposed tower or within the carrier's
search ring.
      (2)   Public hearing notice. Regardless of any other provision in these
regulations to the contrary, notice of the hearing is only required to be
published in the newspaper, in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
      (3)   Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may conduct no more than one
public hearing to consider the application.
         (b)   The Planning and Zoning Commission must review the application,
the report of the Zoning Administrator and the public hearing testimony, and
send its findings of fact and recommendation to the County Board recommending
approval or denial of the wireless telecommunications facility variance. The
Planning and Zoning Commission's action must occur within a time-frame that
allows the County Board to make its final decision within 75 days after
submission of a complete application, as required by statute.
      (4)   Action of the County Board.
         (a)   The County Board must review the record before the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation and
findings and grant or deny the variance by a simple majority vote of the County
Board members present at the meeting.
         (b)   The County Board must make its final decision no later than 75
days after submission of a complete application. If the County Board fails to
act on the application within 75 days after submission of a complete
application, the applicant is deemed approved.
         (c)   All decisions by the County Board must be supported by written
findings of fact.
      (5)   Standards and review criteria. In making their required findings
and making recommendations and decisions, the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the County Board must consider the following factors and no other matters:
         (a)   Whether, but for the granting of a variance the service that the
telecommunications carrier seeks to enhance or provide with the proposed
facility will be less available, impaired or diminished in quality, quantity,
or scope of coverage;
         (b)   Whether the conditions upon which the application for variances
is based are unique in some respect or, if not, whether the strict application
of the regulations would result in a hardship on the telecommunications
carrier;
         (c)   Whether a substantial adverse effect on public safety will
result from some aspect of the facility's design or proposed construction, but
only if that aspect of the design or construction is modifiable by the
applicant;
         (d)   Whether there are benefits to be derived by the users of the
services to be provided or enhanced by the facility and whether public safety
and emergency response capabilities would benefit by the establishment of the
facility; and
         (e)   The extent to which the design of the proposed facility reflects
compliance with these regulations.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 155-16.80 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   No building or structure may be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, moved, or structurally altered, nor may any excavation
or grading commence without a building permit, site development permit, or
other required permit.
      (2)   No building permit or other permit pertaining to the use of land,
buildings or structures may be issued until a zoning certificate is issued by
the Zoning Administrator certifying that the activities proposed on the permit
are in compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. No zoning
certificate is required for routine maintenance or repair of buildings,
structures, or equipment.
      (3)   Any permit or zoning certificate issued in conflict with the
provisions of this zoning ordinance is void.
   (B)   Application. Every application for a building permit must also be
accompanied by an application for a zoning certificate. Zoning certificate
applications must include at least the following information:
      (1)   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
         (a)   The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
         (b)   The sizes and locations on the lot of buildings and structures
already existing, if any;
         (c)   The location and dimensions of all proposed off-street parking
and loading spaces and access drives; and
         (d)   Such other matters as the Zoning Administrator may deem
necessary to determine conformance with this zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Information describing:
         (a)   The existing and proposed use of each building and land area on
the lot;
         (b)   The number of dwelling units proposed to be accommodated; and
         (c)   Such other matters as the Zoning Administrator may deem
necessary to determine conformance with this ordinance.
      (3)   The certification and seal, when applicable, of a registered
professional architect or project engineer when any building or structure is
below the established flood protection elevation plus 0.5 feet, to show
compliance to provisions in the Water Resource Ordinance.
      (4)   Certification by the project engineer, when applicable, that the
proposed construction or development is in accordance with the site development
plan as required in the Water Resource Ordinance and that the required permit
has been filed.
      (5)   Certification by the project engineer, when applicable, that the
plans for the building permit are in compliance with compensatory storage and
detention requirements of the Water Resource Ordinance.
   (C)   Action by Zoning Administrator. Within 15 days of receipt of a
complete application for a zoning certificate, the Zoning Administrator must
act on the application. If the proposal complies with all applicable provisions
of this zoning ordinance, the zoning certificate must be issued. If the Zoning
Administrator determines that the proposal does not comply with one or more
provisions, the zoning certificate must be denied, and the Zoning Administrator
must advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. If the Zoning
Administrator fails to act within the required 15 days, the zoning certificate
will be considered denied.
   (D)   Appeals. If the Zoning Administrator denies a zoning certificate, the
applicant may appeal the action in accordance with the appeal procedures of §
155-16.100.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-16.90 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS.
   See §
155-10.20.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-16.100 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5234.jpg]
   (A)   Authority. The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized to hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged there has been an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or any
other administrative official in the administration, interpretation or
enforcement of this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Right to appeal. Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by
any person aggrieved by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official's decision or action. The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized
to make determinations about whether individuals filing appeals are "aggrieved"
by the decision or action.
   (C)   Application filing.
      (1)   Complete applications for appeals of administrative decisions must
be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within 30 days of
the date of the decision being appealed.
   (D)   Effect of filing. The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission, after the appeal
is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would
cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings will
not be stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of record based on due cause
shown.
   (E)   Record of decision. Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal,
the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official whose decision is
being appealed must transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (F)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Planning and Zoning Commission's
required public hearing must be published in the newspaper in accordance with §
155-16.10(D)(3).
   (G)   Hearing and final decision.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing on
the appeal.
      (2)   Following the close of the hearing, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must take action on the appeal. Their decision must be supported by
written findings of fact.
      (3)   In exercising the appeal power, the Planning and Zoning Commission
has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is
taken. The Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm or may, upon the
concurring vote of at least four members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify
the decision being appealed.
      (4)   In acting on the appeal the Planning and Zoning Commission must
grant to the official's decision a presumption of correctness, placing the
burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
   (H)   Review criteria. An appeal may be sustained only if the Planning and
Zoning Commission finds that the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
official erred.
   (I)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeals of the Planning and Zoning Commission's decisions may be
filed by any person aggrieved by their action. The appeal must be filed with
the Zoning Administrator within 15 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission
decision.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete appeal application, the Zoning
Administrator must forward the appeal to the County Board.
      (3)   The County Board may overturn the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission only if approved by at least a three-fourths majority vote of
the entire County Board.
      (4)   Any decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission not appealed to
the County Board within 15 days of the date of the Planning and Zoning
Commission decision will be considered a final administrative determination and
will be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable Illinois
Statutes.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-17 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155-17.10 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES.
   (A)   County Board. The County Board is responsible for establishing the
regulations and procedures of this zoning ordinance, for confirming
appointments to the Planning and Zoning Commission and carrying out those
specific decision-making duties assigned by this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   Creation and membership.
         (a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission must consist of seven members
appointed by the County Executive and confirmed by the members of the County
Board. Members receive allowances for expenses and compensation, as provided by
the County Board.
         (b)   Planning and Zoning Commission members serve, respectively, for
five years, or until their respective successors are appointed. The terms must
be staggered in accordance with state statutes.
         (c)   One of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission must be
designated by the County Executive as chairperson of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and another member must be designated as secretary, and each must
hold office until their successor is appointed. The County Executive, subject
to the approval by the County Board, has the power to remove any members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission for cause. Vacancies on the Planning and Zoning
Commission must be filled by the County Executive and confirmed by the County
Board, for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, in
the same manner provided for the original appointment of members.
      (2)   Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission is
responsible for carrying out those specific review and decision-making duties
assigned by this zoning ordinance.
      (3)   Operation. The Planning and Zoning Commission must conduct
meetings, take action and operate in accordance with its adopted by-laws, the
county code of ordinances and state law.
   (C)   Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for
carrying out those specific duties and responsibilities assigned by this zoning
ordinance and for:
      (1)   Conducting inspections of buildings, structures, and land to
determine compliance with this zoning ordinance, and notifying in writing the
person responsible for any violation found;
      (2)   Ordering the discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
or structural changes; or taking any other action authorized by statute or by
this zoning ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of
zoning ordinance provisions;
      (3)   Maintaining permanent and current records of this zoning ordinance,
including, all maps, amendments, special use permits, planned unit
developments, variances, appeals, applications, and text;
      (4)   Advising all persons seeking zoning information of the existence of
officially adopted plans;
      (5)   Providing and maintaining a source of public information relative
to all matters arising out of this zoning ordinance;
      (6)   Receiving, filing, and forwarding to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and County Board all applications for matters on which the Planning
and Zoning Commission and County Board is required to review or take action;
      (7)   Providing public information relative to matters arising out of a
comprehensive amendment;
      (8)   Reviewing all property that has been the subject of legal action,
invalidating the zoning ordinance as applied to a particular use on a specific
parcel of land and submitting information to the County Board on such matters;
      (9)   Reviewing all property that has been disconnected from a
municipality or that has come within the jurisdiction of the county as the
result of the dissolution of a municipality and submitting an amendment for
reclassification of said property to the County Board or otherwise recommending
that the property be zoned E-1;
      (10)   Initiating, directing, and reviewing, from time-to-time, a study
of the provisions of this zoning ordinance and making recommendations as such
study requires; and
      (11)   Keeping the County Board advised of zoning activities.
   (D)   County Clerk. The County Clerk is responsible for:
      (1)   Maintaining copies of this zoning ordinance and signed ordinances
for reference by the public; and
      (2)   For receiving protest petitions filed in the County Clerk's office
and forwarding them to the state's attorney for legal review and appropriate
action.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
§ 155-17.20 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Responsibility for enforcement. The Zoning Administrator is
responsible for enforcing this zoning ordinance, except as otherwise expressly
stated.
   (B)   Violations. Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this zoning
ordinance or state law, any violation of a provision of this zoning
ordinance—including but not limited to all of the following—may be subject to
the remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning ordinance.
      (1)   To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this zoning ordinance;
      (2)   To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent
with the requirements of this zoning ordinance;
      (3)   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this zoning ordinance;
      (4)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation
of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals
under this zoning ordinance without obtaining such required permits or
approvals;
      (5)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation
of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or approvals
under this zoning ordinance in any way inconsistent with any such permit or
approval or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval;
      (6)   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
zoning ordinance or any condition imposed on the permit or approval;
      (7)   To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this zoning ordinance;
      (8)   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under
this zoning ordinance; or
      (9)   To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
   (C)   Continuing violations. Each week that a violation remains uncorrected
after receiving notice of the violation from the county constitutes a separate
violation of this zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Remedies and enforcement powers. The county has all remedies and
enforcement powers allowed by law, including the following:
      (1)   Administrative adjudication. In lieu of the remedies, enforcement
powers and procedures provided in this section, the county's administrative
adjudication process may be used in enforcement of this zoning ordinance. See
Chapter 43 of the county Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Withhold permit.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator may deny or withhold permits,
certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or
improvements upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of
this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit,
certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the county.
This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the current owner
or applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator may deny or withhold all permits,
certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or
improvements owned by or being developed by a person who owns, developed or
otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning
ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval
or other authorization previously granted by the county. This enforcement
provision may be used regardless of whether the property for which the permit
or other approval is sought is the property in violation.
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator may deny or withhold temporary use
permits on any land or structure or improvements owned or being developed by a
person who owns, developed or otherwise caused a violation of a previous
temporary use permit. Enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether
the property for which the temporary use permit sought is for the property on
which the previous violation occurred.
      (3)   Permits approved with conditions. Instead of withholding or denying
a permit or other authorization, the Zoning Administrator may grant such
authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected.
      (4)   Revoke permits.
         (a)   Any permit, certificate or other form of authorization required
under this zoning ordinance may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator when the
Zoning Administrator determines:
            1.   That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or
conditions as required under terms of the permit,
            2.   That the development permit was procured by false
representation or was issued by mistake, or
            3.   That any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being
violated.
         (b)   Written notice of revocation must be served upon the owner, the
owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or
structure for which such permit was issued. If no persons can reasonably be
served with notice, the notice must be posted in a prominent location. After
delivery or posting of notice, no construction or development may proceed.
      (5)   Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the Zoning
Administrator may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which
there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of
a permit or other form of authorization issued under the zoning ordinance.
      (6)   Revoke plan or other approval. Where a violation of this zoning
ordinance involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to
which the approval of such plans was made subject, the Zoning Administrator
may, upon notice to the applicant and other known interested parties (including
any holders of building permits affected) (a) revoke the plan or other approval
or (b) condition its continuance on strict compliance with this zoning
ordinance or the provision of security to ensure that construction is completed
in compliance with approved plans, or such other conditions as the Zoning
Administrator may reasonably impose.
      (7)   Injunctive relief. The county may seek an injunction or other
equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this zoning ordinance or of
a permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted under the zoning
ordinance.
      (8)   Forfeiture and confiscation of signs on public property. Any sign
installed or placed on public property, except in compliance with the
regulations of this zoning ordinance, may be forfeited to the public and
subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies and penalties of this
section, the county has the right to recover from the sign owner or person who
placed the sign, the full costs of sign removal and disposal.
      (9)   Abatement. The county may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
      (10)   Other penalties, remedies and powers. The county may seek such
other penalties as are provided by Illinois law.
   (E)   Continuation of previous enforcement actions. Nothing in this zoning
ordinance prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions,
undertaken by the county pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Remedies cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers established
in this zoning ordinance are cumulative, and the county may exercise them in
any combination or order.
   (G)   Persons subject to penalties. The owner or tenant of any building,
structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor,
or agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or
maintains such violations may each be found guilty of a separate offense and be
subject to penalties, remedies and enforcement actions.
   (H)   Enforcement procedures.
      (1)   Non-emergency matters. In the case of violations of this zoning
ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention,
the Zoning Administrator must give notice of the nature of the violation to the
property owner or to any other person who is party to the agreement or to any
applicant for any relevant permit in the manner stated in this section, after
which the persons receiving notice have ten days to correct the violation
before further enforcement action may be taken. Notice must be given in person,
by U.S. Mail, or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must
state the nature of the violation and the time period for compliance and may
state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and
enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected.
      (2)   Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this zoning
ordinance that constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health
or safety concerns or violations that will create increased problems or costs
if not remedied immediately, the county may use the enforcement powers
available under this zoning ordinance without prior notice, but the Zoning
Administrator must attempt to give notice simultaneously with beginning
enforcement action. Notice may be provided to the property owner, to any other
person who is party to the agreement and to applicants for any relevant permit.
      (3)   Appeals. Enforcement actions taken by the Zoning Administrator may
be appealed by the affected party to the Planning and Zoning Commission in
accordance with §
155-16.100.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012)
155-18 MEASUREMENTS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 155-18.10 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS (LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS).
   (A)   Lot area. Lot area includes the total land area contained within the
property lines of a lot.
   (B)   Lot area per unit. Lot area per unit refers to the amount of lot area
required for each dwelling unit on the subject parcel. For example, if a
minimum parcel-area-per-unit standard of 1,000 square feet is applied to an
8,750 square foot parcel, a maximum of eight dwelling units would be allowed on
that parcel.
   (C)   Lot frontage. Lot frontage is measured along the right-of-way line
between opposite-side boundaries of the lot. Lot frontage on cul-de-sac bulbs
is measured at the actual building line. The street frontage of a lot or parcel
that is legally created or described as extending to the center line of a
street must be measured along the line that denotes the edge or boundary of the
easement established for the street.
   (D)   Building coverage. Building coverage is the area of a lot covered by
principal and accessory buildings, as measured along the building line. Only
building areas beneath a roof are counted for purposes of measuring building
coverage. A porch with a roof, for example, is counted, but an uncovered deck
structure is not considered building coverage.
   (E)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Street setbacks.
         (a)   Measurement. Street setbacks are measured from the right-of-way
line or the centerline of the abutting street (as indicated by the subject
district provisions) to the closest point of the building or structure.
         (b)   Permitted obstructions/ encroachments. Street setbacks must be
unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except as expressly
allowed in division (F) of this section.
         (c)   Double frontage lots. On double-frontage lots, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to establish which of the frontages constitutes the
front lot line (and is thereby subject to street setback regulations) based on
factors such as the pattern of front and rear yards on the subject blockface,
existing limitations on street access, where the building's "front" door is
located or other reasonable considerations. Only such obstructions permitted in
street setback may be located in that part of a rear setback adjoining a street
that is equivalent in depth to a required front setback, except for lots
backing to thoroughfares in subdivisions where no-access strips have been
provided on the recorded plat.
         (d)   Exceptions for established setbacks. When existing buildings on
one or more abutting lots are closer to the street property line than the
otherwise required street setback, additions to existing residential buildings
or construction of new residential buildings on the subject lot may comply with
the average street yard depth that exists on the nearest two lots on either
side of the subject lot instead of complying with the zoning district's minimum
street setback requirement.
            1.   If one or more of the lots required to be included in the
averaging calculation is vacant, the vacant lot will be deemed to have a street
yard depth equal to the minimum street setback requirement of the subject
zoning district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5236.jpg]
 
            2.   Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot
or that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used
in computing the average.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5238.jpg]
 
            3.   When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average street yard
depth will be computed on the basis of the nearest two lots with frontage on
the same street as the subject lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5240.jpg]
 
            4.    When the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the
same street, the average street yard depth will be computed on the basis of the
abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street
as the subject lot.
      (2)   Rear setbacks.
         (a)   Measurement. Rear setbacks are measured from the rear property
line to the closest point of the building.
         (b)   Permitted obstructions/ encroachments. Rear setbacks must be
unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except as expressly
allowed in division (F) of this section.
         (c)   Corner lots. No rear setback is required on corner lots.
      (3)   Side setbacks.
         (a)   Measurement. Side setbacks are measured from the interior (non-
street) side property line to the closest point of the building.
         (b)   Permitted obstructions/ encroachments. Side setbacks must be
unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except as expressly
allowed in division (F) of this section.
   (F)   Features allowed to encroach in required setbacks. Required setbacks
must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky except that
features are allowed to encroach into required setbacks to the extent indicated
in the following table. These structures and building features are not subject
to minimum lot area or lot frontage regulations.
Obstruction/Projection into Required Setback Street Side Rear
Obstruction/Projection into Required Setback                     Street Side Rear
Arbors, trellises and pergolas                                   Yes    Yes  Yes
Awnings, canopies and light shelves and architecturally
integrated solar shading devices projecting no more than 10 feet Yes    Yes  Yes
and with at least 7 feet of clear height above the ground below
Balconies                                                        No     No   Yes
Bay windows that project no more than 3 feet and are no more one Yes    No   Yes
story in height
Breezeways                                                       No     No   Yes
Chimneys and flues that project no more than 18 inches into the  Yes    Yes  Yes
required setback
Decks, porches, patios, terraces (open) and similar features up  Yes    Yes  Yes
to 4 feet in height above average grade and without roofs
Geothermal pumps and associated equipment up to 4 feet in height Yes    Yes  Yes
Satellite dish antennas, not exceeding 1 meter (39.37 inches) in Yes    Yes  Yes
diameter
Satellite dish antennas, over 1 meter but not exceeding 2.4      No     No   Yes
meters (94.49 inches) in diameter
Eaves, gutters and roof overhangs projecting no more than 3 feet Yes    No   Yes
Eaves, gutters and roof overhangs projecting no more than 2 feet Yes    Yes  Yes
or 40% of required setback depth, whichever is less
Fences, walls and hedges, subject to §                          Yes    Yes  Yes
155-14.90
Flagpoles, mailboxes and other typical street yard features      Yes    Yes  Yes
Fountains, sculptures, landscape planters and similar landscape  Yes    Yes  Yes
and ornamental objects
Insulation added to the outside of the exterior wall of an       Yes    Yes  Yes
existing building
Parking, enclosed (attached or detached)                         No     No   Yes
Rain gardens                                                     Yes    Yes  Yes
Rain barrels up to 5 feet in height                              Yes    Yes  Yes
Sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses and other              Yes    Yes  Yes
architectural features
Solar energy systems, building-mounted                           Yes    Yes  Yes
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted                             No     Yes  Yes
Swimming pools and decks providing access to pools (see also §  No     Yes  Yes
155-10.10(E))
Steps and stairs (providing necessary access to an allowed       Yes    Yes  Yes
building) up to 4 feet in height above grade
Wheelchair lifts and ramps that meet federal, state and local    Yes    Yes  Yes
accessibility standards
 
   (G)   Building height.
      (1)   Measurement. Building height is measured as the vertical distance
from the finished grade to the highest point of the roof.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   General. The following features are not counted in the
measurement of building height and may exceed otherwise stated maximum height
limits:
            1.   Chimneys,
            2.   Parapet walls,
            3.   Skylights,
            4.   Steeples,
            5.   Flag poles,
            6.   Smokestacks,
            7.   Cooling towers,
            8.   Elevator bulkheads,
            9.   Fore towers,
            10.   Monuments,
            11.   Water towers,
            12.   Stage towers or scenery lofts,
            13.   Tanks,
            14.   Ornamental towers and spires,
            15.   Mechanical appurtenances or penthouses to house mechanical
appurtenances,
            16.   Cracking towers of refineries,
            17.   Power plants and electric substations.
            18.   Portions of a building elevated solely to comply with flood-
proofing requirements.
         (b)   Solar energy systems. Building- mounted solar energy systems may
extend up to three feet above the applicable maximum zoning district height
limit, provided they do not extend more than five feet above the roof line. See
also §
155-10.10(F)(2).
         (c)   Public and civic buildings. Public buildings, semi-public
hospitals, institutions, schools, or public utility and service buildings may
be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, provided that the building is set
back from the street, rear, and side lot lines in addition to otherwise
required district setbacks at least two additional feet for every one foot of
building height above 40 feet.
      (3)   Federal Aviation Administration rules.
         (a)   No building or structure may be constructed that is subject to
notice under Federal Aviation Regulations Par. 77, until it is determined by
the Federal Aviation Administration not to be a hazard to aerial navigation.
         (b)   All petitions for zoning map amendments, special uses,
variances, compensatory development rights, or planned unit developments,
dealing with property located within two miles of any airport in Will County
that is available for public use, must be forwarded to the Federal Aviation
Administration for their review and comment. In addition, plans to construct
any structure or building to a height exceeding 200 feet, regardless of
location, must be forwarded to the Federal Aviation Administration for their
review and comment.
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator must make available to the Federal
Aviation Administrator any data relating to a petitioner's request to construct
a building or structure within two miles of any airport in the county.
      (4)   Wireless telecommunication facilities. Wireless telecommunications
facilities are subject to the applicable height restrictions in §
155-9.270.
      (5)   Electric-generating wind devices. Electric-generating wind devices
are subject to the applicable height restrictions in §
155-9.260.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Ord. 16-227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-
18-2018; Ord. 19-88, passed 4-18-2019)
§ 155-18.20 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Use definitions. See Article
155-8 for use-related definitions.
   (B)   General rules of language. See §
155-1.100 for information about general use of language and ordinance
construction.
   (C)   General definitions. The words and terms expressly defined in this
section have the specific meanings assigned, unless the context expressly
indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined have their
common dictionary meaning.
   ABUT or ABUTTING. To touch or to share a contiguous boundary or border.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. An "accessory building" or "accessory use" is one
that:
      (1)   Is subordinate to the principal building or principal use served in
terms of area and function;
      (2)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants
of the principal building or principal use served; and
      (3)   Is customarily found in association with the subject principal use
or principal building.
An attached garage is expressly included in the definition of “accessory
building.”
   ADJACENT. Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
   ADJOIN or ADJOINING. Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying
near.
   ADULT MATERIAL.
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other reprinted matter, or
digitally-stored materials that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposures, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
      (2)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer
displays other visual representations or recordings of any kind, that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposures, depiction, or
description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities.
      (3)   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or that depict or
describe specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization. A craft grower may contain up to 5,000 square feet of canopy
space on its premises for plants in the flowering state. The Department of
Agriculture may authorize an increase or decrease of flowering stage
cultivation space in increments of 3,000 square feet by rule based on market
need, craft grower capacity, and the licensee's history of compliance or
noncompliance, with a maximum space of 14,000 square feet for cultivating
plants in the flowering stage, which must be cultivated in all stages of growth
in an enclosed and secure area. A craft grower may share premises with a
processing organization or a dispensing organization, or both, provided each
licensee stores currency and cannabis or cannabis-infused products in a
separate secured vault to which the other licensee does not have access or all
licensees sharing a vault share more than 50% of the same ownership.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport, and perform other necessary activities to
provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to cannabis business
establishments.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION or DISPENSARY. A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Department of
Financial and  Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from a cultivation
center, craft grower, processing organization, or another dispensary for the
purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis
seeds, paraphernalia, or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers. A dispensary organization
shall include a registered medical cannabis organization as defined in the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act or its successor Act
that has obtained an Early Approval Adult Use Dispensing Organization License.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION or INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Department of Agriculture
to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product
formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product.
   AGENT. A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the subject property
owner.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure existing or
erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception
of dwelling units.
   AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT. The A-1 and A-2 districts, plus any other zoning
district expressly identified as an agricultural district in Article
155-2.
   ALLEY. A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently
reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property.
Frontage on an alley may not be counted toward satisfying the requirements of
this zoning ordinance related to frontage on a dedicated street.
   ANIMAL, COMPANION. Animals that are commonly kept by persons as a pet or for
companionship. Companion animals have the following characteristics: have a
special and close relationship with humans; are partially or totally dependent
on people; commonly live inside a residence in close proximity with humans;
form bonds with people; and interact with their human companions. Dogs and cats
are common companion animals.
   ANIMAL, DOMESTIC. Any animal that is livestock, a companion animal or both.
   ANIMAL, EXOTIC. Any animal that is not normally domesticated in the United
States or is wild by nature. Exotic animals include all of the following orders
and families, whether bred in the wild or captivity and also their hybrids with
domestic species. The animals listed are intended to act as examples and are
not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group
of animals, unless otherwise expressly stated:
      (1)   Non-human primates and prosimians (monkeys, chimpanzees, baboons);
      (2)   Felidae (lions, tigers, bobcats, lynx, cougars, leopards, jaguars,
not domesticated cats);
      (3)   Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, not domesticated dogs);
      (4)   Ursidae (all bears);
      (5)   Reptilia (all venomous snakes, all constricting snakes);
      (6)   Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles);
      (7)   Proboscidae (elephants);
      (8)   Hyanenidae (hyenas);
      (9)   Artiodatyla (hippotamuses, giraffes, camels, not cattle or swine or
sheep or goats);
      (10)   Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis);
      (11)   Marsupialia (kangaroos, oppossums);
      (12)   Perissodactylea (rhinoceroses, tapirs, not horses or donkeys or
mules);
      (13)   Edentara (anteaters, sloths, armadillos);
      (14)   Viverridae (mongooses, civets, and genets); and
      (15)   Casuariidae (all cassowaries and non-livestock emus).
   ANIMAL; EXOTIC BREEDING AND TRAINING. The breeding and training of animals
other than common domesticated and FARM (LIVESTOCK) ANIMALS.
   ANIMAL, EXOTIC; INDIGENOUS. Exotic animals indigenous to Will County are
exotic animals defined above with a modern natural range area within the State
of Illinois north of the 41st degree of northern latitude.
   ANIMAL, EXOTIC; NON-NATIVE. Exotic animals not native to Will County are
exotic animals defined above without a modern natural range area within the
State of Illinois north of the 41st degree of northern latitude even if the
historical range area was previously within the State of Illinois north of the
41st degree of northern latitude.
   ANIMAL, FARM (LIVESTOCK). Breeds of animals primarily raised for commercial
purposes on agricultural property, in out-buildings or open spaces separate
from residences. Typical examples include, but not limited to:
      (1)   cattle (Bos Taurus and Bison),
      (2)   swine (Sus domesticus),
      (3)   poultry (i.e. landfowl, waterfowl, game birds, and large birds),
      (4)   sheep (Ovis aries),
      (5)   alpacas (Vicugna pacos),
      (6)   llamas (Lama glama),
      (7)   goats (Capra aegagrus hircus),
      (8)   donkeys (Equus africanus asinus),
      (9)   horses (Equus ferus caballus) and
      (10)   rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus domesticus).
   ANIMAL, FARM (LIVESTOCK); POULTRY. Breeds of domesticated birds primarily
raised for commercial purposes or sport on agricultural property, in out-
buildings or open spaces separate from residences, and are generally described
as:
      (1)   Landfowl; e.g. chicken, turkey;
      (2)   Waterfowl: e.g. duck, geese;
      (3)   Game birds; e.g. quail, pheasant, dove, pigeons; and
      (4)   Large birds: e.g. ostrich, emu.
   ANIMAL KENNEL. An establishment where six or more dogs, cats and other
household domestic animals, over six months of age and owned by another person,
are temporarily boarded or an establishment where more than two of said animals
are kept for the purpose of breeding offspring to be sold. For clarification
purposes, an establishment "fostering" six or more dogs, cats and other
household domestic animals is considered a kennel, even if a higher fostering
number is allowed by the state. "Kennel" shall not apply to ANIMAL HOSPITALS
operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law where the boarding of
animals is accessory to medical treatment.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. An establishment for the care and treatment of the diseases
and injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their
convalescence. An "animal hospital" shall not include a "kennel" or any other
animal boarding facility except animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly
licensed under the law where the boarding of animals is accessory to medical
treatment.
   ANIMAL REHABILITATION FACILITY; EXOTIC. A facility that provides human
assistance for injured or ill exotic animals with the ultimate goal of
releasing the animal back into the wild.
   ANIMAL SANCTUARY; EXOTIC. A facility where animals are cared for and
protected typically until their natural death. An exotic animal sanctuary may
also shelter some animals temporarily until they are transferred to permanent
homes. An exotic animal sanctuary does not buy, sell or trade animals. The care
and/or protection of just one exotic animal does not necessarily prevent the
subject site from being classified as the use defined herein.
   ANIMAL ZOO; PETTING. A facility for exhibition and viewing of domesticated
livestock (farm) animals where guests can safely physically interact with the
animals for the purposes of agritourism.
   ANIMAL ZOOLOGICAL PARK; EXOTIC. A facility for exhibition and viewing of
exotic and wild animals. A “zoological park” includes ancillary uses, such as
snack bars, refreshment stands and restaurants for the use of patrons.
   ANTENNA. An antenna device by which radio signals are transmitted, received
or both.
   APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
   APPLICANT. Any authorized person, firm, corporation or agency who submits an
application.
   AUTOMOBILE. A two-axle motor vehicle designed and used primarily for the
conveyance of not more than nine persons that weighs less than 8,000 pounds.
   AUTO REBUILDER. A form of auto salvage in which a previously inoperable
automobile is rebuilt and restored to operating condition in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 5 Dealers, Transporters, Wreckers and Rebuilders of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
   AUTO SALVAGE. The storage of inoperable automobiles for the purposes of
retrieving usable parts for repairing operable vehicles and other uses.
   AUTO SCRAP. The storage of inoperable automobiles for the purposes of
retrieving and recycling the parts and raw materials.
   AWNING. A roof-like structure typically made of cloth, metal or other
material attached to a frame that extends from and is supported by a building.
Awnings are typically erected over a window, doorway or building front and they
may be raised or retracted to a position adjacent to the building.
   BASE (ZONING) DISTRICT. Any zoning district that is not an overlay district.
   BASEMENT. A story having part but not more than one-half of its height below
grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation if
subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor employed on
the premises.
   BEE. The life stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera
Species.
   BEEKEEPER. The person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
bees.
   BERM. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise. (See also §
155-12.90(M))
   BILLBOARD. See SIGN, ADVERTISING.
   BIOMASS ENERGY. Energy produced from the biological breakdown of organic
matter.
   BLOCKFACE. Property abutting one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets, railroad rights-of-way or natural barriers.
   BUFFER. A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as
plants, berms, fences or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen
incompatible land uses from each other.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
setback, landscaping and open space requirements of this zoning ordinance have
been met.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls for the
shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel; and when
separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each
portion of such building is deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded on all sides by open space located
on the same lot.
   BUILDING COVERAGE. See §
155-18.10(D).
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. See §
155-13.130(B).
   BUILDING HEIGHT. See §
155-18.10(G).
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. See NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE in §
155-15.40.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the county for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which a principal use on
the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
   CALIPER. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its
trunk measured six inches above natural ground for trees having calipers less
than or equal to six inches diameter and measured 12 inches above grade for
tree calipers greater than six inches diameter.
   CANOPY. A roof-like structure typically permanent in construction that
covers a doorway or entryway that extends from and is supported by the
building. A canopy may include a freestanding or projecting cover above an
outdoor service area, such as a gasoline service station.
   CARGO CONTAINER. An industrial, standardized reusable vessel that is
specifically designed for the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of
freight, articles, goods or commodities and that is designed for mounting on or
movement by a rail car or truck trailer.
   CARPORT. A roofed automobile shelter with one or more open sides.
   CELLULAR SERVICE. A telecommunications service that permits customers to use
wireless, mobile telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission sites
called cell sites, either to the public switch network or to other mobile
cellular phones.
   CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS. A commercial low power mobile radio service
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to providers in a
specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided
into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within
a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within
the service area.
   CENTRAL WATER OR CENTRAL WATER SYSTEMS. All mains, pipes, and structures
through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells
and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks, and appurtenances, collectively or separately,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for
drinking or general domestic use. CENTRAL WATER OR CENTRAL WATER SYSTEMS must
comply fully with all rules and regulations promulgated or required by the
Office of the State Fire Marshal concerning fire prevention and safety.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific inspections
and tests where required have been performed and that such tests comply with
the applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance.
   CHANNEL LETTER. A fabricated or formed three-dimensional letter, number or
symbol.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5242.jpg]
 
   CLEARING. Any activity, which removes vegetative ground cover.
   COLD FRAME. An unheated structure no more than four feet in height used for
protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
   CO-LOCATION. Locating wireless communications equipment from more than one
provider on a single site, or the siting of two or more separate companies'
wireless antennas on the same support structure.
   COLONY. A hive and its equipment and appurtenances including bees, brood,
pollen, combs, and honey.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that is used or intended to be used
primarily for commercial purposes.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, right-
of-ways, and automobile parking lots designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a planned development. Common open space may include
structures for recreational use.
   CONCENTRATED SOLAR POWER SYSTEM. Solar energy generation systems that use
mirrors to reflect and concentrate sunlight onto receivers that collect solar
energy and convert it to heat. The thermal energy is then used to produce
electricity via a steam turbine or heat engine that drives a generator.
   CONSERVATION DESIGN SUBDIVISION. A subdivision that complies with Part 3 of
the subdivision ordinance.
   CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS, CLEAN. Uncontaminated broken concrete
without protruding metal bars, bricks, rock, stone, reclaimed asphalt pavement,
or soil generated from construction or demolition activities. See also GENERAL
CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS.
   CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS, GENERAL. Non-hazardous, uncontaminated
materials resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition
of utilities, structures, and roads, limited to the following: bricks,
concrete, and other masonry materials; soil; rock; wood, including non-
hazardous painted, treated, and coated wood and wood products; wall coverings;
plaster; drywall; plumbing fixtures; non-asbestos insulation; roofing shingles
and other roof coverings; reclaimed or other asphalt pavement; glass; plastics
that are not sealed in a manner that conceals waste; electrical wiring and
components containing no hazardous substances; and corrugated cardboard, piping
or metals incidental to any of those materials or as defined in Section 3.160
(a) of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, as amended. See also CLEAN
CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS.
   CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER.
   CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by
the method of "average end areas."
   DECIDUOUS. A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
   DENSITY. The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units
in a development by the gross area of the tract of land upon which the dwelling
units are located. Dedicated streets are counted in the calculation of gross
density.
   DETACHED HOUSE. A principal building that contains only one principal
dwelling unit and that is located on a single lot with private yards on all
sides of the building.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human change to real estate, including:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building.
      (2)   Installing a mobile home on a site, preparing a site for a mobile
home, or installing a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, camper
shell, motor home, or tent trailer on a site for more than 180 days. If the
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, or
tent trailer is on site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and
ready for highway use.
      (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects.
      (4)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
      (5)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
      (6)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of
solid or liquid waste.
      (7)   Any other human activity that might change the direction, height,
or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   DIRECTIONAL ANTENNA. An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate
a radio signal in a particular area.
   DISABLED or DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person
is incapable of living independently, a record of having such an impairment, or
being regarded as having such an impairment. The term DISABLED or DISABILITY
does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled
substance or alcoholism.
   DISPLAY AREA, OUTDOOR. Area used for display of merchandise or goods
available for purchase from the business located outside of a building. Such
use is allowable only as an accessory to the principal use of the
establishment.
   DISTRIBUTED ENERGY. Systems that produce and distribute energy at a small
area scale, such as a neighborhood or campus.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. See ANIMAL, DOMESTIC.
   DRIP LINE. The outer perimeter of the largest branches or limbs of a tree,
as measured on the ground around the base of the tree.
   DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH. An establishment that is designed to provide,
either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles
parked upon the premises.
   DRIVEWAY (CONSTRUCTED). That portion of a lot used to provide access from
the street to a place of residence or business and which has been graded and
graveled or surfaced with concrete, asphalt, crushed stone, or other hard
surface and dustless materials.
   DROP BOX, DONATION AND COLLECTION. A receptacle provided for general public
to drop-off recyclable paper, cans, glass and plastics as well as charitable
donations such as clothing, shoes, books, and toys (See §
155-10.10(L) for applicable regulations).
   DWELL TIME. The time that a single message on a dynamic display is held
static or constant, without any change in the message or image displayed.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including detached houses, townhouses, accessory
dwelling units, mobile homes, multi-unit buildings and mixed-use buildings, but
not including hotels, boarding houses, lodging houses or recreational vehicles.
   DWELLING, GROUND FLOOR AREA. The first floor area in square feet measured
from the outside of the exterior walls but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages, and other infrequently used spaces.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by a
single household for living purposes and having its own permanently installed
cooking and sanitary facilities.
   DYNAMIC DISPLAY. Any element of a sign or sign structure capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures, images or messages that can be
electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. This also
includes any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated
through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method or technology that
allows a sign to present a series of images, messages or displays.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV). Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for
operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets; either partially
or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source, that
is stored on-board via a battery. "Electric vehicle" includes: battery electric
vehicles; and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE, BATTERY. Any electric vehicle that operates exclusively on
electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored in the vehicle's
batteries and that produces zero tailpipe emissions or pollution when
stationary or operating.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE, PLUG-IN HYBRID. An electric vehicle that contains an
internal combustion engine and also allows power to be delivered to drive
wheels by an electric motor; charges its battery primarily by connecting to the
grid or other off-board electrical source; may additionally be able to sustain
battery charge using an on-board internal-combustion-driven generator; and has
the ability to travel powered by electricity.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING STATION. A public or private parking space
that is served by battery charging station equipment.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, LEVEL 1. An EV charging station served
only by level 1 battery charging equipment.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, LEVEL 2. An EV charging station served by
level 2 battery charging equipment.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, LEVEL 3. An EV charging station served by
level 3 (rapid) battery charging equipment.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, ACCESSIBLE. An EV charging station where
the battery charging station is located within reach of an accessible parking
space and an electric vehicle that is parked in such space.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PRIVATE (RESTRICTED-ACCESS). An EV
charging station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples
include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or
renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet
parking areas.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PUBLIC. An EV charging station that is
accessible to and available for use by the general public.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE (EVI). Conduit/wiring, structures,
machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle,
including battery charging stations and rapid charging stations.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE. Any parking space that is clearly identified
to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle.
   ENDANGERED SPECIES. Species (including animals, plants, fungi, etc.) that
are at risk of becoming extinct and identified on the official State of
Illinois and/or federal endangered species lists.
   EQUIPMENT HOUSING. A combination of one or more equipment buildings or
enclosures housing equipment that operates in conjunction with the antennas of
a facility and the equipment itself.
   EVERGREEN. A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which the organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock,
or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and include the conditions resulting from
excavation activities.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   EXOTIC PLANT. An introduced or non-native species living outside its native
range that has arrived there by either deliberate or accidental human activity.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
   FARM PRODUCER. Either a person or entity that grows or raises farm products
on land that the person or entity farms and owns, rents or leases or a person
or entity that creates (by cooking, canning, baking, preserving, roasting,
etc.) value-added farm products.
   FARM PRODUCTS. Vegetables, fruits, mushrooms, herbs, grains, legumes, nuts,
shell eggs, honey or other bee products, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food
products (including meat, milk, yogurt, cheese and other dairy products).
   FARM PRODUCT, VALUE-ADDED. A product processed by a farm producer from a
farm product, such as baked goods, jams and jellies, canned vegetables, dried
fruit, syrups, salsas, salad dressings, flours, coffee, smoked or canned meats
or fish, sausages, or prepared foods.
   FCC. Federal Communications Commission.
   FENCE. Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry, or other
material erected for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection, or
restraining animals.
   FENCE, CLOSED. A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from
adjoining properties, streets, or alleys, activities conducted behind it.
   FENCE, OPEN. A fence including gates that has, for each one foot wide
segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, 60% of the
surface area in open spaces that afford a direct view through the fence.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by
man to a new location and include the conditions resulting from fill
activities.
   FINAL GRADE. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
   FLASHING. Intermittent or flashing sources of light or lighting that changes
intensity in sudden transitory bursts.
   FOOTCANDLE. A measure of illumination, the amount of light falling onto a
surface. One lumen of light, shining evenly across one square foot of surface,
illuminates that surface to one footcandle.
   FOUNDATION, PERMANENT. A closed perimeter formation consisting of materials
such as concrete or concrete block that extends into the ground below the frost
line
   FRONTAGE (STREET OR ROAD). A lot line or the length of a lot line that is
also the line of any public street right-of-way other than an alley.
   GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM. Equipment that transfers thermal energy to and/or
from the ground for the purposes of heating and/or cooling a building.
Geothermal energy systems consists of a closed-loop system of pipes filled with
liquid, a heat exchanger and heat pump. This includes vertical closed loop,
horizontal closed loop and water body closed loop systems.
   GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of the building or structure.
   GRADE, STREET. Same as CURB LEVEL.
   GREENHOUSE. A temporary or permanent structure that is primarily used for
the cultivation of plants.
   GREYWATER. Wastewater generated from domestic activities such as laundry and
bathing activities, which can be recycled on-site for uses such as landscape
irrigation and constructed wetlands. Greywater does not include sewage or any
water from toilets.
   GROUNDCOVER PLANTS. See §
155-12.90(H).
   GUYED TOWER. A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part,
by guy wires and ground anchors.
   HEDGE. A landscaped barrier consisting of a continuous, dense planting of
shrubs.
   HEAVILY WOODED PROPERTY. Land predominantly covered by growing trees and
shrubs.
   HEIGHT OF ELECTRIC-GENERATING WIND DEVICE. The height above grade of the
system including the fixed portion of the tower, generating unit, and the
highest vertical extend of any blades or rotors.
   HEIGHT OF A (WIRELESS TELE- COMMUNICATIONS) FACILITY. The total height of
the facility's supporting structure and any antennas that will extend above the
top of the supporting structure; however, if the supporting structure's
foundation extends more than three feet above the uppermost ground level along
the perimeter of the foundation, then each full foot in excess of three feet is
counted as an additional foot of facility height. The height of a facility's
supporting structure is to be measured from the highest point of the supporting
structure's foundation.
   HEIGHT (OF BUILDING). See §
155-18.10(G).
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminary determination by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminary determination by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   HIVE. Any man-made receptacle inhabited by a colony of bees.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A business or commercial activity conducted from a dwelling
unit. (See the home occupation regulations of §
155-10.10(D).)
   HOOP HOUSE. A temporary or permanent structure typically made of flexible
pipe or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a
"half-round" or "hoop" shape, for the purposes of protecting and cultivating
plants. A hoop house is considered more temporary than a greenhouse.
   HOUSEHOLD. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, or a group of not more than three persons (excluding servants),
not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single,
house-keeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities,
fraternities, or other similar group living situations.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of seven
days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or in which the
engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. INOPERABLE VEHICLE does not include a motor vehicle that has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   INTERMODAL CARGO CONTAINER. See CARGO CONTAINER.
   KILOWATT (KW). A measure of power for electric current (1,000 watts).
   KILOWATT HOUR (KWh). A measure of energy equal to the use of one kilowatt in
one hour.
   LAND RECLAMATION. The process of gaining land from a submerged or partially
submerged area by draining, filling, or a combination of such procedures.
   LANDSCAPED AREA, MAINTAINED. Landscaping that requires regular, on-going
management and upkeep to maintain the initial or intended appearance.
   LANDSCAPING. Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground cover,
shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and nonliving landscape material (such as
rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials).
   LATTICE TOWER. A guyed or self-supporting three or four sided, open, steel
frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment.
   LAWFULLY ESTABLISHED. A use, structure, lot or sign (as the context
indicates) that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning
regulations in effect at the time of its establishment.
   LEASEHOLD, RESIDENTIAL. A parcel subject to a ground lease and used or
intended to be used for occupancy by a single detached house.
   LEED (LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN). A green building and
sustainability rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council
(USGBC). Various LEED rating systems exist for different types of projects:
LEED-NC, for example, addresses new building construction and major renovation
projects; LEED-CI covers commercial interior projects; LEED-H is for homes;
LEED-ND addresses neighborhood development.
   LEED-ND. The LEED rating system for assessing the use of green building and
development techniques at the neighborhood scale. The LEED-ND rating system is
designed to enhance and protect the overall health (physical and economic) and
natural environment of communities through well-placed and designed
subdivisions and developments.
   LICENSED PREMISES. The place or location described in an adult establishment
license where an adult entertainment establishment is authorized to operate. No
sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-way, or grounds adjacent to
any such place or location are included within the licensed premises.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light that is emitted into an unintended area.
   LIGHTING, EXTERNAL. Illumination from a light source not contained within a
sign or awning or halo or silhouette lighting that is not visible or exposed on
the face of the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5244.jpg]
 
   LIGHTING, INTERNAL. Illumination from a light source that is contained
within a sign or awning.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. A traffic-way, including expressways and toll roads
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the
public authority having jurisdiction over such traffic-way.
   LOT. A legally divided area or portion of land under a single ownership or
control that is intended to be occupied by a use or group of uses, and/or a
principal building or structure. Note: All lots must be lots of record when
less than five acres in size as required by and in conformance with the
subdivision ordinance and the Plat Act.
   LOT AREA. See §
155-18.10(A).
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the intersection of two streets or a lot bounded on
two sides by a curving street and any two chords of which form an angle of 120
degrees or less measured on the lot side.
   LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the
midpoint of the rear lot line.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two
or more streets. Note: An alley is not considered a street.
   LOT FRONTAGE. See §
155-18.10(C).
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT LINE. An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot or a
line at the boundary of a lot of record.
   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. A lot line shared with another lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line most nearly parallel to and most removed from
the street lot line.
   LOT LINE SET BACK DISTANCE. The distance measured from the center of the
base of a wireless telecommunication facility's supporting structure to the
nearest point on the common lot line between the facility lot and the nearest
residentially zoned lot. If there is no common lot line, the measurement must
be made to the nearest point on the lot line of the nearest residentially zoned
lot without deducting the width of any intervening right-of-way.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Lot lines other than street or rear lot lines.
   LOT LINE, STREET. The property line for a zoning lot, abutting or within a
street that is legally accessible for ingress and egress to the property. On a
corner lot, lot lines along streets are considered to be street lot lines.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been legally recorded or a parcel of land with a legally recorded deed in
accordance with the Plat Act.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot at right angles or approximately right
angles to the general pattern of the area, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the front lot to the
rear. The rear of the corner lot is adjacent to the side of another lot,
whether across an alley or not.
   LOT, THROUGH. See LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.
   LOT, ZONING. A parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots or a
parcel of land described by metes and bounds, that is of sufficient size to
meet the minimum district requirements of this zoning ordinance concerning use,
coverage, width, area, setbacks, or other district requirements of this zoning
ordinance and having frontage on an improved public street, and which is
designated by its owner or developer as a tract of land to be used, developed,
or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A "zoning lot" may
or may not coincide with the definition of a "lot of record."
   MARQUEE OR CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature, which
projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.
   MICROWAVE ANTENNA. A dish-like antenna manufactured in many sizes and shapes
used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or
data.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization
or business that is registered by the Department of Agriculture to perform
necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing
organizations with usable medical cannabis. A registered cultivation center may
not be located within 2,500 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public
or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day
care home, group day care home, part day child care facility, or an area zoned
for residential use.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered on or before June 30, 2019 by the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis
from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered
qualifying patients in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois. A
dispensing organization may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property
line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary
school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day
child care facility. A registered dispensing organization may not be located in
a house, apartment condominium, or an area zoned for residential use.
   MIXED-USE BUILDING. A building occupied by residential uses in combination
with nonresidential uses.
   MOBILE HOME. A factory-built, single- household structure that is
manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5401, the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is built on a permanent chassis,
and is used as a place for human habitation, but that is not constructed or
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit
other than  for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and that does not
have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. This definition
does not include travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, camper
shells, motor homes, tent trailers or recreational vehicles.
   MOBILE STORAGE UNIT. A purpose-built, mobile, fully enclosed unit that is
designed and used for the temporary storage of household goods, wares, and
materials for the purpose of moving, relocation, or temporary storage during
construction. This definition does not include a cargo container, modified or
otherwise.
   MONOPOLE TOWER. A tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy
wires and ground anchors. A slender self-supporting tower on which wireless
antennas can be placed. See also GUYED TOWER.
   MULTI-TENANT DEVELOPMENT. A development typically under unified ownership
and control consisting of two or more business establishments. The tenants of
multi-tenant development typically share vehicle access and parking facilities.
   MULTI-UNIT BUILDING. A residential building containing two or more dwelling
units that share common walls and/or common floors/ceilings. Multi-unit
buildings are typically served by one or more private or common building
entrances.
   MURAL. A hand-produced or machine-made graphic applied or affixed to the
exterior of a building wall through the application of paint, canvas, tile,
metal panels, applied sheet graphic or other medium so that the wall becomes
the background surface or platform for the graphic, generally for the purpose
of decoration or artistic expression.
   NITS. A unit of luminance equal to one candela per square meter.
   NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURE. See §
155-15.50.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. See §
155-15.20.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. See §
155-15.60.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. See §
155-15.40.
   NONCONFORMING USE. See §
155-15.30.
   NONCONFORMITY. Any nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming
structure, nonconforming development feature or nonconforming sign.
   NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. Any agricultural, commercial or industrial
zoning district.
   NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. A state of dress or undress that exposes to view:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areolas, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel, provided the areolas are not exposed; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that, when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   NUISANCE, PUBLIC. A condition that is illegal because it unreasonably
interferes with a right that is common to the general public.
   OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that
is existing and occupied on the date of application to the county for a permit
to develop a commercial wind energy facility or a commercial solar energy
facility:
      (1)   School;
      (2)   Place of worship;
      (3)   Day care facility;
      (4)   Public library; or
      (5)   Community center.
   OFF-GRID SYSTEMS. A system is considered an off-grid system only if it
supplies electrical power solely for on-site use.
   OMNI-DIRECTIONAL ANTENNA. An antenna that is equally effective in all
directions and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it was
designed.
   OPEN-AIR USES. Uses of land that do not involve buildings or that involve
buildings that are incidental and accessory to the open-air use of the lot.
Typical examples include storage yards, vehicle impound yards, auto salvage
uses.
   OUTPARCEL. A parcel of land, generally located on the perimeter of a larger
parcel that is subordinate to the larger parcel for access, parking and
drainage purposes.
   PARAPET or PARAPET WALL. A wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof that acts
as a vertical extension of an exterior building wall extending above the roof
height of the building. Parapets may serve as a safety or architectural
feature.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5246.jpg]
 
   PCS, PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Two-way, personal, wireless
communications systems.
   PERMITEE, WIND FARM FACILITY. The entity or entities, including their
respective successors and assigns, who have been granted the ability to operate
a wind farm facility. The permitee is responsible for the day-to-day operations
and maintenance of the wind farm facility. This includes any third party
subcontractors.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, or corporation, public or private, the State
of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States
of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer
or employee of any of the foregoing.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL. A semiconductor device that converts solar energy into
electricity.
   PILOT PLANT. A building or group of buildings in which a test, sample, or
experimental manufacturing or assembling is operated until such a time as the
process is perfected. This use is not to provide for the continuing operation
of a manufacturing or assembling use.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development approved in accordance with the
planned unit development procedures of §
155-16.50 or the planned unit development procedures in effect at the time the
development was approved.
   PLANT, INVASIVE. A highly aggressive introduced or non-native species living
outside its native range that out-competes native plant species for available
resources since the insects, diseases and animals that naturally keep the
invasive plant's growth in check (within its native range) are not present in
the introduced habitat.
   PLANT, NATIVE. Species of plants occurring within Will County's boundaries
prior to European contact, according to best scientific and historical
documentation. More specifically, it includes those species understood as
indigenous, occurring in natural associations in habitats that existed prior to
significant human impacts and alterations of the landscape.
   PLANT, NOXIOUS. A plant that is especially undesirable, troublesome and/or
difficult to control and identified on official State of Illinois and/or
federal noxious weeds lists.
   WOODY PLANT. A plant that uses wood as part of its structural support.
   PLANTING SEASON. September 15 to December 15 and March 15 to June 15.
   PORCH. A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a
main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building or combination of buildings of chief
importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use is carried out
in a principal building.
   PRINCIPAL USE. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance
on a lot. One of the main purposes for which the land, buildings or structures
are intended, designed, or ordinarily used.
   PROPERTY LINE. See LOT LINE.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. A publicly owned area including, but not limited to, the
following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, waterways, parkways, and
streets.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish
under regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph,
transportation, water, or sewer systems excluding wireless telecommunication
facilities.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public
thoroughfare.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Waste that contains organic matter capable of being
decomposed by microorganisms so as to cause a malodor, gases, or other
offensive conditions, or which is capable of providing food for birds and
vectors. Putrescible wastes may form a contaminated leachate from
microbiological degradation, chemical processes, and physical processes.
Putrescible waste includes, but is not limited to food, paper, gypsum wallboard
and sheetrock, cardboard and wood, fiber, offal, and dead animals.
   QUALIFYING STRUCTURE. A supporting structure that is an existing structure,
if the height of the facility, including the structure, is not more than 15
feet higher than the structure just before the facility is installed; or a
substantially similar, substantially same-location replacement of an existing
structure, if the height of the facility, including the replacement of an
existing structure, is not more than 15 feet higher than the height of the
existing structure just before the facility is installed. This definition
applies to the wireless telecommunication facility regulations of §
155-9.270.
   RACEWAY. A mounting bar or similar device that is used to attach channel
letters to a building. Raceways often conceal the electrical components of
channel letter signs.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. Strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including freight depots, stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
   RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY. The maximum rate output of electric power
production equipment. This output is typically specified by the manufacturer
with a "nameplate" on the equipment.
   RATED WIND SPEED. The lowest wind speed at which the rated output power of
an electric-generating wind device is produced.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper,
camper shell, motor home, tent trailer, boat, houseboat, boat trailer,
snowmobile, personal watercraft, or similar vehicle. Camper shells that are
attached to a pickup, truck are not considered a recreational vehicle.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1,
et seq.)
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act. (ILCS Ch.
225, Act 325, §§ 1, et seq.)
   REMOVAL. Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY. Energy from resources that are quickly replenished, such
as sunlight, wind, water, biomass, geothermal resources.
   RESERVOIR PARKING. Off-street parking spaces or lot areas allocated to
temporary standing motor vehicles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. Any of the zoning districts identified in
Article
155-3.
   ROOF- AND/OR BUILDING-MOUNTED FACILITY. A low-power mobile radio service
telecommunications facility in which antennas are mounted to an existing
structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or building face.
   ROOFTOP-MOUNTED ELECTRIC- GENERATING WIND DEVICE. An electric-generating
wind device which has a rated nameplate capacity of up to five kilowatts and
which is incidental and subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel. A
system is considered a rooftop mounted wind energy system only if it supplies
electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel on which the
system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site
use may be used by the utility company.
   ROTOR. Rotating member of the electric-generating wind device turbine that
actually captures the wind. A typical rotor has two or three blades that spin
on a horizontal axis.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SCREENING. Decorative fencing or evergreen vegetation maintained for the
purpose of concealing from view the area behind the fencing or evergreen
vegetation.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices or by other minor
accessory apparel such as hats, gloves, and socks.
   SETBACK. Open space areas required between buildings and lot lines. See §
155-18.10(E).
   SHADE TREE. Deciduous trees planted primarily for their high crown of
foliage or overhead canopy.
   SHOOTING RANGE. A facility, including its component shooting ranges, safety
fans, shot fall zones, parking areas, and other associated improvements,
designed for the purpose of providing a place for the discharge of various
types of firearms. Occasional target practice performed by individuals who own
or lease the subject property is considered an accessory use and is not
classified as a shooting range.
   SHRUB. A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems
from the ground, or small branches near the ground. May be deciduous or
evergreen.
   SIGN. Any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated
or non-illuminated that is visible to the public from adjoining streets or
adjoining properties and that directs attention to a product, service, place,
activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any
permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, banner,
pennant, placard, temporary sign, light, decoration, balloon or other device
designed to attract attention, advertise, identify or convey information.
Building details that are an integral part of the overall architectural design
of a building or works of art accessory to a building are not be considered
signs.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD). A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than
upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN AREA. The surface measurement of a sign. See also §
155-13.130(A).
   SIGN, BOX (also known as a CABINET SIGN). A sign with text or symbols
printed on a plastic or acrylic sheet that is mounted on a cabinet or box that
houses the lighting source and associated electrical hardware.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5248.jpg]
 
   SIGN, CABINET. See SIGN, BOX.
   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A sign on the site of permitted development/construction
activities.
   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign used to convey directions and other information
for the convenience of the public. Included are signs designating restrooms,
address numbers, hours of operation, entrances to buildings, help wanted,
public telephone, etc. Also included are signs on private property designed to
direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic, such as "entrance" or "exit."
   SIGN, DIRECTORY. A wall or freestanding sign on a multi-tenant development
site that is used to convey directions or tenant information to pedestrians and
motorists who have entered the site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5250.jpg]
 
   SIGN, DISTINCTIVE MATERIALS/DESIGN. Custom-made signs that use only external
lighting and do not include a raceway or visible electrical housing and that
are constructed primarily of the following materials and methods:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5252.jpg]
 
      (1)   Ceramic tile-painted or sandblasted;
      (2)   Wood-carved or sandblasted;
      (3)   Metal-formed, etched, cast, or engraved;
      (4)   Brick or stone with recessed or raised lettering; or
      (5)   Other similar high-quality, exterior- grade materials approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign on a frame, pole or other support structure
that is not attached to any building.
   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign indicating the name and address of a building,
or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation
therein.
   SIGN, MENU BOARD. A sign displaying goods or services available through a
drive-up window or available through a drive-in or drive-through establishment.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is
on the ground or no more than 12 inches above the ground adjacent to the sign.
Typically constructed of brick, wood, stone, or metal, monument signs have a
base that is at least 80% of the width of the sign face.
   SIGN, MOVING. Any sign that revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or
otherwise attracts attention by moving parts, whether operated by mechanical
equipment or by natural sources, not including flags or banners.
   SIGN, MULTI-TENANT DEVELOPMENT. A sign on the site of a multi-tenant
development identifying the names of tenants or property owners, the address of
the premises, and/or the name of any legal business that owns, controls, or
manages a multi-tenant development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5254.jpg]
 
   SIGN, PIN-MOUNTED CHANNEL LETTER. A wall sign mounted directly on the face
of a building wall as individual letters, numbers, or symbols without a raceway
or background other than the background provided by the building to which the
sign is affixed. In order to qualify for the sign area ratios established for
pin-mounted channel letter signs, pin-mounted channel letter signs must not be
illuminated or be illuminated only by external lighting. Pin-mounted channel
letter signs with other forms of il-lumination are subject to raceway-mounted
channel letter sign area ratios.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5256.jpg]
 
   SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground, a building
or other structure that is not readily movable. Any sign attached to a sign
structure that has wheels will be considered a portable sign, as well as any
sign attached to a frame or other sign structure that is not permanently
attached to the ground or a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5258.jpg]
 
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign that is attached to a building and that projects
outward from the exterior wall of the building by more than 18 inches. The face
of a projecting sign is typically perpendicular to the adjacent building wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5260.jpg]
 
   SIGN, RACEWAY-MOUNTED CHANNEL LETTER. A wall sign mounted on a raceway as
individual letters, numbers, or symbols. Also includes channel letter signs
mounted on a background other than the building wall. In order to qualify as a
raceway-mounted channel letter sign, the raceway must be painted or otherwise
designed to match or blend in with the color of the wall to which it is
attached.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5262.jpg]
 
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained above the parapet
on a building with a flat roof or above the fascia board on a building with a
pitched roof.
   SIGN, SCREENED BOX WITH RAISED OR RECESSED (PUSH-THROUGH) LETTERS. A box
sign with an opaque (screened) background and lighting that highlights only the
individual letters, symbols, or logos and on which the letters, symbols, or
logos are raised recessed (pushed through) or routed onto a different plane
than the sign background, thereby giving a clearly distinguishable
"dimensional" effect to the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5264.jpg]
 
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure that supports a sign, including decorative
cover.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display
that by intent is not permanent, constructed of cloth, canvas, lightweight
fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other lightweight materials with or without
frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only.
   SIGN, WALL. A single-faced sign attached generally flush or parallel to the
wall of a building. (See also "rules for measuring wall area," §
155-13.130(C).)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5266.jpg]
 
   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window
exposed to public view. A sign that is interior to the building that faces a
window exposed to public view that is located within two feet of the window
face is a window sign for the purposes of calculating the total area of all
window signs. Merchandise used in a window display will not be considered a
window sign. (See also "rules for measuring window area," §
155-13.130(D).)
   SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain and/or vegetation and construction
improvements.
   SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY; COMMERCIAL. Any device(s) that is ground installed
and uses solar energy from the sun for generating electricity for the primary
purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not primarily for consumption on the
property on which the device or devices reside.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal,
mechanical or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING- INTEGRATED. A solar energy system that is an
integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate
mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural
part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited
to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing
materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural
components.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, STRUCTURE- MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is
mounted on the façade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH- MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is mounted
flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six inches in height
above that surface.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND- MOUNTED. A solar energy system mounted on the
ground and not attached to any other structure other than structural supports.
   SOLAR PANEL. A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels are
assembled on-site into solar arrays.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA. Human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, anus,
or the female breast below a point immediately above the top the areola that is
less than completely or opaquely covered, or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely or opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following: (i) human genitals in a
state of sexual stimulation or excitement; (ii) acts of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse, fellatio, or sodomy; (iii) fondling, kissing, or erotic
touching of specified anatomical areas; (iv) flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship; (v) masochism, erotic or sexually oriented
torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; (vi) erotic touching, fondling, or
other such contact with an animal by a human being; (vii) or human excretion,
urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in
connection with any of the activities set forth in items (i) through (vi).
   STABLE. See §
155-8.40(B)(4)).
   STORAGE, OUTDOOR. The keeping of any inventory, goods, material, or
merchandise, including raw, semi-finished, and finished materials for any
period of time outside of a building. Storage related to a residential use,
required parking or loading areas, nurseries, and the display of automobiles or
other vehicles for sale are not included in this definition.
   STREET. All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or
roadway purposes or subject to public easements.
   STREET LINE (also STREET PROPERTY LINE). The division line between private
property and a dedicated street or way, usually uninterrupted from corner to
corner in any given block.
   STRIPPING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a human change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a mobile home on a site;
preparing a site for a mobile home or installing a travel trailer on a site for
more than 180 days unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, excepting such
alterations as may be required for the safety of the building.
   SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS. For purposes of the
definitions of ADULT CABARET, ADULT STORE, or ADULT THEATER (see §
155-8.40(A)), the phrase "substantial or significant portion of its business"
is deemed to apply to any commercial establishment that satisfies one or more
of the following criteria:
      (1)   Gross sales: 30% or more of the retail dollar value of the
commercial establishment's annual gross sales derives from the sale, rental, or
viewing of adult materials.
      (2)   Floor area: 30% or more of the floor area of the commercial
establishment is devoted to the display, viewing, or presentation of adult
materials, not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
other portion of the commercial establishment not open to the public.
      (3)   Merchandise displayed: 30% or more of the retail dollar value of
all merchandise displayed at any one time is attributable to adult materials.
      (4)   Inventory: 30% or more of all inventory of the commercial
establishment (whether measured by retail dollar value or number of items)
consists at any one time of adult materials.
      (5)   Stock in trade: 30% or more of the stock in trade at the commercial
establishment consists at any one time of adult materials.
      (6)   Live performances: Live performances by persons appearing semi-
nude, or live performances that are otherwise distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities, and that are
taking place 30% or more of the time during which the commercial establishment
is open for business.
   SUPPORTING STRUCTURE. A structure, whether an antenna tower or another type
of structure that supports one or more antennas as part of a facility.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an
artificial body of water for swimming or wading, having a depth of two feet or
more at any point. This definition includes in-ground, above and on-ground
swimming pools but does not include hot tubs, spas, or other structures for
recreational bathing.
   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. Any swimming pool, located on private residential
property, the use of which is intended for the owner and guests.
   TASTING ROOM. A designated area within a craft brewery, distillery or winery
at which guests may sample and purchase alcoholic beverages and where retail
sales of merchandise related to the products being tasted are sold.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1996. Signed into law by President Clinton on
February 8, 1996. It establishes a pro-competitive, deregulatory framework for
telecommunications in the United States.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. A telecommunications carrier as defined in the
Public Utilities Act as of January 1, 1997.
   TEMPORARY MOBILE SIGN. An advertising device of a non-permanent type, used
principally for commercial purposes.
   TENANT OPERATOR. The person, including the person's family members, who are
hired to operate a farm. Normally not the owner of the farm.
   TERRACE, OPEN AND PATIO. A level plane or platform which, for the purpose of
this zoning ordinance, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the
principal structure and which is constructed not more than four feet in height
above the average level of the adjoining ground.
   TEST WIND TOWER. Wind towers that are designed solely to collect wind
generation data.
   THREATENED SPECIES. Species (including animals, plants, fungi, etc.) that
are vulnerable to endangerment in the near future and identified on official
State of Illinois and/or federal Threatened Species lists.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
   TOWER, ELECTRIC-GENERATING WIND DEVICE. The vertical component of an
electric-generating wind device or small wind energy conversion system that
elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
   TRAILER, COMMERCIAL. A vehicle or structure constructed in such a manner as
to permit the conduct of any business, trade or occupation, or use as a selling
or advertising device, or used for storage or conveyance of tools, equipment or
machinery, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels.
   TREE. A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or
trunks and numerous branches. May be classified as deciduous or evergreen.
   UNCONTAMINATED SOIL. Soil that does not contain contaminants in
concentrations that pose a threat to human health and safety and the
environment. (See also Section 3.160 of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Act.)
   UNDERSTORY. Assemblages of natural low-level woody, herbaceous, and ground
cover species, which exist in the area below the canopy of the trees.
   UNIFIED CONTROL. The combination of two or more tracts of land wherein each
owner has agreed that the subject land will be developed as part of a planned
unit development and will be subject to the control applicable to the planned
unit development.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged,
or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
   USE, LAWFUL. The use of any structure or land that conforms with all of the
regulations of this zoning ordinance and that conforms with all of the codes,
ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the
enactment of this zoning ordinance or any amendment thereto, for the structure
or land that is being examined.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and performance standards (if any) of such districts.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be either a "permitted use"
or a "special use."
   UTILITY-SCALE ENERGY PRODUCTION. An energy production facility that produces
electric energy for widespread distribution through the electric power grid.
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures that are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA. An area that is devoted to a short-term use by or for
motor vehicles, including off-street parking areas (accessory or non-
accessory); off-street loading areas; gasoline stations; car washes; and drive-
through service areas. Enclosed areas and access drives used solely for access
between the street and the vehicular use area are not considered part of a
vehicular use area. Definition does not include long-term, vehicle storage
areas or area that are not accessible to the public, such as truck terminals,
bus terminals, and tow yards.
   VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van or a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose.
   VEHICLE, MOTOR. Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, recreational vehicle,
tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by
mechanical power.
   VEHICLE FUELS, ALTERNATIVE. Electricity, CNG (compressed natural gas), LNG
(liquefied natural gas), LPG (liquefied petroleum gas), and hydrogen.
   VEHICLE FUELS, CONVENTIONAL. Gasoline and diesel fuel.
   WATER COLLECTION CISTERN. A barrel or similar container that collects and
stores rainwater or other water that would otherwise be lost as runoff or
diverted into a storm drain.
   WETLANDS. Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, and are subject to the regulations of
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
   WHIP ANTENNA. An antenna that transmits signals in 360 degrees. Whip
antennas are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six inches in
diameter and measure up to 18 inches in height. Also called omni-directional,
stick or pipe antennas.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY; COMMERCIAL. A wind energy conversion facility of equal
or greater than 500 Kw in total nameplate generating capacity.
   WIND TURBINE GENERATOR. The component of an electric-generating wind device
that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. That part of the signal distribution
system used or operated by a telecommunications carrier under a license from
the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) consisting of a combination of
improvements and equipment including (i) one or more antennas; (ii) a
supporting structure and the hardware by which antennas are attached; (iii)
equipment housing; and (iv) ancillary equipment such as signal transmission
cables and miscellaneous hardware.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY LOT. The lot on which a facility is or
will be located.
   WOODLANDS, EXISTING. Existing trees and shrubs of a number, size, and
species that accomplish the same general function as new plantings.
   YARD. The actual (as opposed to "required") horizontal distance that exists
between a principal building and a property line. See also SETBACK.
(Ord. effective 10-1-2012; Am. Ord. 14-44, passed 3-20-2014; Am. Ord. 15-203,
passed 7- 16-2015; Am. Ord. 16-227, passed 12-15-2016; Ord. 18-1, passed 1-18-
2018; Ord. 18-192, passed 10-18-2018; Ord. 18-222, passed 8-16- 2018; Ord. 18-
240, passed 9-20-2018; Ord. 19- 352, passed 12-19-2019; Ord. 20-266, passed 8-
20-2020; Ord. 21-138, passed 5-20-2021; Ord. 21-233, passed 7-15-2021; Ord. 23-
70, passed 3-16-2023)
CHAPTER 156: POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
Section
   
156.01   Pollution control facility regulations adopted by reference
§ 156.01 POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The adopting rules and regulations relating to the form, contents, fees and
filing procedures for application for the approval of sites for the location of
new regional pollution control facilities in the county’s unincorporated areas,
as adopted at the July 28, 1982 meeting and as amended from time to time, is
adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this code as if full set out
herein.
(1980 Code, § 156.01) (Res. 82-91, adopted 7-28-1982; Res. 87-161, adopted 12-
17-1987; Res. 93-32, passed 2-18-1992)
CHAPTER 157: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Adoption of Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy
   
157.02   Program Review Committee
Tax Abatement Guidelines for Location and Retention of Commercial and
Industrial Businesses
   
157.15   Abatement guidelines
   
157.16   Abatement procedure
   
157.17   Administration; reporting
   
157.18   Termination of abatement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY.
   The County Board adopts and approves the Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy.
(1980 Code, § 157.01) (Res. 90-148, adopted 6-21-1990; Res. 94-170, adopted 6-
16-1994; Res. 95-214, passed 9-21-1995; Res. 04-251, adopted 6-17-2004)
§ 157.02 PROGRAM REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The County Chamber of Commerce is designated the Overall Economic
Development Program Review Committee for the county.
(1980 Code, § 157.02) (Res. 90-85, adopted 4-19-1990; Res. 94-145, adopted 6-9-
1994; Res. 95-215, adopted 9-21-1995)
TAX ABATEMENT GUIDELINES FOR LOCATION AND RETENTION OF COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL BUSINESSES
§ 157.15 ABATEMENT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   All abatements shall be construed in accordance with and governed by
the laws of the state.
   (B)   The company must agree to stay in the county twice as long as the
length of their abatement. If this does not occur, the company is required to
repay the abatement to the county.
   (C)   Term of abatement.
      (1)   The term of abatement shall be determined on a case-by-case basis
by the Finance Committee of the County Board, pursuant to state law.
      (2)   Companies applying for a county tax abatement must demonstrate that
they have initiated the abatement/incentive process with other local taxing
bodies. Although the county requires that local incentives be formally agreed
to prior to approval and execution of the county’s agreement of intent to abate
property taxes, the county may, on a case-by-case basis, grant approval for a
project notwithstanding the absence of the other local incentives. Final
approval by the county would be granted after the company notified the county
that an abatement or incentive was awarded by other taxing bodies. If the
request for abatement or incentive from other taxing bodies is denied, the
county shall review the abatement request, and, on a case-by-case basis, make a
final determination.
   (D)   Abatements are prohibited for residential construction or
improvements, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200 §§ 18-165 et seq.
   (E)   Abatements shall begin in the tax levy year that the project is
substantially completed, and the subject property is fully assessed as improved
property by the Township Assessor as indicated by the records of the Township
Assessor. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to notify the County
Executive and the county extension office when an occupancy permit has been
issued for the improved premises which are the subject of the abatement.
   (F)   Taxes may be abated on existing facilities which are in the process of
a retention/expansion project if the project qualifies under the CED evaluation
criteria; existing businesses that have been located in the county for a
minimum of five years will be given a 20% bonus in the point evaluation of the
project. The facility will continue to operate in the county for a period of
not less than twice the period of the abatement and must repay the abatement to
the county if it fails to comply with this requirement.
   (G)   Businesses that qualify as county target industries will be given a
20% bonus in the point evaluation of the project; the United States corporate
headquarters of a non-target industry category will be given a 20% bonus;
however, the United States corporate headquarters of a target industry business
will be given a 30% bonus in the point evaluation of the project.
   (H)   If the project is for a warehouse and distribution user only, the
project must meet 120% of the minimum evaluation criteria to be eligible for
abatement. In addition the project must employ a minimum of 125 FTE throughout
the year.
   (I)   Residential projects are not eligible for abatements; however, multi-
use projects with a residential component are eligible for abatement, if the
residential tax portion of the tax levy can be excluded from the abatement.
   (J)   The application to county for tax abatement will include a request for
information on the company’s philosophy on community involvement and specific
examples of how they have given back to communities at other company
facilities. Final evaluation of the abatement request and the terms and
conditions of the abatement, at the discretion of the County Board may be
influenced by the review of this information.
   (K)   There shall be employed, either directly or indirectly, at all times
during construction covered by the agreement, a minimum of 75% local (county)
labor at the prevailing wage from the county, for construction, from the
beginning to the completion of the construction covered by the abatement,
unless good cause is shown.
   (L)   Does the company have a plan or policies intended to promote growth
and development of minority employment and minority/women business enterprises
that have the work ethic and desire to succeed? If so, plans, policies and
practices regarding this project should be cited.
   (M)   Require the contractor and all subcontractors to participate in
apprenticeship and training programs approved and registered with the United
States Department of Labor’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training or any
successor entity, to the extent that the programs are reasonably available
within the contractor’s or subcontractor’s employees’ trade or trades.
(1980 Code, § 157.10) (Res. 03-138, adopted 4-17-2003; Res. 09-113, adopted 4-
16-2009)
§ 157.16 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A completed Application to County of Will for Tax Abatement must be
submitted to the County Center for Economic Development (CED). Upon receipt of
the completed application, the CED shall evaluate the request pursuant to the
abatement criteria in effect at the time of application. The CED will then
submit the application to the County Executive for review and recommendation
prior to consideration by the County Board.
   (B)   Qualified requests shall then be presented to the Finance Committee
for review and recommendation to the Executive Committee, for placement of a
resolution of intent to abate on the County Board agenda for consideration. The
County Board grants final approval on a case-by-case basis; at which time, the
name of the company shall become public.
   (C)   Upon approval of the resolution of intent to abate, and execution of
the resolution by the County Executive, the agreement of intent to abate
property taxes shall be forwarded to the company by the County Board office.
The agreement shall be executed by the company first, and returned to the
county for execution by the County Executive.
   (D)   Upon notification of the county by the company that the project is
completed, a resolution for the abatement of property taxes shall be presented
to the Finance Committee, for review and recommendation to the Executive
Committee, for placement on the County Board agenda for consideration.
   (E)   After approval of the resolution for the abatement of property taxes
and execution by the County Executive, certified copies shall be delivered to
the company, as well as the County Clerk–Tax Extension Office, the County
Supervisor of Assessments office and the CED.
(1980 Code, § 157.11) (Res. 03-138, adopted 4-17-2003; Res. 09-113, adopted 4-
16-2009)
§ 157.17 ADMINISTRATION; REPORTING.
   (A)   The County Chamber/Center for Economic Development agrees to track all
abatements granted, excluding those in the Des Plaines River Valley enterprise
zone, for compliance with all requirements and agreements. The zone abatements
fall under a different set of guidelines, which are monitored by the Zone
Administrator.
   (B)   The CED also agrees to make an annual written report to the County
Board Finance Committee, during the month of August.
(1980 Code, § 157.12) (Res. 03-138, adopted 4-17-2003; Res. 09-113, adopted 4-
16-2009)
§ 157.18 TERMINATION OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The obligation of the county to abate taxes herein shall be terminated
upon the occurrence of any of the following:
      (1)   The insolvency of the business (owner), but only in the event the
insolvency causes the subject property to cease operations;
      (2)   Except as provided in the agreement of intent to abate property
taxes, the sale of the subject property or assignment of the tax abatement
agreement;
      (3)   The construction of residential improvements on the subject
property, provided, however, that in the event the residential improvements are
identified by separate permanent index numbers (PINs), the cancellation of the
abatement shall apply only to the abatement attributable to those PIN numbers
so identified;
      (4)   If there is a material misrepresentation in the company’s
application; and
      (5)   On the happening of any of the prohibited acts specified in the
agreement of intent to abate property taxes.
   (B)   In the event that any of the following events occur, abatement
previously granted shall be repaid to the county to the extent the prohibited
acts prevent the county from collecting unabated taxes as projected by this
agreement according to the provisions set forth herein.
      (1)   The company files tax rate objections or otherwise challenges the
rate of taxes levied by and extended by the county during a period of time
commencing on the date of the agreement and concluding on December 31 of the
year in which the last abatement provided for is realized.
      (2)   Except as provided in the agreement of intent to abate property
taxes, if there is an assignment of this agreement and the subject property
ceases to be operated as originally intended.
   (C)   The agreement and obligations of the county shall terminate in the
event that the project is not fully constructed and operational, as proposed,
within three years of the date of the agreement of intent to abate property
taxes.
(1980 Code, § 157.13) (Res. 03-138, adopted 4-17-2003; Res. 09-113, adopted 4-
16-2009)
CHAPTER 158: LAND USE FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
158.01   Land use fee schedule
   
158.02   Building fee schedule
   
158.03   School facilities fee
§ 158.01 LAND USE FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Fees for site development permits required for the construction of a
single-family residence shall use the following schedule:
      (1)   Two hundred twenty-five dollars for sites required to obtain a site
development permit for construction of a single-family residence in an
established subdivision which meets the following conditions:
         (a)   All engineering for the subdivision has been submitted, reviewed
and approved by a Subdivision Engineer at the Land Use Department;
         (b)   No significant drainage problems have become known in the
subdivision;
         (c)   The engineering of the subdivision was completed within five
years of the date of the issuance of the site development permit and developed
under the same standards in full force and effect at the time of the site
development permit is issued;
         (d)   There are no floodplains, floodways or wetlands on the site; and
         (e)   No designated detention area exists on the site.
      (2)   Two hundred seventy-five dollars for sites required to obtain a
site development permit for construction of a single-family residence in an
established subdivision which does not meet the conditions listed in division
(A)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Two hundred seventy-five dollars for sites required to obtain a
site development permit for construction of a single-family residence on sites
less than five acres and not part of a subdivision; and
      (4)   As set forth in the current fee schedule (divisions (B) and (C) of
this section) for all other required site development permits.
   (B)   Fees for the following applications shall be assessed as identified
below in this section:
      (1)   Residential and agricultural map amendments;
      (2)   Residential special use permits;
      (3)   Residential site development permits (excepting those identified in
division (A) of this section);
      (4)   Residential preliminary plats of subdivision;
      (5)   Residential final plats of subdivision;
      (6)   Residential permits to construct a mobile home park;
      (7)   Residential initial permits to operate a mobile home park; and
      (8)   Residential annual licenses to operate a mobile home park.
Up to and including 1 acre              $675
> 1 acre up to and including 5 acres    $1,250 flat fee
6 acres up to and including 25 acres    $1,250 + $85 per acre over 5 acres
26 acres up to and including 50 acres   $2,950 + $55 per acre over 25 acres
51 acres up to and including 100 acres  $4,325 + $35 per acre over 50 acres
101 acres up to and including 500 acres $6,075 + $20 per acre over 100 acres
Over 500 acres                          $14,075 + $15 per acre over 500 acres
Any portion of an acre shall be considered a full acre. Fees shall be assessed
for each individual request within an application.
 
   (C)   Fees for the following applications shall be assessed as identified
below in this section:
      (1)   Commercial and industrial map amendments;
      (2)   Nonresidential special use permits;
      (3)   Nonresidential site development permits;
      (4)   Commercial and industrial preliminary plats of subdivision; and
      (5)   Commercial and industrial final plats of subdivision.
 
1 acre up to and including 5 acres      $2,500 flat fee
6 acres up to and including 25 acres    $2,500 + $85 per acre over 5 acres
26 acres up to and including 50 acres   $4,200 + $55 per acre over 25 acres
51 acres up to and including 100 acres  $5,575 + $35 per acre over 50 acres
101 acres up to and including 500 acres $7,325 + $20 per acre over 100 acres
Over 500 acres                          $15,325 + $15 per acre over 500 acres
Any portion of an acre shall be considered a full acre. Fees shall be assessed
for each individual request within an application.
 
   (D)   Fees for variance applications shall be assessed as follows:
 
Initial variance                                $550 flat fee
Each additional variance on a single zoning lot $100
 
   (E)   Additional fees for applications resultant from violations shall be an
additional 50% of base application fee.
   (F)   Fees for permitted wireless telecommunications facilities as defined
by statute shall be assessed as follows:
 
New facility $4,000
Co-location  $1,250
Fees include zoning and engineering reviews (expedited as required by
statute). Additional fees apply if variances and special use permits are
required.
 
   (G)   Fees for temporary use permits shall be assessed as follows: $200.
   (H)   Fees for administrative variances (one or more requests on same
application) shall be assessed as follows: $200.
   (I)   In addition to the above stated fees, the applicant will also be
responsible for the payment of all costs incurred in the publication of the
notice of hearing. A $100 bond check must be submitted with the filing fee to
ensure payment of publication.
   (J)   Permit fees for all signs shall be assessed as follows: $50 plus an
additional $2 per square foot of the gross surface area of the sign.
   (K)   Fees for the annual registration of static advertising signs shall be
assessed as follows: $150 must be submitted to the Land Use Department by
February 1 of each year for each sign face on an advertising sign structure.
The annual registration fee will be doubled if paid after February 1.
   (L)   Fees for the annual registration of dynamic advertising signs shall be
assessed as follows: $650 must be submitted to the Land Use Department by
February 1 of each year for each sign face on an advertising sign structure.
The annual registration fee will be doubled if paid after February 1. The Land
Use Department shall perform quarterly inspections to verify compliance with
ordinance requirements.
   (M)   No application shall be accepted, nor considered filed, without
payment of the appropriate application fee, except as may be waived, on a case-
by-case basis, by the County Board.
   (N)   Subsequent to the initial acceptance of an application for zoning and/
or subdivision development related matters, if it should be determined, during
the review process, that additional zoning and/or subdivision requirements must
be met, which were not addressed in the initial application, the applicant
shall be notified and required to pay any related additional fees, prior to
proceeding further with the review process. Refusal of the applicant to pay
additional fees, or failure to do so within 30 days of notification, shall be
interpreted to mean that the application(s) have been withdrawn.
   (O)   Application fees shall not be refunded or waived, except as may be
determined on a case-by-case basis, by the County Board, or as determined by
the Land Use Department if fees are erroneously paid or collected.
   (P)   Applications that become inactive, whereby applicants have been
required to submit additional information or request consideration at a
commission or committee meeting, and have failed to do so for a period of more
than 180 consecutive days, shall become void and fees shall not be refunded.
The resubmittal of a new application and fees shall be required to pursue the
request. After 150 consecutive days of inactivity, the county shall notify the
applicant in writing that the application will become void in 30 days. If the
applicant fails to submit the required additional information or request
consideration at the appropriate commission or committee within 30 days of the
notice, the county shall notify the applicant in writing that the application
is void. The Land Use Department Director may grant an extension of no more
than 180 days upon written request by the applicant.
   (Q)   A fee of 0.1% of its face amount shall be charged to file, extend or
renew each letter of credit.
   (R)   (1)   Building permits shall be valid for one year from date of issue,
after which they become void, unless renewed on the same basis as the initial
permit application indicated below:
         (a)   Any structure, the purpose for which included an industrial use:
$150, plus $0.13 per square foot or portion thereof, not to exceed a total fee
of $13,000;
         (b)   Any structure, the purpose for which includes a commercial use:
$150, plus $0.12 per square feet or portion thereof, not to exceed a total fee
of $8,300;
         (c)   Any structure, the purpose for which includes a residential use:
$150, plus $0.11 per square feet, or portion thereof, not to exceed a total fee
of $700;
         (d)   Any structure, the purpose for which serves neither industrial,
commercial or residential use: $150, plus $0.10 per square foot or portion
thereof, not to exceed $500, except that no fee shall be charged for the
structure which is less than 50 square feet in size;
         (e)   Any structure, serving multiple zoning purposes, shall have its
permit application fee based on the most intensive zoning use;
         (f)   Any construction requiring a building permit, the inspection of
which exceeds the competence of staff assigned to the County Land Use
Department, and which is not subject to inspection by state or federal
authorities, shall be assessed a building permit fee, as indicated in divisions
(O)(1)(a) through (O)(1)(e) above, plus the direct payment of any costs
associated with the need to temporarily retain specialized inspectors solely
incident to the construction;
         (g)   Any construction requiring a building permit, which occurs
without the issuance of a valid building permit, including permits issued due
to applicant misrepresentation, shall be assessed a penalty fee, separate from
but equal to, the proper building permit application fee, for the construction,
in addition to any fine, which may be imposed in accordance with law, by a
court of competent jurisdiction; and
         (h)   If an inspection has been requested and, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector upon arrival at the inspection site, the job is not ready or
has not progressed to a point where an inspection can be made properly or
access is not possible to perform the inspection, a $50 reinspection fee shall
be assessed. No further inspections shall be made until the reinspection fee
has been paid.
      (2)   No application shall be accepted, nor considered filed without
payment of the appropriate application fee, except as may be waived, on a case
by case basis, by the County Board.
      (3)   Application fees shall not be refundable, except as may be
determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the County Board.
   (S)   Building, zoning and inspections fees shall not be required from:
      (1)   County taxing jurisdictions; and
      (2)   Activities or projects located within the Des Plaines River Valley
Enterprise Zone.
   (T)   Other service fees.
      (1)   Preparation of verbatim transcripts of sworn testimony or public
hearings:
 
Basic official copy cost       $0.50
Actual cost incurred from having a state certified court reporter transcribe
and prepare an original and one copy of the sworn testimony or public hearing
Certification and sealing cost $1.00
 
      (2)   Reproduction of maps and engineering drawings, the producible
original of which is on file in the County Land Use Department:
 
Basic official copy cost       $0.50
Cost per page                  $10.00
Certification and sealing cost $1.00
 
      (3)   Other miscellaneous reproduction services including, but not
limited to each copy of resolutions, reports, plan, permits, ordinances and
applications:
 
Basic official copy cost       $0.50
First page                     $1.00
Pages 2 through 20 each        $0.50
All pages more than 20 each    $0.25
Certification and selling cost $1.00
 
      (4)   No service request shall be accepted, without payment of the
appropriate service fee.
      (5)   Services fees shall not be refundable.
      (6)   Reproduction service fees, for the first copy of any document,
shall not be required from:
         (a)   County Board members, for a copy requested for their official
use;
         (b)   County governmental agencies or departments; and
         (c)   County taxing jurisdictions.
(1980 Code, § 158.01) (Res. 89-263, adopted 10-29-1989; Res. 92-167, passed 8-
20-1992; Res. 95-140, passed 7-20-1995; Res. 98-20, adopted 2-19-1998; Ord. 07-
86, passed 3-15- 2007; Res. 11-159, passed 5-19-2011; Res. 11- 231, passed 7-
21-2011)
§ 158.02 BUILDING FEE SCHEDULE.
1.  $75 flat rate permit fee section (1 inspection permits)              $75
   a. Sheds less than 200 square feet without concrete                   
   b. Windows                                                            
   c. Roofing                                                            
   d. Plumbing (with 1 inspection).                                      
   e. Electrical and/or HVAC (with 1 inspection)                         
   f. Stand by generators                                                
   g. Will County Historic Landmark Residential or Commercial            
   h. Temporary building (with 1 inspection)                             
   i. Lawn Sprinkler and Fire Suppression permits (plumbing)             
2.  $125 flat rate permit fee section (2 inspection permits)             $125
   a. Deck                                                               
   b. Siding                                                             
   c. Underpinning/shoring of existing foundations                       
   d. Fireplace only                                                     
   e. Plumbing (with more than 1 inspection needed)                      
   f. Electrical and/or HVAC (with more than 1 inspection needed)        
   g. Plumbing and electrical/HVAC permit                                
   h. Pergola                                                            
   i. Temporary building (with 2 inspections)                            
3.  a. Above ground swimming pool/hot tub/spa or similar                 $175
   b. In-ground swimming pool                                           $300
   c. Public swimming pool                                              $500
4.  Agricultural Exempt Structure (see electrical and plumbing fees)     No Fee
5.  a. Residential remodel/alteration/repair 700 square feet or less     $200
   b. Residential remodel/alteration/repair 701 to 1,400 square feet    $300
   c. Residential remodel/alteration/repair 1,401 to 2,000 square feet  $400
   d. Residential remodel/alteration/repair 2,001 to 2,600 square feet  $500
   e. Residential remodel/alteration/repair over 2,600 square feet plus $600
    $25 for every additional 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof
6.  a. Residential addition and remodel under 500 square feet            $450
   b. Residential addition and remodel 500 to 999 square feet           $575
   c. Residential addition and remodel 1,000 to 1,999 square feet       $700
   d. Residential addition and remodel over 2,000 square feet plus $100 $825
    for every additional 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof
    e. All square footage is exterior dimensions of living space and
   alteration square footage of existing space affected by the          -----
    addition.
7.  a. New Single Family Home, Duplex or Townhouse under 3,000 square    $2,700
    feet
   b. New Single Family Home, Duplex or Townhouse 3,000 square feet to  $3,000
    4,000 square feet
    c. New Single Family Home, Duplex or Townhouse over 4,000 square
   feet plus $100 for every additional 1,000 square feet or fraction    $3,300
    thereof
   d. New Mobile Homes                                                  $700
    e. All square footage is exterior dimensions of living space,
    garages, bonus rooms finished or unfinished, covered patios, three
   season rooms, screened porches and similar spaces (not including     -----
    basements, crawl spaces and attics not accessed by a permanent
    stair)
8.  a. New Residential Accessory Structure less than 400 square feet     $125
    (except when meeting the $75 flat rate fee section above)
    b. New Residential Accessory structure over 400 square feet plus an
   additional $5 for each additional 100 square feet or fraction        $200
    thereof
9.  a. Commercial Alteration or Tenant Buildout under 500 square feet    $1,000
   b. Commercial Alteration or Tenant Buildout 500 square feet to 999   $1,300
    square feet
   c. Commercial Alteration or Tenant Buildout 1,000 to 1,999 square    $1,600
    feet
   d. Commercial Alteration or Tenant Buildout over 2,000 square feet   $1,900
    to 2,999 square feet
   e. Commercial Alteration or Tenant Buildout over 3,000 square feet   $2,200
    (plus $100 for every 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof).
10. a. New Commercial under 1,500 square feet                            $1,800
   b. New Commercial 1,500 square feet to 2,999 square feet             $2,800
   c. New Commercial 3,000 square feet to 3,999 square feet             $3,800
   d. New Commercial 4,000 square feet to 4,999 square feet             $4,800
   e. New Commercial over 5,000 square feet plus $200 for every         $5,800
    additional 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof
11. a. Sign - On premises                                                $100
   b. Sign - Off Premises                                               $500
12. a. Demolition accessory structure                                    $75
   b. Demolition Residential Dwelling Structure                         $200
   c. Demolition commercial structure                                   $300
13. a. Telecommunication Tower New (Cell Tower)                          $1,000
   b. Telecommunication Tower Upgrade (Cell Tower upgrade)              $350
14. a. Electric Energy Production Systems (Wind or Solar) 0 to 100 kw    $125
   b. Electric Energy Production Systems (wind or solar) 100 kw to 500  $1,100
    kw
   c. Electric Energy Production Systems (wind or solar) over 500 kw    $2,100
   d. Solar Farm                                                        $8,000
15. Exterior Lighting                                                    $250
16. a. Double all permit fees for work done without a permit except when  
    performed by previous owners
17. a. Additional Inspection or Inspection only fee (required after the  $75
    2nd failed inspection)
18. a. Change of Use Permit (to determine commercial remodel parameters) $200
    a. Permit extension %100 of original fee for entire year or 1/12 the
19. fee per month. Exception: %50 of original fee for an additional year  
    if renewed prior to permit expiration.
20. a. Structures not connected must be on a separate permit. Structures  
    connected with roofs only will be on the same permit.
 
   (A)   Plan exam fees shall be paid based on Table 158.02(1).
Plan Exam Fees
 Buildings Constructed under the      Buildings Constructed under the
 International Residential Code (IRC) International Building Code (IBC)
Plan Exam Fees
                          Buildings Constructed      Buildings Constructed
                          under the International    under the International
                          Residential Code (IRC)     Building Code (IBC)
0 to 400 S.F.             $100                       $250
401 to 1,000 S.F.         $150                       $300
1,001 to 2,000 S.F.       $200                       $350
2,001 to 3,000 S.F.       $250                       $400
3,001 to 4,000 S.F.       $300                       $450
4,001 to 5,000 S.F.       $350                       $500
All mobile units          $100                       $250
For each additional 1,000 square feet or fraction
thereof $20. When determined by the code official,    
the plans will be sent to a professional plan
reviewer with applicant to pay all costs.
Exterior dimensions shall be used to determine plan
review fees of all areas on all levels including but
not limited to finished and unfinished basements,
garages, decks, covered patios, conditioned floor
space, three season rooms, and unfinished bonus
rooms.
Exception: Attic space of single family homes unless
accessed by a permanent stairway. In this instance
only the proposed room area shall be counted.
Exception: Only the ground level of accessory         
structures shall be used to determine plan review
fees where structure either meets zoning maximum
building height or is not accessed by a permanent
stair. Exception: Damage repair and remodel plan
review fees for International Residential Code
Buildings shall be a flat rate of $50 Exception:
Detached accessory structure plan review fees shall
be capped at $150 for International Residential Code
buildings
All plan exam fees shall be non-refundable            
Minimum plan exam fee and
processing fee for
miscellaneous permits     $50                         
Exception: Any flat rate
permit fees in this
ordinance
 
   (B)   Construction of “process components” (piping, vessels, equipment,
etc.) Manufacturing facility processing component fee schedule:
Cost of Construction Fee
Cost of Construction    Fee
0—$99,999.99          $500
$100,000—$250,000     $1,250
$250,001—$500,000     $2,500
$500,001—$1,000,000   $5,000
$1,000,001—$2,000,000 $10,000
$2,000,001—$3,000,000 $15,000
$3,000,001—$4,000,000 $20,000
$4,000,001—$5,000,000 $25,000
$5,000,001—$6,000,000 $30,000
$6,000,001—$7,000,000 $35,000
$7,000,001—$8,000,000 $40,000
$8,000,001—$9,000,000 $45,000
$9,000,001—$10,000,000$50,000
$10,000,001—$20,000,00$55,000
Over $20,000,000        $60,000
 
   (C)   Permits - third parties. The building official shall have the right to
have permits and plans reviewed and inspections performed for code compliance
by a third party consultant and all costs shall be borne by the owner of the
building or structures.
(1980 Code, § 158.02) (Res. 95-166, passed 9-21-1995; Res. 01-323, passed 8-16-
2001; Res. 03-478, passed 11-20-2003; Res. 07-352, passed 9-20-2007; Am. Ord.
21-102, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 158.03 SCHOOL FACILITIES FEE.
   (A)   General. The County Board, except in the case of age restricted
developments, will require the payment of a school facilities fee as a
condition of special subdivision, or final plat of PUD to be used for
residential purposes in the county. Therefore, unless authorized or directed by
the County Board, the approval of a special use permit, final plat of
subdivision or final plat of PUD shall be effected conditioned upon the
agreement of the owner to pay a school facilities fee in substantial accordance
with the provisions set forth in division (D) below.
   (B)   School districts to provide indemnification/ intergovernmental
agreement. It shall be a condition of the receipt of the school facilities fees
that the benefitted school district shall enter into an intergovernmental
agreement with the county upon terms and conditions acceptable to the County
Board and that the agreement shall require, among other terms, it defend and
indemnify the county from and against any and all claims or actions brought or
asserted against the county in connection with the imposition, collection,
administration or expenditure of the school facilities fees.
   (C)   Reservation of powers. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to
limit, condition or impair the exercise of powers conferred on the county to
approve special use permits, final plats of subdivision or final plats of PUD,
to regulate further the zoning, subdivision or development of land, to levy or
impose taxes and fees and to exercise other governmental functions and powers.
The establishment of policy herein shall not be construed as a contract with
any party. This section may not be enforced by private action.
   (D)   Development fees.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   In consideration of the approval of this final plat of
subdivision, final plat of PUD or special use permit by the county, the owner
hereby agrees, for itself and its successors, to timely pay in full the
following items (“development fees”) in accordance with the applicable
ordinances or conditions, as those ordinances or conditions may be
presently constituted or as may hereafter be amended, including but not limited
to:
            1.   School Site Contribution Chapter, Chapter 160; and
            2.   School facilities fees as set forth below;
         (b)   For purposes of this division, development fees shall only be
utilized for new school buildings, building additions and improvements, school
site improvements and related infrastructure (hereinafter “school facilities”).
      (2)   Special provisions relating to school facilities. In addition to
any other tax or fee levied or imposed by the county, the owner shall also pay
a school facilities fee as set forth herein as a condition of receiving a
special use permit, final plat of subdivision or final plat of PUD, which will
add children to the schools.
         (a)   Unit school districts. The school facilities fee shall be paid
by the owner in accordance with the following schedule for a unit school
district consisting of kindergarten through twelfth grade:
School Facilities Fee - Unit School District (K-12)
Number of 1/1/2004 to 6/ 7/1/2004 to 1/1/2005 to 6/ 7/1/2005 to 2006 2007 2008
Bedrooms  30/2004        12/31/2004  30/2005        12/31/2005
School Facilities Fee - Unit School District (K-12)
Number of  1/1/2004 to 7/1/2004 to 1/1/2005 to 7/1/2005 to 2006   2007   2008
Bedrooms   6/30/2004   12/31/2004  6/30/2005   12/31/2005
Detached Single-Family Dwelling Units
4+ bedroom $2,640      $3,307      $3,974      $4,640      $4,826 $5,019 $5,220
3 bedroom  $1,763      $2,430      $3,097      $3,763      $3,914 $4,070 $4,233
2 bedroom  $681                    $708                    $736   $766   $796
Attached Single-Family Dwelling Units
4+ bedroom $1,569      $1,902      $2,236      $2,569      $2,672 $2,779 $2,890
3 bedroom  $900        $1,067      $1,234      $1,400      $1,455 $1,514 $1,575
2 bedroom  $806                    $838                    $872   $907   $943
Apartments
3+ bedroom $1,846                  $1,920                  $1,997 $2,077 $2,160
2 bedroom  $651                    $677                    $704   $732   $761
1 bedroom  $16                     $16                     $17    $18    $18
 
         (b)   Elementary school districts. The school facilities fee shall be
paid by the owner in accordance with the following schedule for an elementary
school district consisting of kindergarten through eighth grade:
School Facilities Fee - Elementary School District (K-8)
Number of 1/1/2004 to 6/ 7/1/2004 to 1/1/2005 to 6/ 7/1/2005 to 2006 2007 2008
Bedrooms  30/2004        12/31/2004  30/2005        12/31/2005
School Facilities Fee - Elementary School District (K-8)
Number of  1/1/2004 to 7/1/2004 to 1/1/2005 to 7/1/2005 to 2006   2007   2008
Bedrooms   6/30/2004   12/31/2004  6/30/2005   12/31/2005
Detached Single-Family Dwelling Units
4+ bedroom $1,977      $2,477      $2,976      $3,476      $3,615 $3,760 $3,910
3 bedroom  $1,215      $1,674      $2,134      $2,593      $2,697 $2,805 $2,917
2 bedroom  $581                    $604                    $628   $653   $679
Attached Single-Family Dwelling Units
4+ bedroom $1,041      $1,262      $1,484      $1,705      $1,773 $1,844 $1,918
3 bedroom  $688        $815        $943        $1,070      $1,113 $1,158 $1,204
2 bedroom  $621                    $646                    $672   $699   $727
Apartments
3+ bedroom $1,266                  $1,317                  $1,370 $1,425 $1,481
2 bedroom  $441                    $458                    $477   $496   $515
1 bedroom  $11                     $11                     $12    $12    $12
 
         (c)   High school districts. The school facilities fee shall be paid
by the owner in accordance with the following schedule for a high school
district consisting of ninth grade through twelfth grade:
School Facilities Fee - High School District (9-12)
Number of 1/1/2004 to 6/ 7/1/2004 to 1/1/2005 to 6/ 7/1/2005 to 2006 2007 2008
Bedrooms  30/2004        12/31/2004  30/2005        12/31/2005
School Facilities Fee - High School District (9-12)
Number of  1/1/2004 to 7/1/2004 to 1/1/2005 to 7/1/2005 to 2006   2007   2008
Bedrooms   6/30/2004   12/31/2004  6/30/2005   12/31/2005
Detached Single-Family Dwelling Units
4+ bedroom $663        $830        $998        $1,164      $1,211 $1,259 $1,310
3 bedroom  $548        $756        $963        $1,170      $1,217 $1,265 $1,316
2 bedroom  $100                    $104                    $108   $113   $117
Attached Single-Family Dwelling Units
4+ bedroom $528        $640        $752        $864        $899   $935   $972
3 bedroom  $212        $252        $291        $330        $342   $356   $371
2 bedroom  $185                    $192                    $200   $208   $216
Apartments
3+ bedroom $580                    $603                    $627   $652   $679
2 bedroom  $210                    $218                    $227   $236   $246
1 bedroom  $5                      $5                      $5     $6     $6
 
         (d)   Annual adjustments. Beginning in 2009, the amount of the school
facilities fee shall be annually increased by 4% per year.
         (e)   Time of payment of school facilities fees. School facilities
fees shall be paid in full for a particular dwelling unit prior to the
application for a permit to construct the dwelling unit. Payment shall be made
directly to the school district or districts in which the dwelling unit is
located. Evidence of payment shall be issued by the school district and shall
be submitted to the County Land Use Department at the time of building permit
application. The failure to provide sufficient evidence of the required payment
shall constitute sufficient grounds for the denial of the application for a
building permit, or for the suspension or revocation of a building permit.
In addition, the County Land Use Department may refuse to issue a certificate
of occupancy, or may suspend or revoke the same, if sufficient evidence of
payment of the school facilities impact fee is not presented.
      (3)   Waiver of right to contest development fees. The owner, for itself
and its successors, hereby waives and disclaims any and all right or claim it
may have or hereafter acquire under which the owner or its successors may seek
to avoid, reduce, condition or delay the payment of development fees or seek a
refund or rebate thereof, or that would have the effect of invalidating the
fees or impairing the collection thereof.
      (4)   Covenant not to sue. In addition to the foregoing, owner shall not
bring suit, not shall it join or become included in any proceeding, including,
but not limited to, a class action proceeding, that:
         (a)   Seeks to enjoin, restrain, condition or impair the enforcement
of conditions or ordinances imposing, implementing or amending development
fees;
         (b)   Seeks a declaration regarding the validity, constitutionality or
enforceability of those conditions or ordinances;
         (c)   Seeks the mandatory approval or execution of subdivision plats
or construction permits without the full and prompt payment of development fees
by a writ of mandamus or injunction;
         (d)   Seeks to enjoin, restrain, condition or impair the payment or
collection of money or the transfer or improvement of property pursuant to
ordinances or conditions imposing, implementing or amending development fees;
         (e)   Claims that the enforcement of conditions or ordinances imposing
development fees, as applied to the owner, constitute a taking; and
         (f)   Claims the conditions or ordinances establishing, implementing
or amending the development fees were not validly enacted.
      (5)   Reliance by county. The county has agreed to approve a final plat
of subdivision, final plat of PUD or special use permit for the parcel
conditioned upon, in conjunction with and reliance upon the owner’s payment of
development fees.
      (6)   Other taxes and fees. The payment of development fees shall be in
addition to any other tax, fee, charge, assessment or requirement levied or
imposed by the county.
      (7)   Owner’s recorded declaration.
         (a)   The owner shall provide, prior to this case being considered by
the County Board, a recorded copy of the declaration of covenants for the
applicable homeowner’s association for the subject property, which contains
substantially the following language:
      The record owner of each lot, shall at the time of application for
building permit, pay a school facilities fee in accordance with the attached
Exhibit “   ”. This is a private obligation running with the land at law. If
the owner does not pay the fee at the time of application for building permit,
the same shall constitute a lien on the lot. This covenant and foreclosure of
the lien is a restriction placed upon this property by the declarant
(developer) and shall be enforceable by the developer or by the affected school
district. The lot owner shall be responsible for all reasonable attorney’s fees
and costs incurred in enforcing this covenant. If the zoning is not approved
for the property by the County Board or if the County Board does not impose the
payment of school facilities fees as a condition to the special use permit if
applicable, this condition shall be considered null and void. This covenant may
not be rescinded or amended without consent of the affected school district(s).
         (b)   The owner or petitioner will present to the county, prior to the
time of action on the rezoning or special use permit request, at its cost, a
commitment for title insurance issued or later dated not more than five days
before action by the County Board, showing the covenant has been recorded and
is a valid declaration of the requirement on the property, together with an
affidavit that the covenant has not been amended, rescinded or revoked.
(Res. 04-421, passed 8-21-2004)
CHAPTER 159: CONTRIBUTIONS TO LIBRARY DISTRICTS
Section
   
159.01   Library District Contributions
§ 159.01 LIBRARY DISTRICT CONTRIBUTIONS.
   As a condition of approval of final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat
of a planned unit development, or of an application for permit for mobile home
park, each subdivider, developer or builder of a residential subdivision,
planned unit development or mobile home park located in a library district and
in the unincorporated area of the county shall be required to dedicate land or
make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the development.
   (A)   Amount of land required. It has been determined that one acre per
10,000 of population is needed to provide a comfortable and relaxed atmosphere
for a library. The acreage of land dedication requirement was established by
multiplying the population by minimum space requirements contained in Exhibit C
(which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein), plus
required parking spaces, plus land for landscaping, walkways and setbacks.
   (B)   Density formula. The table of population density as amended by the
State School Consulting Service is generally indicative of current and short
range projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in
calculating the required dedication of acres of land unless a written objection
is filed with the Land Use and Zoning Committee of the County Board by the
subdivider or developer. In the event a subdivider or developer files a written
objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population, he or she shall submit
his or her own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or development. In that event, final
determination of the density formula to be used in the calculations shall be
made by the Land Use and Zoning Committee of the County Board based upon the
demographic information submitted to the Committee by the library districts or
others. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local
conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the dedication
of land, or the payments of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject
to periodic review and amendment, as appropriate.
   (C)   Formula used for cash contribution. The library district may determine
that cash contribution is more practical than a land donation whenever the
amount of land to be donated is not large enough for a complete library site.
The cash contribution shall be equal to the nonresident fees for dwelling units
of individual library districts in the county in accordance with the state
library formula for nonresident fees.
      (1)   The library districts of the county shall annually review and
adjust their nonresident fees. Each district shall calculate its fees in
accordance with the state library formula for nonresident fees. Each district
will submit figures to the County Land Use Department by December of each year
(see Exhibits A and B which are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully
set forth herein). At the time of adoption of this section, the fees shall be
as shown in Exhibit B.
      (2)   In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to
the nonresident fee as established by the library district and accepted by the
county in lieu of contribution, he or she shall submit his or her own
demographic date showing the proper nonresident fee. In that event, final
determination of the proper in lieu of fee shall be made by the Land Use and
Zoning Committee of the County Board based upon a comparison of the information
submitted by the developer/subdivider and the information submitted by the
library district or others. It is recognized that population density, age
distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the specific
formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as
stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment, as appropriate.
   (D)   Criteria for requiring land dedication and a fee. There will be
situations in subdivisions, planned unit developments or mobile home parks when
a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both
necessary. These occasions may arise when:
      (1)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a library site. That portion of the land within the subdivision,
planned unit development or mobile home park falling within the library
location shall be dedicated as a site, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof
shall be required of any additional land that would have been required to be
dedicated; and
      (2)   A major part of the library site has already been acquired and only
a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site.
The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution
in lieu thereof shall also be required.
   (E)   Time of conveyance or payment.
      (1)   At the time of the approval of the final subdivision plat, final
planned unit development or conditional use permit for a mobile home park, the
subdivider, developer or builder must dedicate land as required or make a cash
contribution in lieu of actual land dedication. All payment shall be made by
certified check or other draft.
      (2)   Payments shall be made directly to the respective library districts
wherein the development subdivision or building is located, and evidence of the
payment shall be made at the time of application for each building permit.
   (F)   Collection of moneys. The county shall have the right to delegate the
responsibility for collecting moneys due under this section to other public
bodies designated by the county.
   (G)   Indemnification agreement. As a condition precedent to the receipt of
any funds by a library district, the district shall execute and deliver to the
county an indemnification agreement with states:
      (1)   The library district covenants and agrees to reimburse the county
in the event the county shall be required to refund any funds collected by this
section; and
      (2)   The library district shall pay all legal expenses incurred by the
county in the event the legality of this section is litigated.
(1980 Code, § 159.01) (Res. 90-92, adopted 5-17-1990)
CHAPTER 160: SCHOOL SITE CONTRIBUTION
Section
   
160.01   Dedication of school sites or cash contributions in lieu thereof
   
160.02   Criteria for requiring school site dedication
   
160.03   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of a school site
   
160.04   Criteria for requiring dedication and a fee
   
160.05   Density formula
   
160.06   Reservation of additional land
   
160.07   Combining with adjoining developments
   
160.08   Dedicated sites
   
160.09   Time of conveyance or payment
   
160.10   Collection of monies
   
160.11   Expenditure of monies
   
160.12   Accounting of expenditures
   
160.13   Effective date
 
   
160.99   Penalty
§ 160.01 DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES OR CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF.
   As a condition of approval of final plat of subdivision, of a final plat of
a planned unit development or an application for a special use permit for a
mobile home park, each subdivider, developer or builder will be required to
dedicate land within the school district boundaries for school sites, to serve
the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development or make a
cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both,
in accordance with the following criteria and formula contained in §§
160.02 through
160.12
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.02 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
   (A)   Requirement and population ratio.
      (1)   The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision,
planned unit development or mobile home park shall bear directly upon the
amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites.
      (2)   The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining
the ratio of the estimated children to be served in each school classification
as determined in accordance with the data for the estimated number of children
entering school per type of dwelling unit seen in the latest edition of the
State School Consulting Service Reports over the maximum recommended number of
acres of land needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the
estimated increased number of children in each school classification. The
recommended number of acres of land needed for school sites is obtained from
Recommendations For Elementary and High School Spaces, published by the State
of Illinois, Springfield, Illinois.
      (3)   If cash contribution is required, the following formula shall be
used: cost of a square of land as determined in accordance with §
160.03(B) hereof multiplied by the number of square feet per pupil per school
classification as determined in accordance with division (B) below hereof
equals the cost per child.
   (B)   School classification and size of school site.
      (1)   School classifications and size of school sites within the county
shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
 
School Classification by Maximum Number of Students Number of Acres of Land for
Grades                   for each Minimum School    each School Site of
                         Classification             Classification
Elementary schools       600 students               11 acres
Junior high schools      900 students               29 acres
Senior high schools      1,500 students             45 acres
 
      (2)   The comprehensive school plan and/or the standards adopted by the
affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.03 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF A SCHOOL SITE.
   (A)   (1)   Where the development is small and the resulting school site is
too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a
school site, the county, with the recommendation of the Board of Education of
the school districts affected, shall require, at the discretion of the school
district, the subdivider, developer or builder, to pay a cash contribution in
lieu of land dedication required. The word SMALL in this section is defined as
a total number of proposed dwelling units that will produce less than the
maximum number of students for one school of each school classification as set
forth in §
160.02(B).
      (2)   The determination of whether available land is appropriate for a
school site shall be made by the local school board. Any builder, subdivider or
developer affected may request a hearing before the County Land Use and Zoning
Committee or its successor on the question of whether the proposed land is
appropriate as a school site. Any builder, subdivider or developer affected as
well as the local school board may present evidence at the hearing and in
addition, the Committee, in its discretion, may hear evidence from other
interested persons.
   (B)   (1)   The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the fair
market value of the acres of fully improved residential land in the area after
development. The determination of fair market value shall be made as of the
date of submittal for final plat approval and shall be valid for a period of 90
days. Because of the diversity of lands within the county, a single
determination of fair market value is not possible. The fair market value for
any particular parcel shall be recommended by the County Supervisor of
Assessments Officer after consultation with the appropriate Township Assessor.
This valuation recommended by the Supervisor of Assessments shall be used
unless the affected subdivider, developer or public body files a written
objection thereto with the Land Use and Zoning Committee not more than 30 days
after the County Supervisor of Assessments Officer has determined the fair
market value. In the event of any objection, the subdivider, developer or
public body shall submit a written appraisal showing the fair market value of
the improved residential land in the area of development, and other evidence.
The Land Use and Zoning Committee shall obtain testimony regarding the fair
market value and prepare a recommendation for the County Board. Testimony by
the Township Assessor may be used to support the determination of the
Supervisor of Assessments or an objection thereto. Final determination of the
fair market value per acre of the improved land shall be made by the County
Board based on the recommendation of the Land Use and Zoning Committee from
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources as
submitted to the Land Use and Zoning Committee by affected parties.
      (2)   If there is any change in the fair market value as determined by
the County Board after an appeal, it shall be used solely as to the land which
is the subject of the objection.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997; Ord. 16-368, passed 12-15-2016)
§ 160.04 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING DEDICATION AND A FEE.
   There will be situations in a subdivision, planned unit development or
mobile home park when a combination of land dedication and a cash contribution,
are necessary. These occasions will arise when:
   (A)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location
for a school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision, planned
unit development or mobile home park falling within the school location shall
be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution shall be required
for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated; and
   (B)   A major part of the school site has already been acquired and only a
small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site.
Dedication of the remaining portions of the school site and a cash contribution
shall be required.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.05 DENSITY FORMULA.
   (A)   The table of population density used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof
shall be the most current edition produced by the State School Consulting
Service or, in the event a table of population density is produced specifically
for the county by the State School Consulting Service, then that table shall
apply unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider, developer,
builder or school district with the County Land Use and Zoning Committee or its
successor. The objection shall be filed by a subdivider, developer, builder or
school district prior to final plat approval or approval of a special use
permit for a mobile home park.
   (B)   In the event a subdivider, developer, builder or school district files
a written objection to the table of population density, it shall submit its own
demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated
from the subdivision planned unit development or mobile home park. In that
event, final determination of the density formula to be used in the calculation
shall be made by the County Board after a hearing before the County Land Use
and Zoning Committee or its successor. At the hearing the builder, subdivider,
developer, school district and other interested persons, in the discretion of
the Committee or its successor, may present demographic information. If there
is any change in the density formula as determined by the County Board after an
appeal, it shall be used solely as to the land which is the subject of the
objection.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.06 RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.
   Where the comprehensive plan or the standards of the county shall call for a
larger amount for school sites in a particular subdivision, planned unit
development or mobile home park than the developer is required to dedicate, the
additional land shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the county or
other public body designated by the county provided that the acquisition is
made within one year from the date of approval of the final plat or the
issuance of the special use permit.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.07 COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS.
   Where the subdivision, planned unit development or mobile home park is less
than 40 acres, a school site which is to be dedicated shall be situated in
relation with adjoining developments in order to produce usable school sites.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.08 DEDICATED SITES.
   In addition to the requirements listed in §
160.03(B) of this chapter, all dedicated sites shall be improved in accordance
with the requirements of §
154.065 or any similar successor ordinance promulgated by the county.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.09 TIME OF CONVEYANCE OR PAYMENT.
   The subdivider or developer shall convey to the respective school districts
the land required under this agreement within 30 days after any subdivision
plat or final plat of a planned unit development is recorded in the Recorder’s
office of the county, or special use permit is granted by the County Board. All
improvements to the site shall be completed within the time as required by the
county. A subdivider, developer or builder shall make any cash contributions
required under this chapter upon the issuance of any building permit by the
county. Payments shall be made directly to the school district or districts
wherein the development, subdivision or building is located and evidence of the
payment shall be made at the time of application for the building permit. The
amount of each payment of cash shall be determined by the county and subdivider
and/or developer at the time of the approval of the final subdivision plat,
final plat of a planned unit development or special use for a mobile home park.
The schedule of payments shall be filed with the County Recorder’s office, the
County Clerk and the County Land Use Department or its successor.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.10 COLLECTION OF MONIES.
   The county shall have the right to delegate the responsibility for
collecting monies due under this chapter to other public bodies designated by
the county.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.11 EXPENDITURE OF MONIES.
   (A)   The monies collected pursuant to this chapter are intended for school
land acquisition costs or school facility costs.
   (B)   SCHOOL LAND ACQUISITION COSTS means a school district’s costs of
acquisition of school land, by purchase, lease or other contractual
arrangement.
   (C)   School land acquisition costs may include:
      (1)   The planning, design and legal costs incurred by a school district
in connection with the formulation or adoption of a school land acquisition
program; and
      (2)   The reasonable title and survey expenses, brokerage fees,
attorney’s fees, architect fees, engineering fees and environmental
investigation fees, and any other costs incurred by a school district in
connection with the acquisition of school lands.
   (D)   SCHOOL FACILITY COSTS means those costs attributable to the projected
increase in student population resulting from the development of a proposed
subdivision, planned unit development or mobile home park, including the
following:
      (1)   The costs incurred by a school district that are directly
associated with the construction of school facilities, including expenditures
for equipment;
      (2)   The costs incurred in the renovation or improvement of school
facilities;
      (3)   The costs incurred by a school district that are directly related
to construction of additions;
      (4)   The costs incurred by a school district that are directly
associated with the acquisition of buildings that are to be devoted to use as a
school building;
      (5)   Expenditures made by a school district for installment payments or
lease payments on contracts or agreements that have a defined term and that
result in the acquisition or leasing of a school building by the school
district or in the leasing of temporary classrooms by the school district;
      (6)   Special assessments payable by a school district for capital
improvements such as streets, curbs and drains; and
      (7)   The architectural, engineering, and legal costs incurred by a
school district in constructing school facilities provided, however, that not
more than 10% of the total costs estimated to be incurred in constructing those
school facilities shall be devoted to architectural, engineering and legal
costs.
   (E)   In no event shall school facility costs include routine repairs or
maintenance of existing school facilities.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.12 ACCOUNTING OF EXPENDITURES.
   All monies collected pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in a
separate bank account or other fund by the receiving school district. Each
school district shall provide records of expenditures of the monies to the
county at the end of each school district’s fiscal year.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.13 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
§ 160.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to provide sufficient evidence of the required conveyance or cash
contribution to the County Land Use Department shall result in denial of the
application for a building permit or, when a building permit has already been
issued, revocation of the building permit.
(Ord. passed 7-18-1973; Ord. passed 9-11-1973; Ord. passed 9-19-1973; Ord.
passed 5-25-1993; Ord. passed 1-16-1997)
CHAPTER 161: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
Section
   
161.01   Adoption by reference
§ 161.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The County Board and County Executive hereby adopt the capital improvement
plan as prepared by the Land Use Department, Planning Division. This plan is
not a budget but a recommended planned schedule of major capital expenditures
of public funds for purchase, construction and improvements with the county.
The plan is a tool to identify and evaluate the needs for various capital
improvement projects proposed within the county.
(1980 Code, § 161.01) (Res. 91-143, passed 6-20-1991)
CHAPTER 162: STREET NAMING AND STREET SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
   
162.01   Purpose
   
162.02   Definitions
Address System
   
162.15   Responsibility for address assignment and reassignment
   
162.16   County address system
   
162.17   Procedure for receiving county address
   
162.18   Notification of number change and enforcement
   
162.19   Display of address numbers
Street Signs
   
162.30   Design of street signs
Street Names
   
162.45   Street names
   
162.46   Subdivisions
Exceptions and Implementation
   
162.60   Exceptions
   
162.61   Continuing process
 
   
162.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   County Address Boundaries
   
Appendix B:   Crescent Street
   
Appendix C:   Cul-De-Sac Street
   
Appendix D:   North/South or East/West Street
   
Appendix E:   Trending Street
   
Appendix F:   Diagonal Street
Cross-reference:
   Change of road names, see
TSO Table II
   Street names, see §
154.142
   Street signs, see §
154.143
   Streets, see §§
154.120 through
154.144
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 162.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of implementing a uniform address system throughout the
unincorporated areas of the county is:
      (1)   To locate specific parcels of property;
      (2)   To improve emergency and other services to residents throughout the
county; and
      (3)   To develop a systematic method of determining a correct address
within the county.
   (B)   ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1067 provides that “a county board may name or
may change the name of any street, lane, road or highway and may regulate the
numbering of buildings and lots adjacent to any street, lane, road or highway
in the unincorporated area of a county”.
(1980 Code, § 162.01) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
§ 162.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STRUCTURE. Includes all buildings used for dwellings, business and
industrial purposes.
(1980 Code, § 162.02) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
ADDRESS SYSTEM
§ 162.15 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADDRESS ASSIGNMENT AND REASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a building has been numbered or renumbered in accordance with
this chapter, the number shall not be changed or altered unless upon the
direction of the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system or those authorized by
the same to assign addresses.
   (B)   In all cases where numbers have been assigned on any street, it shall
be the duty of the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system to adjust and
reassign the numbers as the same may be required from time to time. In all
cases where there is a mistake or conflict in numbers, the county 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system shall direct and make proper adjustment of the
same. The county or the County Emergency Telephone System Board shall not be
held liable for any expenses incurred as a result of the address adjustment.
   (C)   At all times, the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system shall keep
an up to date list of the current address for each parcel and property located
in the unincorporated county.
   (D)   The County 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone Board may be responsible for
negotiating address boundary agreements with individual municipalities and
negotiating intergovernmental agreements with municipalities for any
municipality wanting to use the county address system. All agreements shall be
subject to final negotiation and approval of the county and shall be between
the municipality and the county.
   (E)   It will be the responsibility of the individual property owner,
renter, lessee or other person(s) having possession or control of the structure
and/or property to notify all appropriate agencies (post office, telephone
company, electric company and the like) of the most current assigned address
issued by the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system.
(1980 Code, § 162.10) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.16 COUNTY ADDRESS SYSTEM.
   (A)   The numbering for the county address system shall begin at State
Street and Madison Street in the City of Chicago, extending outwardly. The
number system shall increase southerly, westerly and easterly beginning with
the present corporate limits of the county. Only the county 9-1-1 emergency
telephone system shall assign or authorize the assignment of building numbers
in the unincorporated areas and in municipalities within the county which have
entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the county to use the county
address system.
   (B)   In all cases, property owners shall receive official notification of
the change in address in advance of the changes. These notices shall state the
old and new address, effective date of the change, and penalty for not
displaying the new numbers. Notifications of number change are usually sent 30
days before the effective date of the change.
   (C)   North and west sides of the street shall have even numbers. South and
east sides of the street shall have odd numbers.
   (D)   The system defines eight blocks equal to one mile. Each block is
approximately 660 feet long. In addressing, there are 66 possible numbers per
mile. They consist of 33 odd numbers and 33 even numbers, being evenly spaced
out every 20 feet. This is the method to be used to assign addresses for the
county address system.
   (E)   Every section in each township has a north/south and east/west
corresponding boundary. In each section, there are eight blocks. The numbers
shall increase from north to south and east to west for a large portion of the
county. However, to the east of State Street in Washington and Crete Townships
of the county, the numbers shall increase from west to east (see
Appendix A).
   (F)   Street directions shall be designated as either S. for south streets,
W. for west streets and E. for the streets that run east of State Street in
Washington and Crete Townships.
   (G)   Developers shall choose street layouts from the following designs.
      (1)   Crescent (loop) streets. A crescent is designed so that a street
has an entrance and exit at two points on the same collector street. Crescents
are numbered consecutively from their beginning intersection if they have one
street name. Even though crescent street configurations are both north/south
and east/west, the numbers are dependent on the direction of the collector
street if one street name has been chosen. In addressing a crescent, addresses
shall not be alternated so that odd and even numbers are not located on the
same side of the street. Addresses shall be assigned along the crescent
continuously in the same direction as the collector street. It shall depend on
the length of the street if more than one street name will be required. This
will be left up to the discretion of the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone
system (see
Appendix B).
      (2)   Cul-de-sac streets. A cul-de-sac is designed so that the street
does not follow through. There is only one common entrance and exit with a turn
around at the end of the street. Cul-de-sacs shall be addressed in the same
manner as north/south and east/west streets with even numbers located on the
north and west side of the street and the odd numbers on the south and east
side of the street. Because of the shape of a cul-de-sac, the center lot at the
end (circular part of the street) of the cul-de-sac shall be the dividing point
for determining whether a lot will receive an even or odd number (see
Appendix C).
      (3)   North/south or east/west streets. A street designed to provide
vehicular access to abutting property in a grid system. North/south streets can
be intersected by east/west streets. These streets are commonly found
throughout the county in populated areas. On the north and west side of the
street shall be even numbers. The south and east side of the street shall be
assigned odd numbers (see
Appendix D).
      (4)   Trending street. A trending street is designed to bend back and
forth with few straight areas. The street will be considered as trending in the
direction in which they cover the greatest distance being north/south or east/
west. Trending streets shall be addressed in the same manner as the north/south
or east/west streets (see
Appendix E).
      (5)   Diagonal street. A diagonal street is designed to extend as a line
on an angle. The street shall be addressed in the direction in which it covers
the greatest distance being north/south or east/west (see
Appendix F).
   (H)   If one structure has several occupants which use individual doors to
gain access, each entrance shall have its own address. Separate numbers shall
be assigned to each entrance of a duplex house, to an upstairs apartment which
has an outside entrance, for separate buildings in the back of other buildings
and separate entrances in an apartment building. If a commercial enterprise
that is part of a residence has a separate entrance from the street, it shall
also be assigned a separate number. Separate numbers may be represented by
numbers, numerals or letters.
   (I)   Private and interior parking bays and group housing/commercial
developments present unique problems to the assignment of street numbers. The
preferred method of assignment shall be to assign all dwelling units or
structures facing a parking bay, private drive or interior courts, as if they
were facing upon the main street to which the driveway connects. The numbers
shall remain in numerical sequence.
   (J)   On a corner lot, the address shall be assigned in accordance to the
direction the house faces. The address should correspond with the location of
the front door. In some cases, the address shall be assigned by the location of
the driveway due to site design circumstances.
   (K)   Whenever practicable, the continuation of an existing street shall
have the same name as the existing street.
   (L)   When a street makes a 90-degree turn at any point and it is determined
by the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system that it is necessary to avoid
confusion in the delivery of emergency services, a change in street name shall
occur to eliminate confusion.
   (M)   The name of the new street shall not duplicate the name of existing
streets within the area served by the same post office, fire department or
other emergency service organizations.
   (N)   In areas where there are numerous structures on a private road and
there are not enough numbers available in the appropriate range, the county 9-
1-1 emergency telephone system has the authority to increase the number range
in that particular area.
(1980 Code, § 162.11) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
§ 162.17 PROCEDURE FOR RECEIVING COUNTY ADDRESS.
   (A)   Individual address assignment.
      (1)   The request shall be made to the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone
system.
      (2)   Once the request is made, the addressing specialist will identify
and locate the specific parcel using the site plan and legal description,
verify the request with county technical documentation and process the request
for a new address assignment.
      (3)   Once the address is assigned, the owners of the property and the
new address shall be listed at the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system with
the master address table (MAT) within ten working days whenever possible. The
assigned address shall be the official address of the property on the effective
date shown on the notice sent pursuant to division (B) above.
      (4)   For new structures, addresses shall be given out when a building
permit has been applied for and received if an address has not previously been
assigned to a structure by the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system. No
permit shall be issued until a number has been assigned by the county 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system are permanently attached to the structure in the
manner required in §
162.19 of this chapter.
      (5)   Addressing of appurtenances and utility assets located within the
county will be reviewed and determined by the addressing specialist if an
address needs to be assigned. Below are some examples:
         (a)   Cell towers;
         (b)   Electrified pipeline valving stations;
         (c)   Lift stations; and
         (d)   Water towers wells.
   (B)   Subdivision address assignments in the unincorporated county.
Subdivision address assignments for municipalities which have entered into an
intergovernmental agreement with the county are to use the county address
system.
(1980 Code, § 162.12) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.18 NOTIFICATION OF NUMBER CHANGE AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In all cases, property owners, tax assessees of record or person(s)
having use or control of the property and/or structure shall receive official
notification of the change in address in advance of the changes. These notices
shall state the old and new address, effective date of the change and penalty
for not displaying the new numbers.
   (B)   All property owners, tax assessees of record or person(s) having use
or control of the property shall display the address number assigned by the
county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system to the property within 30 days of the
effective date of the address assignment in the manner provided in §
162.19 of this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 162.13) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.19 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   All buildings in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be
numbered with the address number assigned by the county 9-1-1 emergency
telephone system and it is made the duty of the owner, agent, tax assessee or
person in possession or control of every building in the unincorporated areas
of the county to display this number in the manner as is provided in this
section.
   (B)   Numbers.
      (1)   The numbers shall be located so as to be easily located and read
from the nearest common roadway by emergency personnel (numbers shall not be
placed on doors, gates or other moveable objects);
      (2)   For multiple building facilities which have a common mailing
address, the number should be on the street side of the building nearest the
street or roadway; or
      (3)   For buildings too distant from the street to permit easy legibility
from the street, or for buildings not clearly visible from the street, for
whatever cause, numbers shall be affixed to any reasonable, permanent,
freestanding object, readily legible from the street and so located as to
clearly identify the applicable building. Numbers shall not be placed on doors,
gates or other moveable objects.
   (C)   The numbers shall be in Arabic numerals no less than three inches high
and one-half inch stroke. Colors should be of a contrasting color with the
surface on which they are mounted.
   (D)   No person shall remove or deface any building number placed upon any
building in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   No person shall retain any number on his or her building other than
the number provided by provisions hereof in this chapter.
   (F)   No owners, agent, tax assessee or person in possession or control of
any building shall refuse or neglect to number the building or cause the same
not to be numbered in conformity with this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 162.14) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010) Penalty, see §
162.99
STREET SIGNS
§ 162.30 DESIGN OF STREET SIGNS.
   (A)   All street signs shall be consistent with the applicable portions of
the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), 2009 edition
(which may be amended from time to lime), and the state supplement.
   (B)   (1)   On intersection related approaches, a supplemental street name
sign may be erected separately or below an intersection warning sign.
      (2)   When combined with a yellow diamond sign, the color should be a
black message on a yellow background.
   (C)   Street name signs.
      (1)   Street signs for designating street names shall be of the format
shown below or as near to that format as practicable. The sign shall tell the
common street name and the address boundary for that intersection.
         1500 W. Jerome
      (2)   The above format shall be used whenever existing street signs are
replaced and on all new signs erected in accordance with this chapter.
(1980 Code, § 162.20) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010) Penalty, see §
162.99
STREET NAMES
§ 162.45 STREET NAMES.
   (A)   The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name as the
existing street.
   (B)   When a street makes a 90-degree turn at any point and it is determined
by the county 9-1-1 emergency telephone system that it is necessary to avoid
confusion in the delivery of emergency services, a change in street name shall
occur to eliminate confusion.
   (C)   The name of the new street cannot duplicate the name of existing
streets within the area served by the same post office, fire department or
other emergency service organizations.
   (D)   Unacceptable new street names shall include: numerical names (1st, 2nd
and the like); alphabetical letters (A, B, C and the like); frivolous,
complicated or undesirable names; unconventional spelling, compound names.
However a numerical name can be used if the street name number (i.e. 15900th)
is consistent with the adopted address grid system.
   (E)   Names shall not include east, west, north and south as part of name,
except as they are used in the directional title of the street by the county 9-
1-1 emergency telephone system.
   (F)   When a plat is submitted to the county or a municipality within the
county which has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the county to
use the county address system, the municipalities and the county shall
recognize the street names for the as street names in existence from the date
of submittal of the plat so long as the street names are acceptable under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   The standard abbreviations of street suffixes for signs shall comply
with the United States Postal Service Standards (Publication 28, pages 57-69).
Below are some examples:
Type Abbreviation
Type      Abbreviation
Avenue    AVE
Boulevard BLVD
Circle    CIR
Court     CT
Drive     DR
Junction  JCT
Lane      LN
Loop      LOOP
Parkway   PKWY
Place     PL
Road      RD
Square    SQ
Street    ST
Terrace   TER
Way       WAY
 
   (H)   Street names shall be 14 characters or less, exclusive of prefixes and
suffixes. Spaces between words shall be counted as characters. When the prefix
and type are added to a long street name, the letters on the street sign will
usually be smaller in appearance. Governments do not normally want to incur the
cost to produce a larger street sign to accommodate the long street name.
Safety problems can arise due to being able to read smaller letters on a sign.
   (I)   Street names shall be no more than two words and unnecessary spacing
in a name shall be avoided. For example, Forestview is much preferred over
Forest View. A two-word street name is often compressed into one word on a
street sign to conserve space. This compression often misleads the public into
believing that the street sign is the official name.
   (J)   A street type, like a directional prefix, shall be avoided as part of
the root street name. For example, a street named Winding Trail Drive is
confusing since Trail and Drive are both street types. Country Walk Lane Court
is another example where the street type Court was simply added without
deleting the type Lane.
   (K)   Street name continuity is the retention of one street name for the
entire length of the street, including streets aligned in adjacent
subdivisions. This is not to be confused with street name duplication in which
case streets that are not continuous are given the same name. Street name
continuity shall be used when possible. Allowances can be made for gaps in a
street’s continuity as in cases of undeveloped land. However, if a case arises
in which street name continuity has been established in two or more
subdivisions with a gap of undeveloped land in between, the gap, when developed
shall continue that street and street name in its development to establish
continuity. If the street shifts off-line by more than 200 feet, a new street
name shall be assigned.
   (L)   Street names shall not reflect the name of a development. Problems
arise with implementing continuous street names through other subdivisions when
a street name reflects the name of another development. Street names are not
marketing tools; their purpose is to enable people to locate addresses readily.
(1980 Code, § 162.30) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
§ 162.46 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the developer or a municipality within the
county which has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the county to
use the county address system to propose street names to the county 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system. The 9-1-1 emergency telephone system will in turn
verify all street names to eliminate duplicate names in emergency service
areas. It is the responsibility of the county emergency telephone system to
maintain and update an accurate and up to date street name data base (MAT) for
all portions of the county.
   (B)   The developer of all new subdivisions shall furnish the initial road
signs, the sign post and ensure the installation of the road signs to standard
specifications. All signs shall be installed before the construction of
buildings begins and shall be maintained by the developer at all times until
the dedication of the streets is accepted by the appropriate unit of
government.
(1980 Code, § 162.31) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010) Penalty, see §
162.99
EXCEPTIONS AND IMPLEMENTATION
§ 162.60 EXCEPTIONS.
   If an area in the unincorporated county is adjacent to a municipality and
the area is currently using the address numbering system used in the adjacent
municipality, the current address numbering system may be retained if:
   (A)   The emergency services agencies servicing the area request that the
address numbering system currently being used by retained; and
   (B)   Changing the current address numbering system would cause confusion
for the emergency services agencies serving the area.
(1980 Code, § 162.40) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
§ 162.61 CONTINUING PROCESS.
   The assigning of addresses under the provisions of this chapter shall be a
continuing process.
(1980 Code, § 162.41) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
§ 162.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses
to comply with any provision of this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty
(fine) of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day a
violation exists after notification thereof shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1980 Code, § 162.13) (Res. 93-21, passed 5-20-1993; Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-
2010)
APPENDIX A: COUNTY ADDRESS BOUNDARIES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.jpg]
 
NOTE: Appendix A is available in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-2010)
APPENDIX B: CRESCENT STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2761.jpg]
 
   A crescent is designed so that a street has an entrance and exit at two
points on the same collector street. Crescents are numbered consecutively from
their beginning intersection to the ending intersection. Even though crescent
street configurations are both north/south and east/west, the numbers are
dependent on the direction of the collector street. In addressing a crescent,
do not alternate addresses so that odd and even numbers will be located on the
same side of the street. Address the crescent continuously in the same
direction as the collector street. This is done to create a continuous flow of
numbers.
NOTE: Appendix B is available in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-2010)
APPENDIX C: CUL-DE-SAC STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2763.jpg]
 
   A cul-de-sac is designed so that the street does not follow through. There
is only one common entrance and exit with a turnaround at the end of the
street. Cul-de-sacs are addressed in the same manner as north/south-east/west
streets with the even numbers located on the north and west side of the street
and the odd numbers on the south and east side of the street. Because of the
shape of a cul-de-sac, the center lot at the end (circular part of the street)
of the cul-de-sac is the dividing point for determining whether a lot will
receive an even or odd number.
NOTE: Appendix C is available in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-2010)
APPENDIX D: NORTH/SOUTH OR EAST/WEST STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2765.jpg]
 
   A north/south or east/west street is designed to provide vehicular access to
abutting property in a grid system. North/south streets can be intersected by
east/west streets. These streets are commonly found throughout the county in
populated areas. The north and west side of the street shall have even numbers.
The south and east side of the street shall be assigned odd numbers.
NOTE: Appendix D is available in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-2010)
APPENDIX E: TRENDING STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2767.jpg]
 
   A trending street is designed to bend back and forth with straight areas.
The street will be considered as trending in the direction in which they cover
the greatest distance being north/south or east/west. Trending streets are
addressed in the same manner as the north/south or east/west streets.
NOTE: Appendix E is available in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-2010)
APPENDIX F: DIAGONAL STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bb7fe486b79bbe3ba018897e5380ae32aab6fdc8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2769.jpg]
 
   A diagonal street is designed to extend as a line on an angle. The street
shall be addressed in the direction in which it covers the greatest distance
being north/south or east/west. They are addressed in the same manner as the
north/south or east/west streets.
NOTE: Appendix F is available in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 10-368, passed 11-18-2010)
CHAPTER 163: COUNTY LAND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN
Section
   
163.01   Adoption by reference
   
163.02   Adopting revised documents to the County Land Resource Management Plan
§ 163.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The County Land Resource Management Plan. copies of which are on file in the
office County Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 163.02 ADOPTING REVISED DOCUMENTS TO THE COUNTY LAND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
PLAN.
   (A)   The County Board adopts the revised documents entitled Policy Gateway,
Forms and Concepts Handbook and Open Space Element in their entirety and
includes the Airport Environs Element as a new volume to the County Land
Resource Management Plan.
   (B)    A full and complete copy will be on file with the County Clerk’s
office and in the County Board office.
(Res. 11-04, passed 1-20-2011)
CHAPTER 164: WATER RESOURCE ORDINANCES
Section
Authority, Purpose and Definitions
   
164.001   Statutory authority
   
164.002   Purposes of this chapter
   
164.003   Reference to watershed plans
   
164.004   Definitions
Requirements for Stormwater Management
   
164.020   General information
   
164.021   General stormwater requirements
   
164.022   Site runoff requirements
   
164.023   Site runoff storage requirements (detention/extended detention)
   
164.024   Stormwater requirements for agricultural land use including
croplands, pasture lands and farmsteads
   
164.025   Conservation design.
Sediment and Erosion Control
   
164.035   Site planning
   
164.036   Standards and specifications
   
164.037   General requirement
   
164.038   Extended construction shutdown periods
   
164.039   Hydraulic and hydrologic design requirements
   
164.040   “As-needed” practices on the plans
   
164.041   Sediment and erosion control plan requirements
   
164.042   Conveyance of off-site flow
   
164.043   Stockpiles
   
164.044   Storm sewer inlets
   
164.045   Construction dewatering
   
164.046   Protection of public/private roadways
   
164.047   Temporary stream crossings
Protection of Special Management Areas
   
164.060   General
   
164.061   Floodplain, regulatory floodplain, base flood elevation (BFE) and
regulatory floodway locations
   
164.062   General performance standards
   
164.063   Compensatory storage volume standards
   
164.064   Floodway standards
   
164.065   Riverine floodplain
   
164.066   Bridge and culvert standards
   
164.067   Wetland, waters and buffer standards
Site Development Permit Submittal Requirements
   
164.080   General requirements
   
164.081   Duration and revision to permits
   
164.082   Required submittals
   
164.083   Submittals prior to permit issuance
   
164.084   Record drawings
   
164.085   Issuance or denial of permit and appeal of permit denial
Long-Term Maintenance
   
164.100   Long-term maintenance
   
164.101   Transfer to permitting authority or other public entity
   
164.102   Transfer to homeowner’s or similar association
   
164.103   Conveyance to one or more persons
   
164.104   Incorporation of maintenance obligations in site development permit
   
164.105   Funding of long term maintenance of stormwater facilities
General Provisions
   
164.120   Scope of regulation
   
164.121   Exemptions
   
164.122   Interpretation
   
164.123   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
164.124   Violations
   
164.125   Amendments
   
164.126   Effective date
Variances
   
164.140   Purpose
   
164.141   Application for variance
   
164.142   Application fee
   
164.143   Public hearing
   
164.144   Granting of variances
   
164.145   Recommendations
   
164.146   Decision
   
164.147   Conditions
   
164.148   Building permits and site development permits
   
164.149   Effective period
   
164.150   Reversion
Administration
   
164.160   Responsibility for Administration
   
164.161   Duties of County Executive
   
164.162   Duties of Chief Subdivision Engineer
   
164.163   Representative capacity
   
164.164   Oversight Committee
   
164.165   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
164.166   Service
   
164.167   Publication
Performance Security
   
164.180   General security requirements
   
164.181   Development security
   
164.182   Sediment and erosion control security
   
164.183   Letters of credit
Enforcement
   
164.195   Inspection and maintenance authority
   
164.196   Required inspections
   
164.197   Offenses
 
   
164.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Sample Special Service Area Ordinances
   
Appendix B:   FEMA FIRM Maps Effective
   
Appendix C:   Public Bodies of Water
   
Appendix D:   Comment by IDNR
   
Appendix E:   High Quality Aquatic Resources (HQAR)
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
§ 164.001 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Water Resource
Ordinance for Unincorporated Will County.
   (B)   The County Board adopts this chapter pursuant to its authority to
regulate stormwater management and governing the location, width, course and
release rate of all stormwater runoff channels, streams and basins in the
county, in accordance with the County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater
Management Plan. The statutory authority for this chapter is contained in ILCS
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1041, 5-1049, 5-1063, 5-1104, 5-12001, 5-15001 et seq. and
5-40001 and other applicable authority, all as amended from time to time.
   (C)   This chapter shall regulate all development in the unincorporated
areas of the county. However, all development in the unincorporated areas of
the county shall also meet the requirements of the Will County Stormwater
Management Ordinance (Countywide), effective January 1, 2004, and all
amendments to that ordinance, as codified in
Chapter 55. If provisions of the countywide ordinance appear different than the
provisions of this chapter, than the most restrictive provision of either shall
apply.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.002 PURPOSES OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   The principal purpose of this chapter is to promote effective,
equitable, acceptable, and legal water resource management measures by
establishing reasonable rules and regulations for development.
   (B)   Other purposes of this chapter include:
      (1)   Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage throughout the county through planning, appropriate engineering
practices and proper maintenance;
      (2)   Protecting from, and reducing the existing potential for, loss of
human life, health, safety and property from the hazards of flooding damages on
a watershed basis;
      (3)   Preserving and enhancing the natural hydrologic and hydraulic
functions and natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains to
protect water quality, protect aquatic habitats, reduce flood damages, reduce
soil erosion, provide recreational and aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development;
      (4)   Controlling sediment and erosion in and from stormwater facilities,
developments, agricultural fields and construction sites and reducing and
repairing stream bank erosion;
      (5)   Requiring that planning for development provide for water resource
management, taking into account natural features such as vegetation, wildlife,
waterways, wetlands and topography in order to reduce the probability that new
development will create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
      (6)   Protecting environmentally sensitive areas from deterioration or
destruction by private or public actions;
      (7)   Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff
control, especially when the land is developed with a large amount of
impervious surface;
      (8)   Requiring the design and evaluation of each site development plan
consistent with watershed capacities;
      (9)   Encouraging the use of stormwater storage and infiltration of
stormwater in preference to stormwater conveyance;
      (10)   Lessening the taxpayers’ burden for flood-related disasters,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      (11)   Meeting the State Department of Natural Resources Office of Water
Resources floodway permitting requirements delineated in ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §
18g (“An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of
the State”), as amended from time to time;
      (12)   Making federally subsidized flood insurance available to property
throughout the unincorporated county by fulfilling the requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program;
      (13)   Complying with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified in C.F.R. Title 44;
      (14)   Minimizing conflicts and incompatibilities between agricultural
and urban drainage systems and maintaining agriculture as a viable and
productive land use;
      (15)   Encouraging cooperation and consistency in stormwater management
activities within and between the units of government having floodplain and
stormwater management jurisdiction;
      (16)   Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities
that will not adversely affect the potential for flood damage;
      (17)   Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management
facilities;
      (18)   Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and
realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls; and
      (19)   Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   The purposes of this chapter are consistent with and supercede the
Plan.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.003 REFERENCE TO WATERSHED PLANS.
   (A)   This chapter recognizes the integrated nature of the watershed system
and the need to study certain flood control alternatives and other stormwater
management functions on a watershed-wide basis.
   (B)   (1)   Individual watershed plans or interim watershed plans which
recognize the unique attributes of each watershed may be prepared and
periodically updated for the major watersheds, to identify management projects
and establish criteria for development. These plans may also recommend changes
to this chapter effective within the study boundary.
      (2)   Watershed plans or interim watershed plans may be adopted which
recommend more or less stringent criteria than the criteria in this chapter.
When adopted by the County Board, these watershed-specific criteria established
in the watershed plans or interim watershed plans shall be set forth as
Sections 105 through 117 of this ordinance.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary
definition.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. One which:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served;
      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants
of the principal building or principal use served; and
      (4)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
potential use served with the single exception of accessory off-street parking
facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot
with the building or use served.
   ACOE. The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
   ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION. Occurs when rules and procedures regarding permit
applications and site development permits are not followed.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the County Executive to administer
and enforce this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses
for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the
operation of any accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities. AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES include truck farming, poultry
farming, bee keeping, raising of fruit and berries, and the selling of
agricultural products. AGRICULTURE PRACTICES shall not include the commercial
feeding of garbage to swine or other animals. The minimum land area necessary
to constitute an agricultural use is ten acres.
   AGRICULTURAL SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. A water management technique driven by
economic and safety concerns, where the rate at which surplus groundwater
should be removed is determined primarily by the moisture/air requirements of
the vegetation (commonly called tiles, field tiles and the like).
   APPLICABLE ENGINEERING PRACTICE. Procedures, methods or materials
recommended in standard engineering textbooks or references as suitable for the
intended purpose.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to
carry out construction of a development from the county.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The list of permissible uses is
contained in §§
164.060 through
164.067.
   ARMORING. A form of channel modification which involves the placement of
materials (e.g., concrete, riprap, bulkheads and the like) within a stream
channel or along a shoreline to protect property above streams, lakes and ponds
from erosion and wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in a given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-year frequency flood
event.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The highest water surface elevation that can be
expected during the base flood.
   BENCHMARK. A permanent, stable object containing a marked point of known
elevation (with respect to NAVD 88) which is used as a vertical reference point
for topographic surveys.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). A measure used to control the adverse
stormwater-related effects of development. BMPs include structural devices
(e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches and detention basins)
designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes, and protect
aquatic habitats. BMPs also include nonstructural approaches, such as public
education efforts to prevent the dumping of household chemicals into storm
drains.
   BLOCKED RESTRICTOR ELEVATION. The elevation to which stormwater would rise
in a basin in a 100-year storm if the restrictor is blocked. See §
164.023(F).
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   BUFFER. An area of predominantly vegetated land located adjacent to
channels, wetlands, lakes or ponds for the purpose of reducing contaminants in
stormwater that flows to those areas.
   BULLETIN 70. Frequency Distributions of Heavy Precipitation in Illinois:
Updated Bulletin 70 by James Angel and Momcilo Marcus of the Illinois State
Water Survey, Prairie Research Institute (March 2019).
   BYPASS FLOWS. Stormwater runoff or groundwater from upstream properties
tributary to a property’s drainage system but not under its control.
   CALCULATED HIGH WATER ELEVATION. The elevation to which stormwater would
rise along an overland flow route, or similar conveyance system, in a 100-year
storm.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or human-made drainage way, which has a definite bed
and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface, groundwater, effluent or
industrial discharges flow either perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted vegetation
but does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash or dredging to
previously documented thalwag elevations and side slopes.
   CHANNELIZATION. A severe form of channel modification involving a
significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
   CHIEF SUBDIVISION ENGINEER. Stormwater Administrator for unincorporated Will
County as outlined in §
164.162.
   COMMERCIAL. Sale of goods to the public at large where the traffic generated
warrants construction of site improvements.
   COMMITTEE. The Land Use and Development Committee of the County Board.
   COMMUNITY. The county or any city or village within the county.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An excavated, hydrologically and hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood
storage.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA). A FEMA comment letter on a
development proposed to be located in, and affecting only that portion of, the
area of floodplain outside the regulatory floodway and having no impact on the
existing regulatory floodway or base flood elevations.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter that indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM after the “as-built”
record drawings are submitted and approved.
   COE. The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
   CONSERVATION DESIGN. A site design which incorporates the natural landscape,
ecology, and/or historical significance of a site being developed, and which
maintains the most valuable natural features and functions of the site. These
natural and valuable features can be used for either passive or active
recreational activity or preserved as naturally vegetated land.
   CONSERVATION PLANNING. The practices and procedures associated with the
management of soil, water, plants, plant nutrients and other elements of
agricultural production. Documentation of the management system shall only be
as required by the NRCS or in cases of a complaint, as requested by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer in response to a notification of a complaint.
   CONSERVATION PRACTICES. A listing of practices such as those identified in
the USDA-NRCS Technical Guide § 4 that detail the standards and specifications
for each practice listed. The electronic guide can be accessed at:
   http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/techncial/efotg/
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.
   CRITICAL DURATION. The duration of a storm event that results in the
greatest peak runoff.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility that is critical to the health and welfare
of the population, and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these CRITICAL FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES are: emergency
services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals,
retirement homes and senior care facilities, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   CULVERT. A structure designed to carry drainage water or small streams below
barriers, such as roads, driveways or railroad embankments
   D-FIRM. Digital flood insurance rate map published by FEMA showing special
flood hazard areas in a digital format overlaid on an aerial photograph.
   DAM. Any obstruction, wall embankment or barrier, together with any
abutments and appurtenant works, constructed to store or divert water or to
create a pool. DAMS may also include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment
structures. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
   DEPARTMENT. The County Land Use Department.
   DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE. The volume contained below a closed contour on a one-
foot contour interval topographic map, the upper elevation which is determined
by the invert of a surface gravity outlet.
   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. See definition of FLOODWAY.
   DETENTION BASIN (SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY). A constructed structure for
the temporary storage of stormwater runoff with a controlled release rate.
   DEVELOPER. A person who creates or causes a development.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any constructed change to real estate including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a
building or an addition to a building;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on-site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use;
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts, channel modifications, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface, storage materials,
deposit of solids or liquid waste;
         (e)   Any other activity of humans that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal; and/or
         (f)   Plowing and cultivation and other similar agricultural practices
that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees as regulated in
§
164.024.
      (2)   The following are not considered DEVELOPMENT: maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads
with an impervious surface when there is no increase in elevation.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE SITES. Parcels of land, or portions thereof, which are
immediately adjacent and naturally drain directly to the banks of the Des
Plaines River, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, DuPage River and Kankakee River
without crossing over other private or public property.
   DIRECTOR. The County Executive or his or her designee charged with
performing the duties specified in the County Stormwater Management Ordinance,
as codified in
Chapter 55.
   DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A disconnected impervious surface (DIS) is
a built-upon area (usually a solar panel farm or a canopy) that discharges
runoff to a vegetated area that is sized and graded to reduce runoff and
pollutants. The structure shall have no impervious surface under it, other than
supports required to support the structure, such as posts or piers. These
foundations will count as impervious surface and be added to the total
impervious surface on the site. The vegetated receiving area shall not include
any impervious surface.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The land area above a given point that may contribute runoff
flow at that point from rainfall.
   DRY BASIN. A detention basin designed to drain completely after temporary
storage of stormwater flows and to normally be dry over the majority of its
bottom area.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date to be determined by the County Board.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
base flood elevation and the lowest elevation of usable space to which a
building has been constructed.
   EPHEMERAL STREAM. A stream whose bed elevation does not intersect the
groundwater table, it carries flow only during and immediately after a runoff
producing rainfall event.
   EROSION. The process whereby soil is detached by the action of water or
wind.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before the
effective date of this chapter.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   EXTENDED DETENTION. A volume of runoff temporarily detained and released
over a long period of time as specified in §
164.023.
   FARMED WETLAND. As determined following the procedures outlined by the Food
Security Act and Chicago District of the Corps of Engineers.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency and its
regulations, at 44 C.F.R. §§ 59 through 79, effective as of September 29, 1989,
or as amended.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal ways or the unusual
and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. Normally expressed as a period of years, based on a percent
chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical analysis, during which
a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. For
example, the two-year flood frequency has a 50% chance of occurrence in any
given year. Similarly, the 100-year flood frequency has a 1% chance of
occurrence in any given year.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map, on which map FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map may or
may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). A study of flood discharges and flood profiles
for a community, adopted and published by FEMA.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard for structures within the plan limits of the base flood elevation.
Outside the floodplain limits, the blocked restrictor elevation of any adjacent
stormwater facility plus one foot of freeboard.
   FLOODPLAIN. The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation including detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas and the
like. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the special flood hazard areas (SFHA).
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the County Executive to
administer and enforce this chapter (Chief Subdivision Engineer).
   FLOODPROOF. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
   FLOODWAY. Includes the channel, on stream lakes, and that portion of the
floodplain adjacent to a stream or channel which is needed to store and convey
the critical duration 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a
one-tenth-foot increase in flood stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or
storage, and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.
   FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE. The measure of the flow carrying capacity of the
floodway section and is defined using Manning’s equation as:
   K = 1.4863 AR 23 /n
where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective area of the
cross-section, and “R” is ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
   FORESTED WETLAND. As defined by the Chicago District Corps of Engineers.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of height added to the BFE or 100-year design water
surface elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in
calculations, unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects
such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   FUNCTIONAL. In the context of the usage in this chapter, FUNCTIONAL refers
to stormwater facilities, which serve their primary purpose of meeting
developed release rate requirements but do not meet all of the final design
conditions. For example, a detention basin, which has been excavated but has
not had the side slopes graded nor the final landscaping placed, may be
considered FUNCTIONAL as a site runoff storage facility.
   GOOD HUSBANDRY. The application of agricultural or conservation practices
that minimize impacts to natural resources and neighboring landowners.
   GROUND WATER. Water that is located within soil or rock below the surface of
the earth. Same as SUBSURFACE WATER.
   GROUND WATER CONTROL SYSTEM. A designed system which may consist of tiles,
under drains, French drains or other appropriate stormwater facilities whose
purpose is to lower the ground water table to a predictable elevation
throughout the year.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)    Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by
the State Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency.
   HQAR. High quality aquatic resource as defined by the Chicago District Corps
of Engineers. These include waters of the United States or isolated waters of
the county that are determined to be critical due to their uniqueness,
scarcity, function and/or value.
Appendix E provides further descriptions of HQARs.
   HYDRAULICS. The science and study of the mechanical behavior of water in
physical systems and processes.
   HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA. Consists of those areas of
concrete, asphalt and gravel surfaces along with roof tops which convey flows
directly to an improved drainage system consisting of storm sewers or paved
channels. Rooftops whose downspouts discharge to unpaved surfaces which are
designed for the absorption and filtration of stormwater runoff shall not be
considered as HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACES. Roadways whose
primary conveyance is through open ditches and swales shall not be considered
as HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Roadways drained by curb and
gutter and storm sewer, and driveways hydraulically connected to those roadways
shall be considered as directly connected impervious surface.
   HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE. Compensatory storage either
adjacent to the floodplain fill or not located adjacent to the development but
can be shown by hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be equivalent to
compensatory storage located adjacent to the development.
   HYDRIC SOIL. A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions.
   HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED/ HYDROLOGIC DISTURBANCE. An area where the land
surface has been cleared, grubbed, compacted or otherwise modified that changes
runoff, volumes, rates or direction.
   HYDROLOGY. The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics,
composition and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth,
and underground.
   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate
that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive
water content.
   IDNR-OWR. The State Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   IMPERVIOUS. Surfaces that cause the majority of rainfall to be converted to
direct runoff. Asphalt, concrete, roofing systems and gravel areas will be
considered IMPERVIOUS.
   INTERIM WATERSHED PLAN. A regional study of a watershed which does not
address the entire range of purposes, goals and objectives outlined in the
Countywide Stormwater Management Plan approved by the Committee and adopted by
the county.
   INTERMITTENT STREAM. A stream whose bed intersects the groundwater table for
only a portion of the year on the average or any stream which flows
continuously for at least one month out of the year but not the entire year.
   ISOLATED WATERS OF WILL COUNTY. All waters such as lakes, ponds, streams,
(including intermittent streams), farmed wetlands and wetlands that are located
within unincorporated county but not necessarily under the United States Army
Corps of Engineers jurisdiction. The limits of the ISOLATED WATERS OF WILL
COUNTY extend to the ordinary high water mark or delineated wetland boundary.
ISOLATED WATERS OF WILL COUNTY exclude permitted excavations created for
purposes such as stormwater conveyance, detention/recreation areas as
constructed as part of a stormwater management system, recreation, stock
watering, irrigation, settling basins or wastewater treatment systems and
roadside ditches. Compensatory wetland mitigation created to meet the
requirements of this chapter or § 404 of the Clean Water Act is not excluded.
   JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND. A wetland that is under the jurisdiction of the Army
Corps of Engineers.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). The official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain. A LOMA amends the
effective FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A letter from FEMA that revised base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown
on an effective FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A letter from FEMA that revises base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown
on an effective FIRM.
   LAKE. A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two or
more acres, which retains water throughout the year.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR provided that the enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MAINTENANCE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA. A backup funding mechanism which may be
enacted by the County Board in the event that the person or entity charged with
maintenance of the special service area fails to adequately carry out and/or
provide maintenance and upkeep of the area as it relates to § 605 of this
chapter.
   MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM. The portion of a stormwater facility needed to
store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor stormwater system.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MASS GRADING. Development in which the primary activity is a change in
topography affected by the movement of earth materials.
   MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM. Consists of all infrastructure including curb,
gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and swales, storm sewers and sub-surface
drainage systems intended to convey stormwater runoff at less than a 100-year
flood frequency. The MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEMS shall be designed to carry a ten-
year storm event, or as required by the affected Highway Department
jurisdiction.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than five lots and
not involving any new streets, roads or extension of municipal facilities, and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the zoning ordinance,
subdivision regulations or official plan or map relating thereto.
   MITIGATION. Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development in
wetlands or the floodplain. MITIGATION includes those measures taken to
eliminate or minimize damage from development activities by replacement of the
resource, such as compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control,
wetland replacement and channel restoration. MITIGATION may also include those
activities taken to reduce a structure’s susceptibility to flooding.
   NATURAL. In reference to watercourses, those stream channels, grassed
waterways and swales means those stream channels, grassed waterways, and swales
formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by
man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified stream channel, grassed
waterway or swale which has regained natural characteristics over time as it
meanders and re-establishes vegetation may be considered NATURAL.
   NATURALIZED DETENTION BASIN. A constructed basin for the temporary storage
of stormwater runoff with a controlled release rate which creates growing
conditions suitable for emergent and riparian wetland plants, and which is
explicitly designed to lessen the impacts of stormwater quality and quantity in
urban and urbanizing areas.
   NAVD 88 (NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988). The accepted standard
orthometric data, referenced to the single control point at Father Point,
Quebec, Canada. NAVD 88 supersedes the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
(NGVD).
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program whose
requirements are codified in C.F.R. Title 44.
   NET BENEFIT IN WATER QUALITY. The institution of best management practices
as part of a development that when compared to the pre-development condition
can be judged to reduce downstream sediment loading or pollutant loadings.
   NET WATERSHED BENEFIT.
      (1)   A finding that, when compared to the existing condition, the
developed project will do one of the following:
         (a)   Substantially reduce (more than 10%) downstream peak discharges;
         (b)   Reduce downstream flood stages (more than one-tenth foot); or
         (c)   Reduce downstream damages to structures occurring in the pre-
development condition.
      (2)   The demonstration of one of these conditions must be through
detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of watersheds on a regional scale as
approved by the Stormwater Administrator.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed after the effective
date of this chapter.
   NON-RIVERINE. Areas not associated with a stream or river such as isolated
depressional storage areas, ponds and lakes.
   NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit from the State Environmental Protection Agency for
discharge of stormwater associated with construction activities disturbing one
acre or more.
   NRCS. The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
   OBSERVATION STRUCTURES. Structures built on a field tile where the pipe
inflow and outflow is visible upon removal of a lid.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR EVENT. A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a 1%
chance of occurring in any given year.
   OPEN CHANNEL. A conveyance system with a definable bed and banks carrying
the discharge from field tiles and surface drainage. OPEN CHANNELS do not
include grassed swales within farm fields under agricultural production, which
are ephemeral in nature.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristic.
   OVERLAND FLOW PATH. A design feature of the major stormwater system which
carries flows in excess of the minor stormwater system design capacity in an
open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to
withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
   OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE. The County Land Use and Development Committee. See §
164.165.
   PARCEL. A contiguous area of land under unified ownership, separately owned
and capable of being separately conveyed.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point.
   PERENNIAL STREAMS. Riverine watercourses whose thalwag generally intersects
the ground water table elevation and flows throughout the year.
   PERMITTING AUTHORITY. Will County.
   PLAN. The County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan,
adopted by the County Board on October 13, 1998, as amended from time to time.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION(PZC). See §
164.165.
   POND. A body of water of less than two acres, which retains a normal water
level year round.
   PRIMARY GRAVITY OUTLET. The outlet structure designed to meet the release
rate requirements of this chapter.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the state, under the State
Professional Engineering Practice Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.),
as amended.
   PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state, under
the State Land Surveyors Act. (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et seq.), as
amended.
   PROPERTY. Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
   PROPERTY OWNER’S ASSOCIATION. The legal entity created for the purpose of
developing, selling, managing and maintaining a residential, commercial or
industrial development which shall have the primary responsibility for
providing for the care, maintenance, renewal and replacement of stormwater
drainage facilities. May also known as HOMEOWNER’S ASSOCIATION.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft in whole or in part for commercial uses and purposes
and all lakes, rivers and streams, which in their natural conditions were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and
submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly
accessible thereto.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project, which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing
buildings and structures, which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of
the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing in
whole or in part of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
public agencies.
   PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT. An easement acceptable to the appropriate
jurisdictional body that meets the regulations of the OWR, the Department, and
the community, and that provides legal assurances that all areas subject to
flooding in the created backwater of the development will remain open to allow
flooding.
   QUALIFIED WETLAND PROFESSIONAL. A person trained in natural and/or physical
sciences (such as one or more of the disciplines of biology, geology, soil
science, engineering or hydrology) whose training and experience ensure a
competent analysis and assessment of stream, lake, pond and wetland conditions
and impacts.
   RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor representing the final “as-
built” record of the actual in-place elevations, location of structures and
topography.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational camping travel or seasonal use.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Development on a parcel upon which the existing condition is
buildings, parking lots and/or infrastructure.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Offered for pre- approved projects that are considered
minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for
Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and
conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR
website. However, a regional permit from IDNR/OWR does not exempt a project
from securing a site development permit.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. See PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR.
   REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. See PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.
   REGISTERED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the
state as a structural engineer.
   REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN.  The floodplain as depicted on maps recognized by
FEMA as defining the limits of the SFHA.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. Those portions of the floodplain depicted on maps as
floodway and recognized by the IDNR-OWR for regulatory purposes.
   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE. Development activities that do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RETENTION FACILITY. Stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release.
   RIPRAP. Large size, coarse aggregate with angular edges normally placed at
end sections of storm sewer inlets or outlets, culverts or along shorelines to
reduce soil erosion.
   RIVER FRONTAGE. The property that is immediately adjacent to and naturally
drains directly to the Des Plaines River, Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal,
DuPage River or Kankakee River without crossing over other private or public
property.
   RIVERINE. Related to, formed by or resembling a channel (including creeks
and rivers).
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to over bank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a
tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of
that basin.
   RUNOFF POLLUTANTS. Sediment, heavy metals, petroleum-based organic
compounds, nutrients, oxygen-demanding organics (BOD), pesticides, salt and
pathogens which may be present in stormwater runoff.
   SEASONAL HIGH GROUND WATER TABLE. The upper limits of the soil temporarily
saturated with water.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits hydraulically moved soils, debris
and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water,
watercourses or stormwater drainage systems.
   SEDIMENT TRAP. A structure or area that allows for the temporary deposit and
removal or disposal of sediment materials from stormwater runoff.
   SEEPAGE. The movement of drainable water through soil and rock.
   SITE. A lot or a parcel of land where grading work is performed as a single
unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the County Land Use Department
for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for
the control of erosion, runoff and grading, or for the clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating or filling of land.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See FLOODPLAIN.
   STORMWATER ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the County Executive to
administer and enforce this chapter in the unincorporated areas of the county.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or human-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from, a drainage area to the point of
final outlet from a property. The STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM includes, but is
not limited to, any of the following: conduits, appurtenance features, canals,
channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins,
swales and pumping stations.
   STORMWATER FACILITY. All ditches, channels, conduits, bridges, culverts,
levees, ponds, natural and human-made impoundments, wetlands, riparian
environment, tile, swales, sewers or other natural or artificial structures or
measures which serve as a means of draining surface and subsurface water from
land.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT. The permit issued under §§
164.080 through
164.085. Also called a SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling
within a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration
capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground
or are collected in channels or conduits.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
   STREAM. Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine or natural or
human-made drainage way which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or
into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a built change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than 180 days unless they are fully licensed and ready for
highway use.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place during a ten-year period, in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term
includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage,
regardless of the actual work done. This term does not, however, include any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a historic structure listed
on the National Register of historic Places or the State Register of historic
places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
   SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. The removal of excess soil water to control water table
levels at predetermined elevations for structural, environmental or other
reasons in areas already developed or being developed for agricultural,
residential, industrial, commercial or recreational uses.
   SUBSURFACE WATER. Water beneath the ground or pavement surface. Sometimes
referred to as GROUND WATER or SOIL WATER.
   T FACTOR. The soil loss tolerance. It is defined as the maximum amount of
erosion at which the quality of a soil as a medium for plant growth can be
maintained. Erosion losses are estimated by Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)
and Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE).
   TECHNICAL GUIDANCE MANUAL. The manual adopted by the County Board, which
refers to the County Stormwater Management Ordinance, as codified in Chapter
55, and provides additional explanations and examples.
   THALWAG. A line along the lowest point in a channel.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section, or vice versa.
   TRAVEL TRAILER OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational camping travel or seasonal use.
   TWO-YEAR EVENT. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a 50% chance of
occurring in any given year.
   USABLE SPACE. Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities or other
beneficial purposes, including, without limitation, basements.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until a time as
that documentation is provided.
   WATER TABLE. The upper limit of a free water surface in a saturated soil or
underlying material.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. As defined by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers in their Federal Methodology for the Regulation of Wetlands. For
purposes of this chapter, WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES include wetlands, lakes,
rivers, streams, creeks, bogs, fens and ponds. WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES do
not include maintained stormwater facilities.
   WATERSHED. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same
stream, lake, stormwater facility or draining to a point.
   WATERSHED BENEFIT. See NET WATERSHED BENEFIT.
   WATERSHED CHARACTERISTICS. Includes land use, physiology, habitat, climate,
drainage system and community profile.
   WATERSHED PLAN. A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin’s
stormwater management, floodplain management, water quality and flood control
needs and capabilities.
   WET BASIN. A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water
after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
   WETLAND.
      (1)   As defined in current federal methodology recognized by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers for regulatory purposes. WETLANDS are areas that
are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions (known as hydrophytic vegetation).
      (2)   A WETLAND is identified based upon the three attributes:
         (a)   Hydrology;
         (b)   Soils; and
         (c)   Vegetation as mandated by the current federal wetland
determination methodology.
      (3)   Classification of areas shall follow the United States Army Corps
of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, Technical Report Y-87-1.
   WETLAND BASIN. A detention basin designed with all or a portion of its
bottom area as a wetland.
   WETLAND IMPACT. Wetlands that are hydrologically disturbed or otherwise
adversely affected by flooding, filling, excavation or drainage that results
from implementation of a development activity.
   WETLAND MITIGATION CREDITS. A credit is equal to one acre of wetland
mitigation. The value of mitigation to generate credit is calculated
differently depending the form of the mitigation.
   WOODLANDS. An area with a contiguous tree canopy area, including younger
understory trees, of at least one acre that contains healthy deciduous
coniferous trees as determined by a qualified professional.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 19-238, passed 9-19-2019; Ord. 22-24,
passed 2-25-2022)
REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 164.020 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Other applicable regulations. All developments shall meet the
requirements specified for general stormwater development (§
164.021), site runoff (§
164.022), sediment and erosion control (§§
164.035 through
164.047), and performance security and maintenance (§§
164.100 through
164.105).
   (B)   Applicability of site runoff storage requirements (detention). All
developments shall comply with the site runoff storage requirements provided in
§
164.023 of this subchapter in which:
      (1)   Manufactured home parks are to be constructed on a parcel larger
than one acre in size;
      (2)   Multi-family homes are to be constructed on a parcel larger than
one acre in size;
      (3)   A parcel is being subdivided into single- family residential lots;
and
      (4)   Nonresidential development.
   (C)   Exemptions from site runoff storage requirements (detention). Site
runoff storage is not required under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Direct discharge industrial sites where appropriate BMPs are
utilized;
      (2)   Non-industrial direct discharge sites 160 acres or less having the
following minimum river frontage:
 
Site Area       Required Frontage
0—2 acres     50 feet
Up to 5 acres   100 feet
Up to 10 acres  150 feet
Up to 40 acres  200 feet
Up to 80 acres  350 feet
Up to 160 acres 500 feet
 
      (3)   The development is of a nonresidential nature on an existing
developed parcel, where new impervious surfaces do not exceed 25,000 square
feet in aggregate provided that the design does not further concentrate
stormwater flows from the existing condition, and the design provides
appropriate best management practices on site;
      (4)   The development is of a nonresidential nature on an existing
agricultural parcel, where new impervious surfaces do not exceed 25,000 square
feet in aggregate, which are not exempted under §
164.024;
      (5)   Roadway developments in rights-of-way under the ownership or
control of a unit of local governments when the contiguous area of new roadway
construction (excluding previously paved areas) does not exceeds two acres;
      (6)   Minor subdivision of a single-family residential zoned parcel;
      (7)   Construction of a single-family residence, an addition to an
existing single-family residence, and/or construction of an accessory structure
where the cumulative impervious area does not exceed 25,000 square feet on an
existing legal lot or parcel;
      (8)   Single-family structures on legally created agricultural parcels;
      (9)   Bike trails, pedestrian trails and multi-purpose trails on park
district or forest preserve district property when the trail is designed so as
to not further concentrate stormwater flows from the existing condition, and
when it can be shown by calculations, as required under §
164.023(B), that there will be no net increase in stormwater discharge rates
from the proposed construction during the two-year and 100- year rainfall
events. BMPs can be utilized to help mitigate discharge rates. In addition, a
trail shall not be designed, nor constructed in a manner that could result in
impoundment of stormwater onto another property. The trails shall not exceed 12
feet in width to be exempt from the site runoff storage requirements; and/or
      (10)   A parcel being subdivided into single-family residential lots
having a minimum lot size of two and one-half acres or greater. Provided that
the exempt subdivision is designed so as to not further concentrate stormwater
flows from the existing condition, and when it can be shown that there will be
no net increase in stormwater discharge rates from the proposed construction
during the two-year and 100- year rainfall events. BMPs can be utilized to help
mitigate discharge rates (i.e., roadside ditches).
      (11)   In solar farm developments, the solar panels will be considered
“disconnected” and therefore pervious, if the following criteria are met:
         (a)   Groundcover vegetation must be maintained in good condition in
those areas receiving disconnected runoff, specifically the area under and
between the rows of panels. Typically this maintenance is no different than
other lawn or landscaped areas. However, care should be taken to avoid soil
compaction in these areas.
         (b)   The total proposed impervious area on the surface of the ground
must be less than 25,000 square feet. The total impervious must include any
gravel, pavement, asphalt, concrete, panel posts, and so on.
         (c)   The open space between panels must be equal to or greater than
the width of the row of panels. The runoff must sheet flow onto and across the
vegetated area to maintain the disconnection. Sheet flow is optimal on sites
with gradual slopes (<5%). Level spreaders, terraces, or berms may be used to
maintain sheet flow conditions if the average slope is steeper than 5% and
<10%. Installations on slopes >10% will require a detailed engineering study to
demonstrate the safe and non-erosive conveyance of runoff to the property line
or downstream storm water management practice.
         (d)   For permitting purposes the entire project area is counted
toward disturbed area.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 22-24, passed 2-25-2022)
§ 164.021 GENERAL STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements applicable to all developments. No development shall:
      (1)   Result in any new or additional expense to any person other than
the developer for flood protection; or
      (2)   Increase flood elevations or decrease flood conveyance capacity
upstream or downstream of the area under the ownership or control of the
developer. This requirement shall not prohibit the removal or reduction of
built obstructions to flow, such as increasing culvert capacity or lowering
roadway elevations.
   (B)   Building permits. Stormwater facilities shall be functional before
building permits are issued for residential and nonresidential subdivision.
   (C)   Single parcel developments. Stormwater facilities shall be functional
where practicable for single parcel developments before building construction
begins.
   (D)   Overland flow paths. The development shall have an overland flow path
at the downstream limit of the property that will pass the base flood flow at a
stage at least one foot below the lowest adjacent foundation grade in adjacent
structures without increasing damage to structures or property. If the upstream
drainage area is less than 20 acres, the storm sewer pipe and inlet sized for
the base flood can be constructed in lieu of providing an overland flow path.
Overland flow paths internal to the site shall be considered as part of the
major stormwater system and shall be designed for conveyance of the base flood
(critical duration) and shall be a minimum of one cfs per tributary acre
without damage to structures.
   (E)   Protection of buildings. All usable space in new buildings or added to
existing buildings hydraulically connected to a major stormwater system, site
runoff storage facility or overland flow path shall be elevated, flood proofed,
or otherwise protected to at least one foot above the blocked restrictor
elevation of the site runoff storage (detention) facility or the calculated
high water elevation of the overland flow path, or two feet above the base
flood elevation, whichever is greater.
   (F)   Depressional storage. The function of existing on-site depressional
storage shall be preserved for both on-site and off-site tributary flows in
addition to required detention. When depressional storage is removed, it must
be compensated for in the site runoff storage facility at one and one-quarter
to one ratio if the depression is identified as a regulatory floodplain and at
a one to one ratio if the depression is not a regulatory floodplain, provided
that offsite areas tributary to the existing depressional storage are routed
through the site runoff storage facility. This requirement is in addition to
the site runoff storage required in §
164.023. The Chief Subdivision Engineer may allow the function of depressional
storage to be preserved if the applicant performs detailed pre- and post-
project hydrologic and hydraulic modeling to identify the effect of the
depressional storage on discharges over a range of rainfall frequencies.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010) Penalty, see §
164.999
§ 164.022 SITE RUNOFF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    Stormwater facility discharges. Stormwater facilities shall be
required and designed so that runoff exits the site at a point where it exited
prior to the subject development and in a manner such that flows will not
increase flood damage to adjacent property except when otherwise approved by
the Chief Subdivision Engineer. Concentrated discharges from new developments
must enter conveyance systems capable of carrying the design flow rate without
increasing flood damages or maintenance costs downstream.
   (B)   Minor stormwater system criteria. Minor stormwater systems shall be
sized to convey runoff from the tributary watershed under fully developed
conditions. Storm sewers shall be sized to convey the ten-year storm in a full
(non-surcharged) pipe condition unless otherwise directed by the road
authority.
   (C)   Major stormwater system criteria. Major stormwater systems shall be
sized to carry the base flood without causing additional flood damage.
   (D)   Existing subsurface and surface drainage systems.
      (1)   Stormwater systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible
with existing subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural
systems. Designs shall not cause damage to the existing drainage system(s) or
the existing adjacent or tributary land including those with agricultural uses.
      (2)   The following principles and requirements shall be observed in the
design.
         (a)   Off-site outfall. Existing agricultural subsurface and surface
drainage systems shall be evaluated with regard to their capacity, condition
and capability to properly convey low flow groundwater and two-year site runoff
to a surface outlet without damage to downstream structure and land use on the
adjacent properties. If the outfall drain tile and surface drainage systems
prove to be inadequate, it will be necessary to modify the existing systems or
construct new systems which will not conflict with the existing systems and
will not impact the existing agricultural land use.
         (b)   On-site. Agricultural drainage systems shall be located and
evaluated on-site. All existing on-site agricultural drain tile not serving a
beneficial use shall be abandoned by trench removal prior to other development
and recorded on record plans. If any existing drain tiles continue to upland
watersheds the developer must maintain drainage service during construction
until new sewers can be installed for a permanent connection.
         (c)   Off-site tributary. Existing drainage systems shall be evaluated
with regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion
capacities. All existing tributary drain tiles shall be incorporated into the
new conduits including observation structures located at the property limits,
shall provide a free flow discharge and shall not allow surface runoff to enter
the system.
         (d)   New roadway construction. New roadway construction shall
preserve existing sub-surface systems within the right-of-way. Inspection wells
shall be placed at the right-of-way (ROW) and tiles found to not be flowing
between inspection wells at the end of the construction shall be replaced.
   (E)   Design runoff rate. Design runoff rates for minor stormwater systems
may be calculated using the Rational Method.
   (F)   Design rainfall. Any design runoff rate calculation method for
conveyance shall use data from Illinois State Water Survey Updated Bulletin 70
(March 2019) Northeast Sectional Code.
   (G)   Stormwater system easements. For projects involving subdivision, major
and minor stormwater systems shall be located within easements or rights- of-
way explicitly providing for public access for maintenance of the facilities.
For all other projects requiring a permit, easements (minimum ten feet wide)
are required for public access for maintenance of stormwater facilities only
for new construction or modifications involving components of a drainage system
that conveys runoff from off-site properties. For commercial and/or industrial
property, the stormwater system does not have to be located within an easement
or public right-of-ways unless the system serves multiple properties or is
constructed on an adjacent property. Instead, the owner or owner’s
representative shall provide a signed agreement to the county authorizing it to
enter the facility to maintain the stormwater system if the owner fails to
correct any deficiencies brought to the owner’s attention by the governmental
entity.
   (H)   Flow and ponding depths. Maximum flow depths for new transverse stream
crossings shall not exceed six inches at the crown of the road during the 100-
year storm condition. For flow over a new roadway or parallel to a new roadway,
the product of the flow depth (in feet) and velocity (in feet per second) shall
not exceed four for the 100-year storm condition. The maximum flow depth on a
roadway shall not exceed six inches at the crown for flow parallel to the
roadway. The maximum stormwater ponding depth during the 100-year critical
storm event in any yard or parking area shall not exceed nine inches, and the
maximum storage elevation shall not be maintained for more than four hours.
Inlets shall have capacity to allow the inflow, based on the design pipe
capacity, with no more than three inches of ponding over street inlets.
   (I)   Diversion of flow to another watershed. Transfers of waters between
watersheds (diversions) shall be prohibited except when such transfers will not
violate the provisions of §
164.021(A) and are otherwise lawful. Watersheds for purpose of regulation under
this section shall be the major watershed divides as defined in the County
Stormwater Management Plan.
   (J)   Best management practices requirement.
      (1)   Developments shall incorporate all best management practices as may
be required pursuant to the United States Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq., as amended. Developments shall be designed to create a healthy aquatic
ecology, provide for sustainability, minimize maintenance and human
intervention, and treat stormwater as a multiple-use resource. The Chief
Subdivision Engineer does reserve the right to require specific stormwater best
management practices at a particular site if it discharges to a sensitive
ecological area or if the intended use of the property produces a particularly
detrimental water quality of the discharge.
      (2)   Listed below are examples of BMPs that meet the intent of the
chapter:
         (a)   Minimize mass grading and disturbance of soils;
         (b)   Lay out streets and lots to conform to the natural topography of
the site;
         (c)   Minimize new impervious surfaces by clustering of neighborhoods
and homes, minimizing street widths and parking lots, and reducing lot sizes
and building setbacks;
         (d)   Preserve and create natural landscaping, buffers and filter
strips;
         (e)   Utilize permeable areas to maximize infiltration of runoff into
the ground through the use of biofilters, filter strips, swales, infiltration
trenches, permeable pavement and native vegetated open spaces;
         (f)   Direct runoff to permeable areas and/or utilize stormwater for
reuse by:
            1.   Directing roof runoff towards permeable surfaces, drywells,
French drains, vegetated swales or other BMPs instead of driveways or other
non-permeable surfaces;
            2.   Grading impervious surfaces to direct runoff to permeable
areas, utilizing level spreaders or other methods to distribute the impervious
runoff onto pervious surfaces;
            3.   Using cisterns, retention structures or rooftops to store
precipitation or runoff for reuse; and
            4.   Removing berms and designing pavement edges (e.g., curb cuts)
in order to direct water to permeable landscaped areas.
         (g)   Improve water quality of stormwater leaving the site through the
use of a naturalized detention basin designed to maximize the removal and
transformation of runoff pollutants. Design should include:
            1.   Emergent vegetation in the bottoms of the wetland basins and
along the periphery of wet bottom basins and side slopes vegetated in native
prairie (traditional dry bottom basins are not approved BMPs);
            2.   Stilling basins at major detention basin inlets and maximizing
the distance between major inlets and the basin outlet;
            3.   Installation of pre-settlement or mechanical stormwater
treatment units prior to discharge of stormwater into primary detention basins;
and
            4.   In locations where detention basin discharge to adjacent/
downstream wetlands, designing detention basin outlet structures to spread and
infiltrate runoff through the use of level spreader devices.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 19-238, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 164.023 SITE RUNOFF STORAGE REQUIREMENTS (DETENTION/EXTENDED DETENTION).
   (A)   Release rate.
      (1)   If no release rate is specified in an adopted watershed plan in
accordance with §
164.003, then sufficient flood storage shall be provided so that the site will
not discharge at a rate greater than 0.15 cfs/acre of development during and
after a rainfall event with a 100-year frequency except for sites exempted in §
164.020(C). Unless exempted in §
164.020(C), sites shall not discharge at a rate greater than 0.04 cfs/acre of
development during and after a rainfall event with a two-year frequency.
      (2)   This area of hydrologic disturbance on the site shall be used to
calculate the required site runoff storage volume. The on-site watershed area
tributary to the point of discharge shall be used to calculate the allowable
release rate for the site runoff storage facility, which shall be the maximum
release rate allowed considering only the on-site watershed area runoff.
      (3)   In the event the downstream creeks, streams, channels, conduits or
other drainage facilities are inadequate to receive the release rate herein
above provided and there is no adopted watershed plan available, then the
allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the receiving
downstream creeks, streams, channels, conduits or other drainage facilities;
and additional detention volume shall be required to store that portion of the
runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving drainage facilities.
   (B)   Design methods.
      (1)   Event hydrograph routing methods or the modified rational method
may be used to calculate design runoff volumes for site runoff facilities. The
methods must be HEC-1, (SCS methodology), HEC-HMS, TR-20 or TR-55 tabular
method.
      (2)   Event methods shall incorporate the following assumptions:
         (a)   Antecedent moisture condition equals two;
         (b)   Appropriate Huff rainfall distribution; and
         (c)   Twenty-four-hour duration storm with a 1% probability (100-year
frequency) of occurrence in any one year as specified by data from Illinois
State Water Survey Updated Bulletin 70 (March 2019) Northeast Sectional Code.
   (C)   Existing release rate less than allowable. For sites where the
undeveloped release rate is less than the maximum release rate in division (A)
above, the developed release rate and corresponding site runoff storage volume
shall be based on the existing undeveloped release rate for the development.
   (D)   Downstream water surface elevations. All hydrologic and hydraulic
computations must utilize appropriate assumptions for downstream water surface
elevations, from low flow through the base flood elevation, considering the
likelihood of concurrent flood events.
   (E)   Extended detention requirement.
      (1)   The requirements of this section will apply only when an existing
agricultural land use is downstream of and adjacent to a site runoff storage
facility outlet. The runoff from a three-quarters-inch rainfall event over the
hydraulically connected impervious area of the new development shall be stored
below the elevation of the primary gravity outlet (extended detention) of the
site runoff storage facility. The facility may be designed to allow for
evapotransporation or infiltration of this volume into a subsurface drainage
system and shall not be conveyed through a direct positive connection to
downstream areas.
      (2)   The hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation
of required extended detention volume may be reduced by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer if the soils are prepared to maximize infiltration and deep rooted
grasses or other plants selected for their ability to promote infiltration or
water absorption are planted in areas appropriately dedicated. The reduction in
hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal
to the area of the development meeting the above soils/native planting
requirement.
      (3)   Subsurface drainage systems may be designed as a component of the
extended detention portion of the detention basin to assist in infiltration in
accordance with the following criteria.
         (a)   The extended detention volume shall be discharged at a rate no
greater than (no earlier than) that required to empty the calculated extended
detention volume within five days of the storm event.
         (b)   For purposes of meeting the maximum subsurface drainage
discharge requirements, flow control orifices and weirs may be used.
         (c)   All design extended detention volume shall be provided above the
seasonal high ground water table or the invert elevation of the ground water
control system.
         (d)   Farm field tile shall not be used as a component of the extended
detention system, unless evaluated per §
164.022(D).
   (F)   Site runoff storage facility design requirements. Storage facilities
shall be designed and constructed with the following characteristics.
      (1)   The site runoff storage facility shall provide one foot of
freeboard above the calculated (blocked restrictor) high water elevation.
      (2)   The storage facilities shall be accessible and easily maintained.
      (3)   Storage facilities shall facilitate sedimentation and catchment of
floating material. Unless specifically approved by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer, concrete lined low-flow ditches shall not be used in detention
basins.
      (4)   Storage facilities shall minimize impacts of stormwater runoff on
water quality by incorporating best management practices.
      (5)   Storage facilities shall maximize the normal flow distance between
detention inlets and outlets, to the extent possible.
      (6)   Storage facilities shall be designed so that the existing
conditions pre-development peak runoff rate from the 100-year, critical
duration rainfall will not be exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is
blocked. One foot of freeboard shall be provided over the blocked restrictor
water level.
      (7)   Storage facilities with single pipe outlets shall have a minimum
inside diameter of 12 inches. Where flow control orifices are used, the minimum
diameter is four-inch. If design release rates necessitate a smaller outlet,
structures such as perforated risers or other self-cleaning restrictors shall
be used.
      (8)   Basin side slopes should not be steeper than four to one
(horizontal to vertical); five to one side slopes are preferred. For wet-bottom
basins, side slopes not steeper than two to one may be used below the safety
ledge.
      (9)   Wet-bottom storage facilities must include a safety shelf, minimum
six feet width, two and one-half feet to three feet below the normal water
line.
      (10)   The permanent pool volume in wet-bottom basins shall be at least
equal to the two-year, 24-hour runoff volume from the tributary watershed. The
minimum permanent pool depth is three feet, excluding safety shelves. If fish
habitat is to be provided, over 25% of the bottom area must be at least ten
feet deep.
      (11)   Dry bottom detention basins shall be graded with not less than 1%
slope across basin floor.
      (12)   All detention basins shall be provided with an overflow structure
capable of passing pre- development peak runoff rate capable of meeting the
requirements of division (F)(6) above.
      (13)   All detention basins discharging at grade shall discharge a
minimum of 20 feet from any property line unless an agreement allowing
discharge closer to the property line is secured from the adjacent property
owner or road authority. Vegetative buffers, level spreaders or other
appropriate BMPs shall be utilized at the outlet structure to promote spreading
and infiltration of the discharge.
      (14)   Riprap or other approved method of dissipating energy shall be
utilized at all end sections and point discharge locations.
      (15)   Standards for naturalized detention basins include: flat side
slopes (eight to one from two- year water level to one-half foot below normal
water level), shallow zones of emergent vegetation at water’s edge, combination
of natural vegetation and open water area. Uses of aerators, cascades, water
falls and the like are encouraged. A planting/ maintenance shall be submitted
and approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
   (G)   Site runoff storage facility requirements within the regulatory
floodplain. Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain shall:
      (1)   Conform to all applicable requirements specified in §§
164.060 through
164.067 of this chapter;
      (2)   Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the release rate
requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in the receiving
stream up to the ten-year flood elevation; and
      (3)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer may approve designs which can be
shown by detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to provide a net watershed
benefit not otherwise realized by strict application of the requirements in
division (G)(1) and (G)(2) above.
   (H)   Site runoff storage facility requirements within the regulatory
floodway. Site runoff storage facilities shall not be located within the
regulatory floodway.
   (I)   Off-site facilities. Site runoff storage facilities may be located
off-site if the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The off-site storage facility meets all of the requirements of this
subchapter, §§
164.020 through
164.025.
      (2)   Adequate storage capacity in the off-site facility is dedicated to
the development and placed in an appropriate easement on the off-site property.
      (3)   The development includes means to convey stormwater to the off-site
storage facility. The conveyance system shall be placed in an appropriate
easement on the off-site property.
   (J)   Cross-stream structures for site runoff storage facilities. Structures
constructed across the channel to impound water to meet detention requirements
shall be prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a public flood
control project with a net watershed benefit. Those streams appearing as blue
on a USGS quadrangle map shall be assumed perennial unless better data is
obtained. All cross- stream structures for the purpose of impounding water to
provide detention in all cases on perennial and intermittent streams must
demonstrate that they will not cause short term or long-term stream channel
instability.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 19-238, passed 9-19-2019)
§ 164.024 STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND USE INCLUDING
CROPLANDS, PASTURE LANDS AND FARMSTEADS.
   (A)   Applicability. Regulations under this section apply only to croplands,
pasturelands, farmsteads and outbuildings associated with those agricultural
practices. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be construed
as compliance with the stormwater ordinance for the above land uses and no
further regulation under the ordinance will apply. Any other land use,
including, but not limited to, greenhouses, nurseries, container grown plants,
equestrian facilities, the sale of agricultural products to the public or any
other commercial activities involving the new construction of gravel or paved
parking facilities or buildings, where the aggregate area of proposed
impervious surfaces is 25,000 square feet or more are required to comply with
all applicable sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Conservation planning and performance standards.
      (1)   To comply with this section, landowners shall practice conservation
planning whose product shall be a management system, which addresses site
runoff, soil erosion and sediment control, surface and subsurface drainage. Any
acreage with a signed and approved NRCS Conservation Plan is exempt from the
requirements of this section and the chapter.
      (2)   Applicable approved practices include:
         (a)   Vegetated grass waterways;
         (b)   Contour buffer strips;
         (c)   Critical area planting and cover crops;
         (d)   Terrace ridges and diversions;
         (e)   Contour strip cropping;
         (f)   Contour farming;
         (g)   Conservation crop rotation;
         (h)   Conservation tillage and crop residue management; and
         (i)   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance
with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the County NRCS District Conservationist.
      (3)   The performance standard for conservation planning and
implementation shall be a management system which will develop a set of field
practices which will reduce the calculated actual soil loss to the “tolerable
soil loss” (T) as calculated by the revised Universal Soil Loss Equation for
the actual site conditions. Cropland tillage and resource management methods
shall be consistent with the Technical Guide Notice IL-108 and shall be
considered evidence of compliance with the “T” performance standard.
   (C)   Drainage practices, requirements and design criteria.
      (1)   Drainage for agricultural purposes shall be consistent with those
practices identified as appropriate for good husbandry given the soil types,
slopes and crops. An agricultural drainage system may consist of both
subsurface drainage systems and surface drainage systems. Where active drainage
districts maintain drainage systems, they shall be consulted on surface and
subsurface drainage within the district boundaries.
      (2)   Requirements applying to subsurface and surface drainage system
shall be as follows.
         (a)   Agricultural subsurface drainage systems. Drain tile systems
shall be maintained and constructed in accordance with subsurface drainage
recommendations for the appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the
University of Illinois Extension Service Drainage Guide link http://
urbanext.illinois.edu/lcr/drainage.cfm. Surface inlets into the subsurface
drainage system shall be allowed where their use cannot be practicably avoided
due to topography. They shall be installed using flow controls such as orifices
and perforated risers with gravel filters and /or vegetative filters. In cases
where the installation of the surface inlet is for the purpose of enhancing the
drainage of farmed wetlands, the individual shall consult with the County NRCS
District Conservationist.
         (b)   Surface drainage systems. Surface drainage systems shall be
maintained and constructed in accordance with surface drainage recommendations
for the appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the University of
Illinois Extension Service link http://urbanext.illinois.edu/lcr//drainage.cfm
. Surface drainage systems shall be built with geotechnically stable slopes and
the surface when applicable shall be further stabilized utilizing the
establishment of cool and warm season grass mixes as identified in Field Office
Technical Guide (Illinois 108).
         (c)   Buffer strips. Open channels with a definable bed and banks
shall use buffer strips having a minimum width of 25 feet in order to reduce
the amount of erosion occurring from the conveyed flows as well as to help
filter the runoff from the site into the waterway.
         (d)   Agricultural drainage systems. Agricultural drainage systems
shall also comply with all regulations regarding wetlands as enforced by
federal, state and local agencies.
   (D)   Sediment control for open channels.
      (1)   All open channel drainage systems shall maintain practices adjacent
to the open outlet channel that will reduce the transportation of sediment off-
site. Runoff from agricultural fields must pass through a sediment control
system prior to discharge into the open channel conveyance system.
      (2)   Approved sediment control systems may consist of the following:
         (a)   Vegetated buffer shall have a minimum width of 25 feet planted
with permanent grasses appropriate for soil stabilization and filtering;
         (b)   Grade control structures for over fall stabilization;
         (c)   Sediment traps adjacent to the stream channel; and
         (d)   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance
with the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the County NRCS District Conservationist or the Administrator.
   (E)   Maintenance and construction of drainage systems. Agricultural
drainage systems shall be maintained so as to convey the expected flows for
good drainage practices. The existing agricultural surface drainage systems
shall not be enlarged unless the enlargement is consistent with all other
divisions of this section. Maintenance and construction of subsurface drainage
systems will not be subject to the requirements of other sections of this
chapter except as they are regulated by other agencies. Maintenance projects by
legally functioning drainage districts on existing agricultural drainage
systems will not be subject to further permitting requirements under this
chapter except as they relate to the jurisdiction of other agencies.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.025 CONSERVATION DESIGN.
   (A)   Applicability. In a conservation-designed subdivision as defined in
the County Subdivision Ordinance, as codified in
Chapter 154, a density bonus is granted for each acre (or fractional acre) of
land utilized for stormwater infiltration. See §
154.268 of the subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Infiltration credit.
      (1)   To obtain the maximum infiltration credit, infiltration BMPs shall
be designed, installed and maintained to infiltrate runoff to the maximum
extent practicable in accordance with one of the following goals:
         (a)   Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the post-development
infiltration volume shall be at least 90% of the pre-development infiltration
volume, based on an average annual rainfall for the region; or
         (b)   Infiltrate at least 25% of the post-development runoff volume
from the two-year, 24-hour design storm with a Type II distribution. Separate
curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate
runoff volumes and not composite curve numbers.
      (2)   Natural conditions such as soil types and slopes will affect the
ability of a site to meet these infiltration goals. Projects that are shown to
meet these goals will be granted full (100%) credit (i.e., one acre of credit
for one acre of land dedicated to stormwater infiltration). Projects that
exceed these goals or partially meet these goals will be given credit according
to the following table:
Goal #1            Goal #2
90% Average Volume 25% 2-Year Volume % Credit
% Calculated       % Calculated
Goal #1            Goal #2
90% Average Volume 25% 2-Year Volume % Credit
% Calculated       % Calculated
> 92.5%            > 26.0%           110%
90.0% to 92.5%     25.0% to 26.0%    100%
85.5% to 89.9%     23.8% to 24.9%    95%
81.0% to 85.4%     22.5% to 23.7%    90%
76.5% to 80.9%     21.3% to 22.4%    85%
72.0% to 76.4%     20.0% to 21.2%    80%
67.5% to 71.9%     18.8% to 19.9%    75%
63.0% to 67.4%     17.5% to 18.7%    70%
58.5% to 62.9%     16.3% to 17.4%    65%
54.0% to 58.4%     15.0% to 16.2%    60%
50.0% to 53.9%     14.0% to 14.9%    55%
< 50%              < 14.%            0%
 
   (C)   Pretreatment required. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall
be required for parking lot and/or commercial area runoff that will enter an
infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the
infiltration system from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect
groundwater quality. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to,
oil/grease separation, sedimentation, biofiltration, filtration, swales or
filter strips. To minimize potential groundwater impacts, it is desirable to
infiltrate the cleanest runoff. To achieve this, a design may propose greater
infiltration of runoff from low pollutant sources such as roofs, and less from
higher pollutant source areas such as parking lots and commercial areas.
   (D)   Infiltration. Infiltration from areas requiring pretreatment and
regional devices (facilities with a drainage area of five acres or greater) for
infiltration from residential development shall not be installed within 400
feet of a community water system well or within 100 feet of a private well.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
§ 164.035 SITE PLANNING.
   (A)   Applicability. No person shall commence or perform any clearing,
grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land without having first obtained
a site development permit from the Development Review Division of the County
Land Use Department. Requirements for a site development permit are found in §§
164.080 through
164.085 of this chapter.
   (B)   Site planning. Sediment and erosion control planning shall be part of
the initial site planning process. In planning the development of the site, the
applicant shall consider the susceptibility of existing soils to erosion and
topographic features such as steep slopes and stream corridors which must be
protected to reduce the amount of sediment and erosion which occurs. Where
appropriate, existing vegetation shall be protected from disturbance during
construction by fencing or other means.
   (C)   Planning process. In the planning process, the applicant shall also
address the following.
      (1)   For projects that involve phased construction, existing land cover
for those areas not under current development shall be addressed. If existing
land cover does not consist of an appropriate ground cover then these phases
shall be planted temporarily to reduce erosion from idle land.
      (2)   In planning the sediment and erosion control strategy, preference
shall be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling sediment. In order
to accomplish this, the plan must carefully consider the construction sequence
of the phases so that the amount of land area exposed to erosive forces is the
minimum consistent with completing construction.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.036 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance
with the Illinois Urban Manual (2002) or latest edition. Sediment and erosion
control planning shall be in accordance with Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois (revised July, 1988) by the
Urban Committee of the Association of State Soil and Water Conservation
Districts (The Green Book) Chapters 1 through 5. Where the Illinois Urban
Manual supersedes sections of The Green Book, the Illinois Urban Manual shall
prevail.
   (B)   All projects that will result in the development of one acre or more,
except for agricultural projects regulated solely under §
164.024, shall be required to obtain coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit
and shall submit an application for a NPDES permit or a notice of intent (NOI)
to be covered under a general NPDES permit. The developer shall certify to the
Chief Subdivision Engineer that all required permits, plans and inspections
have been prepared and maintained in accordance with the NPDES permit.
Specifically, the developer shall prepare and adhere to a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared for the development project and shall meet the
conditions in the permit for SWPPPs. A copy of such plan shall be provided to
the Chief Subdivision Engineer prior to commencement of development activities
and a copy shall be maintained on the construction site at all times.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.037 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   The runoff from disturbed areas shall not leave the development site without
first passing through sediment control facilities. This requirement shall apply
to all phases of construction and shall include an ongoing process of
implementation of measures and maintenance of those measures during both the
construction season and any construction shut down periods.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.038 EXTENDED CONSTRUCTION SHUTDOWN PERIOD.
   The condition of the construction site for the winter shut down period shall
address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall growing season so
that slopes and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or
permanent vegetative cover. All open areas that are to remain idle throughout
the winter shall receive temporary erosion control measures including temporary
seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanketing prior to the end of the
fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of the growing
season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do not rely on
vegetative cover such as erosion control blankets and heavy mulching.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.039 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In the hydraulic and hydrologic design of major erosion control
measures (those whose tributary drainage area is greater than three acres) such
as sediment basins and traps, diversions and the like, the design frequency
shall be commensurate with the risk of the design event being exceeded.
   (B)   The following design frequencies shall be regarded as minimum design
frequencies for the construction period.
      (1)   For those projects whose construction period is less than six
months, then the storm event having a 50% chance (two-year event) of being
exceeded in any year shall be used for design purposes.
      (2)   For those projects whose construction period is greater than six
months but less than one year, the design frequency for major sediment basins
shall be a rainfall event with a 20% (five-year event) chance of being exceeded
in any one year.
      (3)   For those construction projects expected to last more than one
year, major sediment basins shall be designed for a rainfall event with a 10%
(ten-year event) chance of being exceeded in any one year.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.040 “AS-NEEDED” PRACTICES ON THE PLANS.
   (A)   The sediment and erosion control plan shall designate a series of
practices which shall be implemented either at the direction of the permittee
or the permittee’s representative on-site or at the direction of the Chief
Subdivision Engineer should an inspection of the site indicate a deficiency in
soil and sediment erosion control measures.
   (B)   As a minimum, these measures shall include the following:
      (1)   Sedimentation basins;
      (2)   Sediment traps;
      (3)   Diversion swales;
      (4)   Silt fences;
      (5)   Temporary seeding;
      (6)   Mulching; and
      (7)   Erosion control blankets.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.041 SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   Sediment and erosion control plans shall be in accordance with §§
164.080 through
164.085 but shall include the following.
   (A)   Detailed construction phasing plan identifying sediment and erosion
control measures to be in place for each phase shall be submitted prior to
stripping the site of existing vegetation or cover.
   (B)   Sediment and erosion control measures to be installed initially prior
to stripping existing vegetation or mass grading shall be indicated on the
plans.
   (C)   Permanent stabilization measures shall be indicated on a separate
plan.
   (D)   The expected two-year and ten-year runoff rates from all off-site
areas draining into the site shall be identified on the plan.
   (E)   Methods for conveying flows through the site during construction shall
be indicated. These methods must include the temporary and permanent
stabilization measures to be used to reduce velocity and erosion from flow
through the construction zone.
   (F)   A maintenance schedule of each measure used shall be indicated on the
plan. As a minimum, all sediment and erosion control measures on-site shall be
inspected weekly and also by the applicant’s designee or after a one-half inch
or greater rainfall event and any required repairs shall be made to keep these
measures functional as designed. All plan modifications shall be reviewed by
the Chief Subdivision Engineer or his or her designee. A record of all repairs
and modifications shall be maintained by the applicant and available for review
by the Chief Subdivision Engineer or his or her designee.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.042 CONVEYANCE OF OFF-SITE FLOW.
   (A)   To the extent practicable, proposed ditches and waterways that are to
convey off-site flows through the site shall be stabilized upon construction.
   (B)   Where new waterways are constructed, they shall be stabilized to the
extent practicable prior to their use to convey flood flows.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.043 STOCKPILES.
   (A)   Stockpiles of soil and other erodable or floatable building materials
(sand, limestone and the like) shall not be located in floodplains, overflow
routes or areas subject to frequent inundation.
   (B)   If a stockpile is to remain in place for more than three days, then
sediment and erosion control shall be provided for the stockpile.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.044 STORM SEWER INLETS.
   Storm sewer inlets shall be protected with sediment trapping and/or filter
control devices during construction.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.045 CONSTRUCTION DEWATERING.
   Water pumped or which is otherwise discharged from the site during
construction dewatering shall be filtered, using appropriate sediment and soil
erosion control measures, to reduce erosion.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.046 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC/PRIVATE ROADWAYS.
   Graveled roads, access drives, parking areas of sufficient width and length
and vehicle wash down facilities, if necessary, shall be provided to prevent
soils from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any soil tracked onto
a public or private roadway shall be removed before the end of each workday or
sooner as directed by the authority maintaining the roadway.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.047 TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSINGS.
   Temporary stream crossings of intermittent and perennial streams used only
for and during construction shall be designed to convey a two-year flood
(minimum) or other flood event approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer
without overtopping unless a more frequent design event is allowed by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer. The entire crossing shall be designed to withstand
hydrodynamic forces and erosive forces up to the base flood event without
washing out. Ephemeral streams may be crossed at temporary at-grade crossings
provided that the crossing point is stabilized with materials resistive to the
erosive forces produced by runoff from the upstream drainage area, and the
design is approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer. Temporary stream
crossings shall be removed upon completion of construction activities. All
temporary stream crossing shall be completely removed and the stream restored
to its preconstruction condition upon completion of construction. Restoration
shall incorporate appropriate vegetation consistent with the adjacent existing
vegetation prior to construction or in accordance with a restoration plan
approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
PROTECTION OF SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS
§ 164.060 GENERAL.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth requirements for developments within
floodplains and floodways. In addition, developments in the SFHA draining more
than one square mile with no designated floodway must meet IDNR/OWR Ill. Adm.
Code Part 3700 Rules. References to IDNR/OWR permits or approvals in this
section shall be construed as “their designee” where a portion or all of their
authority has been delegated.
   (B)   Development that qualifies for any of the self-issuing statewide or
regional permits administered by IDNR/OWR (Statewide Permit Nos. 1 though 14
and Regional Permit No. 3) are similarly permitted under this subchapter. The
applicant’s state professional engineer shall certify to the Chief Subdivision
Engineer that the development qualifies for the particular statewide or
regional permit in question under the regulations established by IDNR/OWR for
the permit. All other provisions of this chapter and other ordinances
applicable to the development, however, continue to apply. However a permit
from the county must still be issued.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.061 FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) AND
REGULATORY FLOODWAY LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Regulatory floodplain. The floodplains are those lands within the
jurisdiction of the county that are subject to inundation by the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. The floodplains of the county are generally
identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map of the county prepared by
FEMA. The BFE shall be delineated onto the site topography to establish the
regulatory floodplain area limits for regulation under this chapter. Regulatory
floodplains shall be delineated onto the site map from the current FEMA FIRM,
FBFM or LOMR and include those areas of the SFHA which are not regulatory
floodplains.
   (B)   Base flood elevation (BFE). The BFE shall be:
      (1)   The elevation of the 100-year profile corresponding to the location
of the development as indicated in the flood profiles in the FEMA flood
insurance studies listed in
Appendix B (which may be updated from time to time);
      (2)   In the case of FEMA delineated “AH Zones” the elevation noted on
the map shall be the BFE. In the case of FEMA delineated “AO Zones” the BFE
shall be the elevation or depth added to the highest adjacent grade (or at
least two feet about the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is provided)
shown on the countywide flood insurance rate map of the county;
      (3)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other
sources. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
development of the site.
         (a)   When no BFE information exists, the BFE for a riverine SFHA
shall be determined using a site-specific floodplain study by a professional
engineer using appropriate hydrologic and hydraulic models as follows:
            1.   The base flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model
such as HIP;
            2.   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained
from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20 or HIP or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological
Survey for estimating peak flood discharges; or
            3.   A technique approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer and the
IDNR/OWR.
         (b)   Where a channel has a tributary drainage area of 640 acres or
more, the above analyses shall be submitted to the IDNR/OWR for concurrent
approval.
         (c)   For a non-riverine regulatory floodplain, the historic flood of
record plus three feet may be used for the BFE instead of performing a detailed
hydrologic and hydraulic study.
      (4)   For floodplains that are not regulatory, are not draining more than
640 acres, and with no BFE determined, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may
require a site-specific floodplain study for the purpose of establishing an FPE
for the development.
   (C)   Regulatory floodplain locations.
      (1)   The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on
the current effective regulatory maps maintain by the county. The floodways are
designated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of the county, prepared
by FEMA. When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive
floodway limit shall prevail. The location of the regulatory floodway boundary
shall be scaled onto the site plan using references common to both the map and
the plan (typically the township section lines). Where an interpretation is
needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted.
      (2)   Note: If an area of the site is located in the regulatory floodway
that is higher than the BFE, that area is subject to the floodway standards of
§
164.064, including the appropriate use criteria, until such time as a LOMR is
received from FEMA with concurrence by IDNR/OWR.
      (3)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory
floodway are as follows.
            1.   The flood profiles, flows and data in the current effective
FIS must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears
to be in error or conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall be contacted
for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
The County Executive and the Chief Subdivision Engineer shall be copied on all
related correspondence.
            2.   If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected
by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area,
the proposed development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this
section with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.
            3.   If the applicant is informed by IDNR/OWR, local governments or
a private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is
scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control
project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the
next five years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to meet
the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control
project is built, removed or modified as applicable.
            4.   If the appropriate use will result in a change in the
regulatory floodway location or a change in the BFE, the applicant shall submit
the information required to be issued a conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR) to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. A public notice inviting public comment on the
proposed change in the BFE or location of the regulatory floodway will be
issued by IDNR/OWR or its designee before a CLOMR is issued. Filling, grading,
dredging or excavating may take place upon issuance of a conditional approval
from IDNR/OWR and the Administrator. No further development activities shall
take place in the existing or proposed floodplain until a letter of map
revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA unless such activities meet all the
requirements of §
164.062. The Director shall be copied on all related correspondence.
            5.   For those circumstances listed below and located in a
regulatory floodway, at a minimum, the following information shall be submitted
to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence:
               a.   Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge,
culvert crossings and roadway approaches;
               b.   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge,
culvert crossing or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the
analysis indicating the proposed flood profile;
               c.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage; and
               d.   Stormwater management permits to local units of government
for regulatory floodway and floodplain development.
            6.   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams
and the like all other state, federal or local projects.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.062 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The following general performance standards are applicable
to all development in a regulatory floodplain. The standards of this section
apply except when superseded by more stringent requirements in the subsequent
sections.
      (1)   No development except as allowed in §
164.066 shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain that singularly or
cumulatively creates an increase in flood stage or velocity off-site, or a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity on-site
or threat to public health, safety and welfare.
      (2)   For all projects involving a channel modification, fill, stream
maintenance or a levee, the flood conveyance and storage capacity of the
regulatory floodplain shall not be reduced.
      (3)   If the proposed development would result in a change in the
regulatory floodplain or BFE as indicated in
Appendix B, the applicant shall obtain a LOMR from FEMA. No buildings may be
built in the existing or proposed regulatory floodplain until the LOMR receives
concurrence from IDNR/OWR and is issued by FEMA and the building meets all the
building protection standards (division (C) below). Proposed changes to the
regulatory floodway delineation and the BFE must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for
concurrence.
      (4)   If the development is located in a public body of water, as defined
by IDNR/OWR (
Appendix C), a permit or a waiver of a permit must also be received from IDNR/
OWR.
      (5)   Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or
removal of a dam, the developer shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required.
      (6)   (a)   For public flood control projects, the floodplain management
standards will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR
and Chief Subdivision Engineer that each of the following conditions are met:
            1.   Demonstrate by hydraulic and hydrologic modeling that the
proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood
heights outside the project site or demonstrate that any increases will be
contained in easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event;
            2.   Demonstrate that the project will be operated and maintained
by a public agency; and
            3.   Demonstrate that the project will reduce flood damage to an
existing building or structure.
         (b)   These standards do not preclude the design, engineering,
construction or financing, in whole or in part of a public flood control
project by persons who are not public agencies.
      (7)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, planned
unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home park and additions
to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
data and floodway delineations.
      (8)   Critical facilities shall not be permitted within the 500-year
floodplain.
   (B)   Public health protection standards.
      (1)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted if all manholes or other aboveground openings located
below the FPE are watertight.
      (2)   New on-site waste disposal systems, such as septic systems, are
allowed in the regulatory floodplain only if they meet all of the following
conditions.
         (a)   The invert of any wastewater distribution lines shall be a
minimum of two feet above the water surface elevation of the base flow of any
perennial stream.
         (b)   The lateral distance from a ditch, creek or other riverine
source to the wastewater distribution lines shall be a minimum of 75.
         (c)   The elevation of any areas which are to receive wastewater
distribution shall be above the ordinary high water mark.
         (d)   The soil of the receiving field shall be of a type suitable for
septic fields.
         (e)   The tank shall be placed out of the floodplain with the invert
of the outlet above the BFE.
      (3)   New, substantially improved or replacement wastewater treatment
plants shall have watertight openings for those openings located below the FPE.
These facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the facility or
contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.
   (C)   Building protection standards. The building protection standards apply
to all buildings located in the regulatory floodplain; however, it should be
noted that most new and replacement buildings are not appropriate uses of the
regulatory floodway.
      (1)   The lowest floor including basements of all new residential
structures, substantially improved structures and additions shall be elevated
up to at least the flood protection elevation.
         (a)   If placed on fill, the top of the fill for the residential
structure shall be at the flood protection elevation (FPE) or higher. The top
of fill for an attached garage shall be at least 0.1 foot above the base flood
elevation (BFE). The fill shall be placed at that elevation for a distance of
ten feet out from the building unless the building design is certified by a
registered structural engineer to be protected from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures. Additionally, the fill shall not settle below the FPE for the
residential structure and not below 0.1 feet above the base flood for an
attached garage, and shall be adequately protected against erosion, scour and
differential settlement. The fill shall not adversely affect surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties. All structures placed on fill in the
floodplain shall meet the requirements of this chapter and FEMA Technical
Bulletin 10-01, and the applicant’s design engineer shall certify that the land
or structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area are reasonably
safe from flooding.
         (b)   If elevated by means of walls, pilings or other foundation, the
building’s supporting structure must be permanently open to flood waters and
not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The permanent
openings shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consist of a
minimum of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the BFE. The lowest inside grade must match the lowest existing
outside grade adjacent to the structure. The foundation and supporting members
shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining
structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice and floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including
basement) for the residential structure and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall
be located at or above the FPE. An attached garage must be elevated to at least
0.1 feet above the BFE. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the FPE. No area below the FPE shall be used for storage.
      (2)   The lowest floor including the basement of all new or substantially
improved nonresidential buildings shall be elevated at least to the FPE as
described above or be structurally dry flood proofed to at least the FPE. A
nonresidential building may be structurally dry flood proofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided that a professional engineer or registered structural
engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry flood
proofed below the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building
design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from
debris or ice. Flood proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered flood proofing for the purpose
of this division.)
      (3)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed on a
site for more than 180 days shall be at or above the FPE and shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with the
Illinois Manufactured Home Tie-Down Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 870) as amended.
      (4)   (a)   Accessory structures, such as tool sheds and detached garages
which are not substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be
constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with the
following criteria.
            1.   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
            2.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof
material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet the floodway
standards in §
164.064.
            3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and
movement.
            4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or flood proofed to the FPE.
            5.   The building shall be no greater than 600 square feet in floor
size, and be valued at less than $7,500. The building shall meet the permanent
opening criteria of division (C)(1)(b) above.
            6.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain basements or other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or
similar uses.
         (b)   Accessory structures that do not meet all of the above criteria
may be constructed if they are dry flood proofed or elevated at least one-half
of one foot above the BFE.
   (D)   Nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood,
fire, wind or other disaster may be restored unless the damage meets or exceeds
50% of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform
to the building protection standards of this chapter.
   (E)   LOMR-F. A LOMR-F must be issued by FEMA before a building permit may
be issued for structures built on fill in the floodplain. A permit shall not be
issued unless the applicant has complied with all the following criteria.
      (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per §
164.063.
      (2)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      (3)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above
the FPE for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may waive the ten foot minimum setback if a
state licensed professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to
protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressure has been met. The
certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design
analysis, which shall be submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer for
review. The Chief Subdivision Engineer may require additional documentation as
necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the
structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance be less than
four feet.
      (4)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the base flood elevation
(BFE). However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may waive the 20-foot minimum setback
distance if a state licensed professional engineer certifies that an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design
proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe
from flooding, shall be submitted to the Chief Subdivision Engineer for review.
In no case shall the setback distance be less than four feet.
      (5)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this division and is at least five feet thick under the
basement floor slab. Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to require
the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F, if the
fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification and degree
permeability, as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM
standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
      (6)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, soil
must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the same
direction.
      (7)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by a state licensed professional engineer, as warranted by the site
conditions.
      (8)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five feet below the BFE.
      (9)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab,
and minimum of one quarter horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four times
the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from the
building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor
under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      (10)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      (11)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      (12)   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in divisions (E)(1) through (E)(11) above, the Chief Subdivision Engineer
may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and
requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe
from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed
engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered
basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA
Technical Bulleting 10-01 with the analysis of the fill being prepared by a
state licensed professional engineer.
      (13)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The
rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to
the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to drain the
compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.063 COMPENSATORY STORAGE VOLUME STANDARDS.
   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and
balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The following standards
apply within the regulatory floodplain.
   (A)   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage volume will be required
for development in a riverine or non-riverine regulatory floodplain and shall
be at least one and one-fourth times the regulatory floodplain flood storage
volume displaced. The storage volume displaced below the existing ten-year
frequency flood elevation must be replaced below the proposed ten-year
frequency flood elevation. The storage volume displaced above the ten-year
existing frequency flood elevation must be replaced above the proposed ten-year
frequency flood elevation.
   (B)   Compensatory storage areas shall be designed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse, and in the case of streams and watercourses, the
excavation shall be located opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied.
   (C)   A recorded covenant running with the land is required to maintain the
compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide compensatory storage
volume.
   (D)   Existing depressional storage shall meet the requirements of §
164.021(F).
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.064 FLOODWAY STANDARDS.
   (A)   The only development in a regulatory floodway which will be allowed
are appropriate uses which will not cause an increase in flood heights or
velocities for all flood events up to and including the base flood, and which
will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity, or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare, or impair the
natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
permanently impair existing water quality of aquatic habitat. Construction
impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods. Only those
appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed in the
regulatory floodway.
   (B)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined below as an
appropriate use. If the development is proposed for the regulatory floodway
portion of the regulatory floodplain, the following standards apply in addition
to the standards for the regulatory floodplain.
      (1)   The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
         (a)   Public flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public
works or and private improvements relating to the control of drainage flooding,
erosion, water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
         (b)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements relating to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
         (c)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
         (d)   Underground and overhead utilities;
         (e)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields, and trail
systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including
open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that will not
block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         (f)   Detached garages, storage sheds, boat houses or other non-
habitable structures without sanitary facilities that are accessory to existing
buildings and will not block flood flows nor reduce regulatory floodway
storage;
         (g)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways and taxiways
and any modification thereto;
         (h)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade provided that
either:
            1.   The BFE is less than one foot above the proposed parking lot;
or
            2.   The parking lot is accessory to short-term outdoor
recreational facilities and the owner agrees to restrict access during periods
of inundation and agrees to accept liability for all damage caused by vehicular
access during flooding events.
         (i)   Regulatory floodway grading, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slope toward a channel;
         (j)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of water-tight window wells, elevating
structures, or the construction of flood walls around residential, commercial
or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall
be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure,
and, which are not considered to be substantial improvements to the structure;
         (k)   The repair, replacement or reconstruction of a damaged building,
provided that none of the outside dimensions of the building are increased and
if the building was damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the
damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation; and
         (l)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase
the enclosed floor area of the building below the BFE and which will not block
flood flows including, but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks,
patios and second story additions. If the building is improved to 50% or more
of the market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial
improvement), the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation.
      (2)   Additions or changes to the above list of appropriate uses must be
approved by the Committee prior to the adoption by the County Board and IDNR/
OWR.
      (3)   All development in the regulatory floodway shall require a permit
from IDNR-OWR and must be in accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate
use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data prepared and signed by a professional
engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of
this chapter.
         (a)   All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the
development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on-
stream structures or dams, shall be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the base flood.
         (b)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used to
determine transition sections in calculations of effective regulatory floodway
conveyance.
            1.   Flowing water will expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length.
            2.   Flowing water will contract no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length.
            3.   Flowing water will not expand or contract faster than one foot
vertical for every ten feet of flooded stream length.
            4.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
            5.   Transition sections must be used to determine the effective
conveyance areas on adjacent properties.
         (c)   Development of an appropriate use will not result in an increase
in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage. However, in
the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose
of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may
be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
      (5)   In the case of on-stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water during normal or flood flows, the increase in flood stage when
compared to existing conditions for all storm events up to and including the
base flood event shall be contained within recorded easements or the channel
banks. A dam safety permit or letter indicating a dam safety permit is not
required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for these structures.
      (6)   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams and the
like and for all other state or local projects.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.065 RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN.
   (A)   These standards apply to riverine regulatory floodplains without a
regulatory floodway.
   (B)   The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR for all development
any portion of which is located partially or completely within the regulatory
floodplain (without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a tributary drainage
area of 640 acres or more.
      (1)   The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in an
obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due to
an increase in flood heights, velocities or loss of floodplain area storage.
      (2)   A professional engineer shall submit a study that demonstrates one
of the following:
         (a)   Determine a floodway which meets the definition of a regulatory
floodway and demonstrate that the proposed development meets the floodway
standards in §
164.064; or
         (b)   Determine a BFE and demonstrate that the proposed development
will maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase flood
velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will compensate for any lost
floodplain storage.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.066 BRIDGE AND CULVERT STANDARDS.
   These standards are for the reconstruction, modification or new construction
of bridges, culvert crossings and roadway approaches located in the regulatory
floodplain.
   (A)   A proposed new structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one- tenth foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the base flood event unless
contained within the channel banks or recorded easements. The evaluation must
be submitted to the IDNR-OWR for review and a permit obtained.
   (B)   If the proposed new structure will increase upstream flood stages
greater than one-tenth foot, the applicant must contact IDNR/OWR for a dam
safety permit or waiver. The Director shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
   (C)   Lost regulatory floodplain storage must be replaced as required in §
164.063 except that artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in
head loss behind an existing bridge or culvert crossing shall not be required
to be replaced, provided no flood damage will be incurred downstream.
   (D)   Velocity increases must be mitigated by use of appropriate measures to
avoid scour, erosion and sedimentation at the structure.
   (E)   For modification or replacement of existing structures, the existing
structure must first be evaluated in accordance with IDNR/OWR Rules (17 Ill.
Adm. Code Part 3708) to determine if the existing structure is a source of
flood damage. If the structure is a source of flood damage, the applicant’s
engineer shall submit justification to allow the damage to continue and
evaluate the feasibility of relieving the structure’s impact. Modifications or
replacement structures shall not increase flood stages (0.0 feet) compared to
the existing condition for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event. The evaluation must be submitted to IDNR/OWR, for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued. The County Executive and the Chief Subdivision
Engineer shall be copied on all related correspondence.
   (F)   If any work is proposed in, near or over a public body of water, a
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR.
   (G)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing
the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
   (H)   (1)   Construction vehicles shall cross-streams by the means of
existing bridges or culverts.
      (2)   Where an existing crossing is not available, a temporary crossing
that has been issued a permit or waiver by IDNR/OWR shall be constructed in
which:
         (a)   The approach roads will be one- half foot or less above existing
grade;
         (b)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall;
         (c)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two
feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-
erosive material, such as riprap or gravel; and
         (d)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.067 WETLAND, WATERS AND BUFFER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. Waters of the United States is a defined term (§
164.004) in this chapter and refers to areas that are under the jurisdictional
authority and regulated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Isolated
waters of the county are under the jurisdictional authority of this chapter and
is a defined term in §
164.004.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Development activities that create an impact within a wetland,
waters of the United States, isolated waters of the county, or their associated
buffers, regardless of the Corps of Engineers jurisdiction, must submit a site
development permit application to the County Land Use Department.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit a jurisdictional determination for the
United States Army Corps to determine the proper permitting agency.
      (3)   No site development permit for activities that may impact wetlands,
waters or their associated buffers shall be issued unless the County Land Use
Department finds that:
         (a)   The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy,
without mitigation (see §
164.082), wetlands, waters or their associated buffer areas, nor impair their
natural functions, with the exception of impacts to individual wetlands/waters
covering one-tenth acre or less total area, which may be impacted without
mitigation required;
         (b)   The location of natural features and the site’s topography have
been considered in the designing and siting of all physical improvements, and
it has been determined that impacts to wetlands, waters, and buffers cannot be
avoided; and
         (c)   Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the
site of topsoil, trees and other natural features will not occur before the
commencement of building operations; only those areas approved for the
placement of physical improvements may be cleared.
      (4)   The following existing developments are generally considered to be
exempt from wetland provisions of this chapter. However, the Chief Subdivision
Engineer reserves the right on a case-by- case basis to determine that a
particular waterbody within these categories of waters is a regulated isolated
waters of the county:
         (a)   Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons
designed to meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act (other than cooling
ponds as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 123.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this
definition);
         (b)   Drainage and irrigation ditches excavated on dry land;
         (c)   Artificially irrigated areas that would revert to upland if the
irrigation ceased;
         (d)   Artificial lakes created by excavating and/or berming dry land
to collect and retain water and which are used exclusively for the purposes as
stormwater storage, stock watering, irrigation or settling basins;
         (e)   Artificial reflecting or swimming pools or other small
ornamental bodies of water created by excavating and/or berming dry land to
retain water for primarily aesthetic reasons; or
         (f)   Waterfilled depressions created in dry land incidental to
construction activity and pits excavated in dry land for the purpose of
obtaining fill, sand or gravel unless and until the construction or excavation
operation is abandoned and the resulting body of water meets the definition of
waters.
      (5)   There shall be no development, including clearing or removal of
natural ground cover and/or trees, within isolated waters of the county or
waters of the United States for any purpose, unless a permit is granted subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   This chapter is not intended to preclude the removal of vegetation
(e.g., removal of exotic species or selective thinning in order to increase
sunlight penetration) as part of a management program for maintenance and
restoration of natural areas.
      (7)   The County Land Use Department may limit development activity in or
near a wetland, water’s or buffer to specific months, and to a maximum number
of continuous days or hours, in order to minimize adverse impacts. Also, the
County Land Use Department may require that equipment be operated from only one
side of a stream, lake or pond in order to minimize bank disruption. Other
development techniques, conditions and restrictions may be required in order to
minimize adverse impacts on any related areas not subject to development
activity.
   (C)   Requirements for wetland delineation. A wetland delineation report
shall be submitted along with a site development permit application for any
activities that may impact wetlands, waters of the United States, waters of the
county or their associated buffers.
      (1)   The applicant shall identify the boundaries, extent, function and
quality of all wetland areas on the development site and prepare a wetland
determination report. The presence and extent of wetland areas shall be
determined by, or under supervision of, a qualified wetland professional using
an on-site wetland procedure within three years of the initial permit
application date in accordance with the methodology contained in the 1987 Corps
of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual or as otherwise noted below.
      (2)   The following are minimum requirements for the wetland
determination report:
         (a)   A plan showing the exact location of wetlands within the
development boundaries. The wetland boundary shall be flagged in the field and
surveyed, and the boundary of the wetland plotted on a plat of survey;
         (b)   An aerial photograph delineating the wetland and the development
boundary;
         (c)   A copy of the following maps (most recent) delineating the
development boundary:
            1.   U.S.G.S. quadrangle map;
            2.   NRCS (Natural Resources Conservation Service) wetland map;
            3.   National wetland inventory map;
            4.   FEMA floodplain map;
            5.   County soil survey; and
            6.   Hydrologic atlas.
         (d)   United States Army Corps of Engineers data sheets with
representative color photographs provided for each data point;
         (e)   A written description of the wetland(s), the delineation report,
including farmed wetland determinations, prepared in conformance with current
Corps of Engineers requirements or Food Security Act provisions, and the
following growing season and boundary confirmation requirements:
            1. The growing season for the purposes of a final wetland
delineation that will be made part of an application package will generally be
between April 15 and October 31 each year, provided the ground is neither
frozen to the point that soil probes or pits cannot be completed or there is
any snow cover present. If the weather has been unusually warm or cold at the
beginning or end of the growing season, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may
shorten or lengthen these periods based on his or her discretion;
            2.   The approximate location, extent, and relative quality of off-
site wetlands on properties adjoining the development shall be identified by
using the first of the following documents or procedures pertaining at the time
of development:
               a.   Site-specific delineation according to the 1987 Federal
Wetland Delineation Manual;
               b.   If a site-specific delineation is not available, use most
current NRCS wetland maps; and
               c.   National Wetland Inventory (NWI) map.
            3.   A floristic quality assessment along with a statement
regarding whether or not the site contains high quality aquatic resources
(HQAR);
            4.   Documentation that the development is in compliance with the
State Department of Natural Resources Endangered Species Consultation Program
and the State Natural Areas Preservation Act;
            5.   Documentation that the development is in compliance with the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service’s consultation program under the
Endangered Species Act; and
            6.   Wetland/waters delineation plan view drawing that includes the
proposed site development plan, with the existing conditions and topography
overlain with the following:
               a.   All onsite wetland and waters areas;
               b.   All required buffer areas;
               c.   All proposed wetland, waters, and buffer impact areas;
               d.   If applicable, identification of where buffer averaging is
proposed, including calculation of the impact and replacement area; and
               e.   A table listing the acreages of all wetlands, waters,
buffers and buffer averaged areas.
   (D)   Requirements for buffer areas. Buffer areas shall be required for all
areas defined as either waters of the United States or isolated waters of the
county. Buffer areas are divided into two types, linear buffers and water body
buffers. Buffers required by Army Corps of Engineers for wetland impacts under
their jurisdiction will be considered as compliant with this section’s
requirements.
      (1)   Linear buffers shall be designated along both sides of all channels
meeting the definition of waters of the United States or isolated waters of the
county. The buffer width shall be determined as follows.
         (a)   When the channel has a watershed less than one square mile, the
minimum buffer shall be 50 feet on each side of the channel.
         (b)   When the channel has a watershed greater than one square mile,
the minimum buffer shall be 75 feet on each side of the channel.
         (c)   Linear HQAR and streams shall have a minimum buffer width of 100
feet an each side of the channel.
      (2)   Water body buffers shall encompass all non-linear bodies of water
meeting the definition of either waters of the United States or isolated waters
of the County. The buffers width shall be determined as follows.
         (a)   For all water bodies or wetlands with a total surface area
greater than one-tenth acre but less than one acre, a minimum buffer width of
30 feet shall be established.
         (b)   For all water bodies or wetlands with a total surface area
greater than one acre but less than two and one-half acres, a minimum buffer
width of 40 feet shall be established.
         (c)   For all water bodies or wetlands with a total surface area
greater than two and one-half acres, a minimum buffer width of 50 feet shall be
established.
         (d)   Non-linear HQAR shall have a minimum buffer width of 100 feet.
      (3)   In areas where state or federal threatened and endangered species
are present or for a state natural area inventory site, buffer widths may be
modified upon approval of the Chief Subdivision Engineer. Any modification
requires approval by the Chief Subdivision Engineer following consultation with
the State Department of Natural Resources or United States Fish and Wildlife
Service.
      (4)   Buffer areas for water bodies meeting the definition of waters of
the United States or isolated waters of the county shall extend from the
ordinary high water mark. Buffer areas for wetlands shall extend from the edge
of the delineated wetland. A property may contain a buffer area that originates
from waters of the United States or isolated waters of the county on another
property. On-site verification of the off-site wetland or waters limit is
preferred. When an on-site determination is not possible, the limit should be
determined through review and annotation of aerial photo mapping which must be
provided with the wetland delineation report or permit application package.
      (5)   Features of the stormwater management system approved by the county
may be within the outer 50% of the buffer area of the development.
      (6)   Access through buffer areas shall be provided, when necessary, for
maintenance purposes.
      (7)   All existing roadside ditches, improvement to existing public road
and trail developments or alignments, and utility projects that are located in
a public right-of-way are exempt from buffer requirements.
      (8)   Stormwater discharges that enter a buffer shall have appropriate
energy dissipation measures to prevent erosion and scour.
      (9)   All buffer areas shall be maintained free from development
including disturbance of the soil, dumping or filling, erection of structures
and placement of impervious surfaces except as follows.
         (a)   Trails and bike/pedestrian paths may encroach provided: they are
no wider than 12 feet; no closer than ten feet from the edge of the wetland;
and runoff from these facilities is unconcentrated flow.
         (b)   Utility installation or maintenance, construction of stormwater
facilities and maintenance of stormwater facilities shall be allowed.
         (c)   Boat docks, boathouses and piers shall be allowed and the
provisions of division (D)(1) above shall apply.
      (10)   Buffer areas disturbed by construction or as part of a
revegetation plan shall be revegetated using Native Plant Guide for Streams and
Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois, NRCS, et al., (as amended) as a
minimum standard. Performance standards for the required revegetation will at a
minimum require at least one year of monitoring with at least 90% cover for
non-aquatic vegetative zones within one year of planting.
      (11)   Buffer averaging. If a Corps of Engineers buffer is not required,
the buffer width for a development site may be decreased to a minimum of one-
half of the buffer width required, upon approval of the Chief Subdivision
Engineer, provided that the new buffer limit is delineated by a path, fence or
permanent signage and that the lost buffer area is made up elsewhere along the
same wetland perimeter. The consultation process of IDNR or United States Fish
and Wildlife Service may override the ability to average buffer areas.
      (12)   Preservation of buffer areas shall be provided by deed or plat
restrictions.
   (E)   Buffer area permitted activities.
      (1)   Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations,
informational displays, directional signs, footbridges, observation decks and
docks;
      (2)   Walkways and observation decks may encroach provided that they are
no wider than 12 feet and that the runoff from the surfaces enters the buffer
area as unconcentrated flow. These items shall avoid high quality wetland
areas, and shall not adversely affect natural areas designated in the state
natural areas inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species;
      (3)   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development
of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the development of park
shelters or similar structures is allowed. The development and maintenance of
roads, parking lots and other impervious surfaces necessary for permitted uses
are allowed only on a very limited basis, and where no alternate location
outside of the setback area is available;
      (4)   The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing
structures;
      (5)   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic natural and scientific
areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps;
      (6)   A buffer area may be used for passive recreation (e.g., bird
watching, walking, jogging, bicycling, horseback riding and picnicking) and it
may contain pedestrian, bicycle or equestrian trails provided that impervious
surfaces are no wider than 12 feet and that the runoff from these areas enters
the buffer area as unconcentrated flow;
      (7)   Utility maintenance and maintenance of stormwater facilities shall
be allowed; and
      (8)   Boat docks, boathouses and piers shall be allowed and the
provisions of division (D)(3) above shall apply.
   (F)   Mitigation. Mitigation is required for all impacts to wetlands greater
than one-tenth acre of isolated waters of the county that are high quality
aquatic resources (HQAR). Mitigation is required for all impacts to wetlands
that are greater than one-fourth acre of isolated waters of the county that are
not high-quality aquatic resources. Mitigation required by Army Corps of
Engineers for wetland impacts under their jurisdiction will be considered as
compliant with this section’s requirements. Requirements for mitigation are as
follows.
      (1)   All mitigation shall occur in the county. Mitigation shall use the
following hierarchy; with on-site mitigation preferred. Allowance to the next
lower step is permitted only when justified through sequencing specified or
when the higher step is not available:
         (a)   On-site wetland mitigation meeting the requirements of this
chapter;
         (b)   In the same watershed as wetland impact in a county-approved
wetland mitigation bank;
         (c)   County Forest Preserve District Wetland Restoration Funds. This
mitigation option may only be used for wetland impacts where there are no
available mitigation credits within the county; and
         (d)   A United States Army Corps of Engineers approved wetland
mitigation bank.
      (2)   Mitigation shall provide for the replacement of the lost wetland
environment at the following ratios (creation acreage to wetland impact
acreage):
         (a)   A minimum of 1.5:1 for impacts to non-HQAR wetlands;
         (b)   A minimum of 3:1 for impacts to HQAR wetlands;
         (c)   A minimum of 6:1 for impacts to forested or fen HQAR wetlands;
and
         (d)   A minimum of 1:1 for impacts to open waters that are not HQAR
      (3)   Mitigated isolated waters of the county shall be designed to
duplicate or improve the hydrologic and biologic features of the original
wetland impact area.
      (4)   The mitigation plan shall include the proposed grading plan,
planting plan and specifications. It shall also include a wetland mitigation
management and monitoring plan indicating the legally responsible parties for
long-term operation and maintenance and dedicated funding sources.
      (5)   A project mitigation document shall be submitted in conformance
with the latest version of the Chicago District Corps of Engineers Mitigation
Guidelines and Requirements.
      (6)   Creation of wetlands for the mitigation of wetland impacts shall
not take place within detention facilities.
      (7)   A five-year period of management, maintenance and monitoring
program will be required. The proposed management, maintenance and monitoring
plan text should generally follow the standards of the Chicago District Corps
of Engineers.
      (8)   A five-year wetland monitoring and maintenance guarantee for 125%
of monitoring and maintenance cost estimate shall be submitted prior to
obtaining a permit. The guarantee shall be in accordance with §§
164.180 through
164.183 and shall include costs for construction, monitoring and management
activities during the five-year monitoring period.
      (9)   Long-term ownership and funding must be identified. A long-term
management plan must be submitted that guides the long-term owner/manager in
the proper care of the area. This plan’s operation would commence following the
required initial maintenance and monitoring period.
      (10)   On-site mitigation is preferred when the cumulative area of
mitigation and preserved wetlands exceeds one and one-half acres.
      (11)   If the proposed mitigation area is less than one and one-half
acres it is preferred that wetland mitigation banks be used, unless the
developer can provided assurances that the area will be successful and will
receive a high level of care in perpetuity.
      (12)   Mitigation areas shall have the same buffer requirements as
existing wetlands and waters.
      (13)   The developer shall provide the Chief Subdivision Engineer annual
monitoring reports prepared by a qualified wetland professional on the status
of the constructed mitigation measures for five years from date of completion
of the mitigation project. The developer shall undertake all necessary remedial
action to bring the area into compliance with the wetland mitigation plan.
      (14)   Where a proposed development activity is less than one acre in
area or the development consists of a single family residence, the Land Use
Department, upon approval of the Chief Subdivision Engineer, may simplify the
submission requirements of the above division provided that the person
responsible for any development shall implement necessary erosion control
measures to satisfy the purpose and intent set forth in §§
164.035 through
164.047 of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 164.080 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Site development permit and other permits required.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall
commence or perform any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling of
land without having first obtained a site development permit from the
Development Review Division of the County Land Use Department. Failure to
obtain a site development permit is a violation of this chapter.
         (a)   A site development permit shall not be required for any one of
the following construction activities unless the property is located in a
floodplain, if there is regulatory floodplain within the property boundary or
if the development impacts a wetland and associated buffer or an existing
stormwater drainage system:
            1.   Clearing, grading, stripping, excavation or filling associated
with the construction of a single-family residence or an addition to an
existing single-family residence on a site equal to or greater than five acres;
            2.   Clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling associated
with the construction of an addition to an existing residential building or
construction of a single-family accessory structure on a site equal to or
greater than two and one-half acres provided that the proposed structure is
equal to or less than 3,000 square feet in area;
            3.   Clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling associated
with the construction of an addition to an existing residential building or the
construction of a single-family residential accessory structure on a site less
than two and one-half acres if the footprint of either is equal to or less than
1,000 square feet in area;
            4.   Clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling associated
with the agricultural practices, including the implementation of conservation
practices included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Will/South Cook
Soil and Water Conservation District, and including the construction of
structures used for agricultural purposes, provided the construction meets the
requirements of §
164.024;
            5.   Clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling associated
with the installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system to serve an
existing dwelling or structure;
            6.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof which is equal to
or less than 100 cubic yards in volume on a site less than two and one-half
acres in size when structures are not involved and the proposed construction
activity is not within 20 feet of a property line;
            7.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof which is equal to
or less than 200 cubic yards in volume on a site equal to or greater than two
and one-half acres when structures are not involved and the proposed
construction activity is not within 20 feet of a property line;
            8.   Removal of plant cover equal to or less than 5,000 square feet
in an area when structures are not involved;
            9.   Driveways installed at existing grade on residential property
that do not impact existing stormwater drainage systems;
            10.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility
easements for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities;
            11.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in a right-of-way for the
purpose of installing or maintaining utilities, including storm sewers; or
            12.   Maintenance of an existing stormwater facility, not requiring
other state or federal permits or approvals.
         (b)   A site development permit is required for all development that
is located in the regulatory floodplain, requires stormwater detention
facilities and/or stormwater management system per §
164.020(B), which do not meet the exemptions of §
164.020(C) of this chapter.
         (c)   A site development permit is required for any development that:
            1.   Creates a wetland impact within an area defined as waters of
the United States;
            2.   Creates a wetland impact within an area defined as isolated
waters of the county; or
            3.   Occurs in buffer areas adjoining waters of the United States
or isolated waters of the county.
      (2)   All development shall secure all appropriate stormwater management
related approvals, including, without limitation, an IDNR- OWR floodway/
floodplain construction permit, a ACOE 404 permit and an IDNR-OWR dam safety
permit if required, from all federal, state and regional authorities and other
appropriate federal, state, and regional approvals prior to the issuance of a
site development permit for areas of a site requiring other approvals.
   (B)   Permit review fees. All permit fees shall be paid at the time of
permit issuance. Permit fees are established by the County Board. Fees may
include, but are not limited to, the cost of permit administration, review and
inspections prior to construction, during construction and within the permanent
cover establishment period following construction. Refer to §
158.01 for the fee schedule.
   (C)   Professional seals and certifications required.
      (1)   The design of stormwater facilities, calculations for the
determination of the regulatory floodplain, or calculations of the impacts of
development shall meet the standards of this chapter and shall be prepared,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state. The
professional engineer shall provide an opinion that the technical submittal
meets the criteria required by this chapter or the applicable certified
community ordinance.
      (2)   For structures (not including earth embankments) that are subject
to a differential water pressure greater than three feet, the submittal shall
include evidence that the subject design has been prepared by a qualified
professional who shall, as a minimum, have registration with the state as a
professional engineer. These reviews shall include stability of the structure
under design conditions considering the protection of downstream life and
property in the event of a failure. When directed by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer the calculations submitted for the structures shall be reviewed,
signed and sealed by a registered structural engineer.
      (3)   For projects which include earth embankments which are subjected to
a differential water pressure the submittal shall include evidence that the
embankment design and construction specifications are adequate for the design
conditions. This review shall include consideration of the existing foundation
soils for the embankment, the materials from which the embankment is to be
constructed, compaction requirements for the embankment and protection of the
embankment from failure due to overtopping. Construction and materials
specifications for all embankments shall be included with the plan set
submittal. When directed by the Chief Subdivision Engineer, or when the
impounded water pressure differential exceeds three feet, or when appropriate
considering the volume impounded and water surface elevation differential to
which the embankment is subjected, these calculations may be required to be
reviewed, signed and sealed by a qualified geotechnical or structural engineer.
      (4)   A topographical map of the site, record drawings and other required
drawings shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional land surveyor
or professional engineer and tied to NAVD 88 and any FEMA benchmarks.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.081 DURATION AND REVISION TO PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit expiration. Permits expire one year following the date of
permit issuance or upon expiration of state or federal permits required for
stormwater management.
   (B)   Permit extension. If the permitted activity has been started but is
not completed by the expiration date of the permit, and the permittee intends
to pursue the permitted activity, then the permittee may submit a written
request that the expiration date be extended. Upon receipt of the request, the
Chief Subdivision Engineer may extend the expiration date in one-year
increments a maximum of three times for permitted activities outside regulatory
floodplains and floodways. Expiration dates for permitted activities in
regulatory floodplains and floodways may be extended in one-year increments a
maximum of three times provided the activity is in compliance with the then
current requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Permit revision. If, after permit issuance, the permittee decides to
revise the approved plans, the permittee shall submit revised plans to the
Chief Subdivision Engineer along with a written request for approval. If the
Chief Subdivision Engineer determines that the revised plans are in compliance
with the then current requirements of this chapter or the applicable, an
approval of the revised plans may be issued.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.082 REQUIRED SUBMITTALS.
   (A)   Generally. All permit submittals shall include the material listed in
the sections for the applicable type of development, unless the submittal
requirements are specifically modified by the procedure in division (B) below.
   (B)   Modification of submittal requirements. The Chief Subdivision Engineer
may, at his or her discretion, modify the submittal requirements on a case-by-
case basis considering the size, complexity and likelihood that a development
will affect the discharge of stormwater. These modifications shall be requested
and answered in writing. The Chief Subdivision Engineer’s response shall note
the relevant findings, and be specific as to what submittal requirements are
changed. The Director shall be copied on all related correspondence. The Chief
Subdivision Engineer may not modify submittal requirements for any aspect of
the development requiring state or federal permits or approvals, nor for any
application in which any variance is requested.
   (C)   Application and project overview. The applicant shall provide the
following information as a minimum, on forms or in a format approved by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer:
      (1)   The name and legal address of the owner(s) of the site and the
permit applicant;
      (2)   The common address, legal description, property identification
number (PIN) of the site;
      (3)   The name of the project, area of the site in acres, type of
development;
      (4)   A general narrative description of the development, existing and
proposed conditions, and project planning principles considered, including best
management practices used;
      (5)   Affidavits signed by the owner or the applicant’s authorized
representative attesting to their understanding of the requirements of this
chapter and their intent to comply therewith;
      (6)   A statement of opinion by a qualified person either denying or
acknowledging the presence of floodplain on the development site;
      (7)   Copies of other stormwater related permits or permit applications
as required;
      (8)   A subsurface drainage investigation report; and
      (9)   An engineer’s estimate of probable construction cost of the
stormwater facilities.
   (D)   Plan set submittal. All applicants for a site development permit shall
provide the following basic plan exhibits: site topographic map; general plan
view drawing; sediment/erosion control plan; and a vicinity topographic map.
Each exhibit may be on more than one drawing for clarity. The development plan
and associated stormwater/floodplain calculations shall be submitted on a
digital diskette in a format compatible with the county’s geographic
information system (GIS). The specific information to be included on each
exhibit shall be as noted below.
      (1)   Site topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
         (a)   Map scales as one inch equals 50 feet (or less) and accurate to
+/- 0.5 feet;
         (b)   Existing and proposed contours (one-foot intervals) on-site and
within 100 feet of site;
         (c)   Existing and proposed drainage patterns and watershed
boundaries;
         (d)   Delineation of pre-development regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits;
         (e)   Delineation of post-development regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits;
         (f)   Location of cross-sections and any other hydrologic/hydraulic
computer modeled features;
         (g)   Location of all on-site drain tiles;
         (h)   Boundary of all wetlands, lakes, ponds and the like with normal
water elevation noted;
         (i)   Location of all existing buildings and those to remain on the
site noted;
         (j)   Nearest base flood elevations;
         (k)   FEMA and any site-specific benchmarks (tied to county
benchmarks) used; and
         (l)   Highlight all contours used in the calculation of depressional
storage.
      (2)   General plan view drawing meeting the following requirements shall
be submitted:
         (a)   Drawing at the same scale as the site topographic map;
         (b)   Existing major and minor stormwater systems;
         (c)   Proposed major and minor stormwater systems;
         (d)   Design details for stormwater facilities (i.e., structure and
outlet work detail drawings and the like);
         (e)   Scheduled maintenance program for permanent stormwater
facilities including BMP measures;
         (f)   Planned maintenance tasks and schedule;
         (g)   Identification of entities responsible for maintenance;
         (h)   Permanent public access maintenance easements granted or
dedicated to, and accepted by, a government entity;
         (i)   Proposed regulatory floodplain and floodway location (with the
base flood and flood protection elevations noted); and
         (j)   Highlight all plan areas at elevations below the 100-year high
water elevation of site runoff storage facilities.
      (3)   Sediment and erosion control plan meeting the following
requirements shall be submitted:
         (a)   Drawings at the same scale as the site topographic map;
         (b)   Sediment/erosion control installation measures and schedule;
         (c)   Existing and proposed roadways, structures, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces;
         (d)   Limits of clearing and grading;
         (e)   Floodplain/floodway locations;
         (f)   Proposed buffer location, existing soil types, vegetation and
land cover conditions; and
         (g)   List of maintenance tasks and schedule for sediment/erosion
control measures.
      (4)   Vicinity topographic map meeting the following requirements shall
be submitted:
         (a)   Vicinity topographic map identifying all off-site areas draining
to the development and downstream to the receiving intermittent or perennial
stream. (A two foot contour map is preferred at a scale readable by the
reviewer but a USGS quadrangle map is acceptable);
         (b)   Watershed boundaries for areas draining through or from the
development;
         (c)   Soil types related to hydrologic soils group, vegetation and
land cover affecting runoff upstream of the site for any area draining through
the site;
         (d)   Location of development site within the major watershed(s); and
         (e)   Show the overland flow path from the downstream end of the
development to the receiving intermittent or perennial stream.
   (E)   Stormwater submittal. The stormwater submittal shall include narrative
discussion and calculations to support a finding that the proposed development
complies with the technical requirements of the permitting authorities
ordinance. The submittal shall consist of, at a minimum, the following
material:
      (1)   A narrative description of the existing and proposed site drainage
patterns and conditions. Include description of off-site conditions, which help
to identify stormwater issues considered in the design;
      (2)   A schedule for implementation of the site stormwater plan;
      (3)   On-site and off-site runoff calculations which address the
following:
         (a)   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for sizing major and minor systems;
         (b)   Cross-section data for open channels;
         (c)   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under design
flow conditions; and
         (d)   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under base
flood flow conditions.
      (4)   Site runoff storage calculations, which address the following:
         (a)   Calculation of hydraulically connected impervious area and
corresponding retention volume;
         (b)   Documentation of the procedures/ assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the allowable release rate;
         (c)   Documentation of the procedures/ assumptions used to calculate
on-site depressional storage;
         (d)   Documentation of the procedures/ assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the storage volume (on hard
copy and on disc);
         (e)   Elevation-area-storage data and calculations for site runoff
storage;
         (f)   Elevation-discharge data and calculations specifically related
to the outlet control structure depicted in the plan exhibits; and
         (g)   The general plan view drawing of division (D)(2) above shall
indicate the areas of directly connected impervious areas and any offsetting
landscaped areas as defined in §
164.023(E).
   (F)   Floodplain submittal. The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR-
OWR and FEMA for all new base flood and floodway determinations for those cases
in which their permitting authority applies or as noted in §
164.061 of this chapter. The site development permit will not be issued until
the approval is received. Documentation supporting a finding that the proposed
development is in compliance with §§
164.060 and
164.061 shall be submitted with the application. At a minimum, the following
material shall be submitted for approval with the application:
      (1)   Regulatory floodplain boundary determination:
         (a)   Provide source of flood profile information; and
         (b)   Provide all hydrologic and hydraulic study information for site-
specific floodplain studies, unnumbered Zone A area elevation determinations
and floodplain map revisions.
      (2)   Floodway hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for the following
conditions:
         (a)   Existing conditions (land used and stream systems);
         (b)   Proposed conditions (land used and stream systems);
         (c)   Tabular summary of 100-year flood elevations and discharges for
existing and proposed conditions;
         (d)   Calculations used for model development; and
         (e)   Hydraulic/hydrologic computer model input/output.
      (3)   Floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations for below and
above ten-year flood elevation up to the base flood elevation:
         (a)   Tabular summary for below and above ten-year flood elevation of
fill, compensatory storage and compensatory storage ratios provided in proposed
plan; and
         (b)   Cross-sections used for the above calculations.
      (4)   Floodproofing measures:
         (a)   Narrative discussion of floodproofing measures including
material specifications, calculations and design details, operation summary;
and
         (b)   Ensure structures built on fill in or near special flood hazard
areas are reasonably safe from flooding (see TB 10-01 published by FEMA).
      (5)   Flood easements when required by this chapter.
   (G)   Wetland submittal requirements.
      (1)   In addition to all other site development permit requirements,
wetland permit submittal requirements depend upon whether the development is
within waters of the United States or isolated waters of the county as provided
below. The applicant shall provide a statement of wetland determination as to
which wetlands on the development site are isolated waters of the county or
waters of the United States to the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(Corps) for a jurisdictional determination. A copy of the jurisdictional
determination shall be included with the wetland submittal.
      (2)   For wetland impacts to waters of the United States or isolated
waters of the county, the following information is required:
         (a)   Wetland delineation and wetland determination report;
         (b)   A United States Army Corps permit for the proposed development
or a letter from the Corps stating that the proposed development does not
require Corps authorization;
         (c)   Buffer area requirements as specified in §
164.067(D);
         (d)   A cover letter signed by a qualified wetland professional, that
provides a clear project purpose and need statement, a description of the
proposed activity, area (in acres) of wetland and/or buffer impact;
         (e)   Buffer area requirements as specified in this chapter;
         (f)   A delineation of the wetlands consistent with the requirements
provided in §
164.067(C) of this chapter, signed by a qualified wetland professional;
         (g)   A statement on the occurrence of any high quality aquatic
resource (HQAR) on or adjoining the development, signed by a certified wetland
specialist;
         (h)   Documentation that the development is in compliance with the
State Department of Natural Resource’s endangered species consultation program
and the State Natural Areas Preservation Act;
         (i)   Documentation that the development is in compliance with the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service’s consultation program under the
Endangered Species Act;
         (j)   A mitigation plan meeting the requirements of this chapter;
         (k)   A discussion, hydrology calculations or other supporting
information to document that on-site preserved wetlands and off site wetlands
will not be impacted either from adverse changes in hydrology or pollutant/
sediment loading or erosion;
         (l)   A copy of the natural resources information report (NRI) for
development that is required to obtain a NRI performed by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District;
         (m)   A narrative of the alternative measures taken to avoid,
minimize, or mitigate for wetland impacts to isolated waters of the county; and
         (n)   Shoreline and streambank erosion restoration that meet the
requirements contained in divisions (J) and (K) below are exempt from submittal
requirements contained in this division.
   (H)   Permit exceptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
         (a)   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; when
emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall
report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the County Land Use
Department within ten working days after commencement of the work and shall
thereafter obtain a site development permit and shall perform that work as may
be determined by the agency to be reasonably necessary to correct any
impairment to the watercourse, lake, pond, floodplain or wetland;
         (b)   Work consisting of the operation, repair or maintenance of any
lawful use of land existing on the date of adoption of this chapter;
         (c)   Lands adjacent to farm ditches if:
            1.   The lands are not adjacent to a natural stream or river;
            2.   Those parts of the drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were not streams before ditching; or
            3.   The lands are maintained in agricultural uses without
buildings and structures.
      (2)   Where farm ditches are found to contribute to adverse environmental
impacts or hazards to persons or property, the County Land Use Department may
request submittal of a stormwater management application. The County Land Use
Department may also require that linings, bulkheads, dikes and culverts be
removed to mitigate hazards or that other mitigating measures be taken, such as
the maintenance of a natural vegetation buffer strip.
   (I)   Conditions and restrictions for permitting stream modification. Stream
modification is subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be improved
by the modification;
      (2)   No HQAR habitat area may be destroyed; and
      (3)   All of the requirements of a site development permit must be
provided as well as the information required in division (K) below.
   (J)   Required content of stream modification/ relocation plan. Stream
relocation may be permitted in accordance with a stream relocation plan that
provides, to the extent possible, for:
      (1)   The creation of a natural meander pattern, pools, riffles and
substrate;
      (2)   The formation of gentle side slopes (at least three feet
horizontally per one foot vertically), including installation of erosion
control features;
      (3)   The utilization of natural materials wherever possible;
      (4)   The planting of vegetation normally associated with streams,
including primarily native riparian vegetation that is capable of holding banks
and soil in place;
      (5)   The creation of spawning and nesting areas where appropriate;
      (6)   The re-establishment of the native fish population where
appropriate;
      (7)   The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with
native fauna habitat areas, where appropriate;
      (8)   The filling and revegetation of the prior channel;
      (9)   A proposed phasing plan, specifying time of year for all project
phases;
      (10)   Plans for sediment and erosion control; and
      (11)   Establishment of a low-flow channel which reflects the conditions
of a natural stream.
   (K)   Criteria for permitting armoring of channels and banks. Armoring in
the form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or devices is not permitted
except in accordance with a site development permit as well as the following:
      (1)   The use of revegetation and gradual bank slopes are practicable;
      (2)   Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way;
      (3)   The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland, or
between a wetland and a lake or pond except where necessary to resolve a
health, safety or welfare issue; and
      (4)   The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the transmittal
of wave energy or currents to other properties.
   (L)   Criteria for permitting the use of culverts. Culverts are not
permitted in streams except in accordance with a site development permit as
well as the following:
      (1)   Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property (use
of culverts as a convenience, in order to facilitate general site design, is
not to be considered);
      (2)   The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream, and
accommodate the 100-year flood event without increasing upstream flooding,
except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an overall storm and
floodwater management plan;
      (3)   The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to allow
free passage of water, and if applicable, fish; and
      (4)   The stream bottom should not be significantly widened for the
placement of a culvert as this situation will likely increase erosion and
downstream sedimentation; if multiple culverts must be installed, one culvert
should be at the level of the bottom of the stream and the others at or above
normal water elevation.
   (M)   Stream maintenance easement. The applicant shall grant an access
easement for stream maintenance purposes to county over a 25 feet wide strip
adjacent to the stream bank except in the case where the property owner is
another unit of government.
   (N)   Effect on other permits. The issuance of a site development permit
under the provisions herein shall in no way affect the owner’s responsibility
to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or regulation
of any state agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other county ordinances
and regulations. Where state and/or federal permits are required, a site
development permit will not be issued until they are obtained.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.083 SUBMITTALS PRIOR TO PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The following additional submittals are required prior to issuance of the
site development permit.
   (A)   Performance security. Performance security in accordance with §§
164.180 through
164.183 shall be required prior to permit issuance.
   (B)   Maintenance schedule and funding. A completed maintenance schedule for
the stormwater management facilities and special management areas, in
accordance with §§
164.100 through
164.105 shall be submitted along with identification of the entity responsible
for maintenance and funding and back-up funding sources for maintenance in
accordance with §
164.105.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.084 RECORD DRAWINGS.
   The developer is required to submit record drawings of all permitted
stormwater facilities. The record drawings shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or professional land surveyor who shall state that the
project as constructed is substantially in conformance with the project as
permitted. The record drawings shall include calculations verifying that the
volumes of detention and compensatory storage required in the permit have been
provided.
   (A)   It is recommended that the “as built” volume calculations and record
drawings for the detention and compensatory storage areas be submitted for
approval by the Chief Subdivision Engineer prior to final grading and
landscaping of the area.
   (B)   “As built” grading plan shall be submitted to the Chief Subdivision
Engineer prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy for a structure if
a site grading plan was a requirement of the permit. This “as built” grading
plan shall include sufficient specific actual land elevations to prove that the
grading was constructed in accordance with the intent of the grading plan
submitted for the building permit.
   (C)   In addition, an elevation certificate must be submitted for any
construction built in a SFHA. The Chief Subdivision Engineer will review and
maintain the completed elevation certificates showing the “finished
construction” elevations for all buildings constructed or substantially
improved in the SFHA, and copies of the elevation certificates will be
available to the property owner, his or her agents and FEMA.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.085 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL.
   (A)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer shall either issue or deny a site
development permit within 30 days of receiving a complete permit application
and all required submittals and fees, unless additional time is granted by both
the Chief Subdivision Engineer and the applicant. When a permit is denied, the
applicant may appeal the Chief Subdivision Engineer’s decision to the Land Use
and Development Committee provided the appeal is made in writing within 15 days
of the date of the notification of denial. The Land Use and Development
Committee shall render a decision to issue the site development permit, issue
the permit with conditions, or uphold the Chief Subdivision Engineer’s denial
of the permit. The Land Use and Development Committee shall render its decision
within 30 days of the appeal. Failure to take action shall be deemed action to
uphold the permit denial by the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
   (B)   Upon denial by the Land Use and Development Committee, the applicant
may file an appeal in writing within 15 days of the denial or decision or the
Committee’s action to the County Board. This appeal shall be addressed to the
County Executive with copies sent to the Chairperson of the Land Use and
Development Committee and to the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE
§ 164.100 LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Unless maintenance responsibility has been delegated to and accepted
by another qualified entity under this section, the owner shall maintain that
portion of a stormwater drainage system located upon his or her land. With the
approval of the Chief Subdivision Engineer, the stormwater drainage system, or
specified portions thereof, may be:
      (1)   Dedicated or otherwise transferred to and accepted by the county,
township or other public entity;
      (2)   Conveyed or otherwise transferred to and accepted by a homeowner’s
association, or similar entity, the members of which are to be the owners of
all of the lots or parcels comprising the development; or
      (3)   Conveyed to one or more persons or in one or more undivided
interests to one or more persons.
   (B)   Except for those portions of a stormwater drainage system to be
dedicated or otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public
entity, included in the application for a site development permit shall be a
plan for the long-term management, operation and maintenance of the stormwater
drainage system and a description of the sources of funding therefore.
Amendments to the plan must be approved by the Land Use and Development
Committee.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.101 TRANSFER TO PERMITTING AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY.
   If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be dedicated or
otherwise transferred to the county, township or other public entity under §
164.100(A)(1), appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance
of those portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the entity on the final
plat.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.102 TRANSFER TO HOMEOWNER’S OR SIMILAR ASSOCIATION.
   If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed or
otherwise transferred to a homeowner’s or similar association under §
164.100(A)(2) then:
   (A)   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of the
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the association and the
permitting authority on the final plat;
   (B)   The association shall be duly incorporated and a copy of the
certificate of incorporation, duly recorded, and bylaws, and any amendment to
either of them, shall be delivered to the Chief Subdivision Engineer;
   (C)   The bylaws of the association shall, at a minimum, contain:
      (1)   A provision acknowledging and accepting the association’s
obligation to maintain certain portions of the stormwater drainage system as
required by this chapter;
      (2)   A mechanism for imposing an assessment upon the owners of all of
the lots or parcels comprising the development sufficient, at a minimum, to
provide for the maintenance of those portions of the stormwater drainage system
as required by this chapter and the payment of all taxes levied thereon;
      (3)   A provision adopting the plan of long term maintenance set forth in
the application for a site development permit, with approved amendments;
      (4)   A provision identifying the officer of the association responsible
for carrying out the obligations imposed upon the association under this
chapter, and an obligation to inform the Chief Subdivision Engineer of the
name, address and phone number of this officer and any changes thereto;
      (5)   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to
any amendment of the bylaws changing any of the provisions of the bylaws
required by this chapter; and
      (6)   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to
the dissolution of the association.
   (D)   Any conveyance or other instrument of transfer delivered under §
164.100(A)(2) shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon the
association the obligations set forth in this section and the association’s
affirmative acceptance thereof.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.103 CONVEYANCE TO ONE OR MORE PERSONS.
   If any portion of the stormwater drainage system is to be conveyed to one or
more persons under §
164.100(A)(3), then:
   (A)   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of
those portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the permitting authority on
the final plat;
   (B)   The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance
obligations of this section upon the grantee and his or her successors in
interest as a covenant running with the land and incorporating by reference the
plan of long term maintenance set forth in the application for a site
development permit, with approved amendments;
   (C)   The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the
permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required
in this section if the owner does not do so and to place a lien against the
land for the cost thereof; and
   (D)   Any conveyance delivered under §
164.100(A)(3), and any subsequent conveyance, shall include a covenant
affirmatively imposing upon the grantee the obligations, restrictions and
provisions set forth in this section and the grantee’s affirmative acceptance
thereof.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.104 INCORPORATION OF MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS IN SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be incorporated by reference in the
site development permit and the applicant’s acceptance of the permit shall be
deemed to be the applicant’s acceptance and assumption of the obligations
imposed under this section. At the option of the Chief Subdivision Engineer,
the site development permit may be recorded.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.105 FUNDING OF LONG TERM MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   As a condition of approval of any application for a site development
permit, unless the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater drainage
system to be constructed or installed in connection therewith has been accepted
by a public entity, the Chief Subdivision Engineer will require assurance of
long-term funding in a form found acceptable to the County. A corporation with
a bond rating of “A” or higher from a major investment firm (i.e., Standard and
Poor, Moody or equivalent) will be considered to have met the long-term
maintenance funding requirement.
   (B)   Absent some other form of agreement, then the Chief Subdivision
Engineer shall require the establishment of a maintenance special service area
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq. (Special Service Area Tax
Law) according to the following requirements.
      (1)   The County Board shall propose and establish one or more
maintenance special service areas (MSSA) pursuant to the Special Service Area
Tax Law upon all taxable property within the MSSA. The maintenance special
service area (MSSA) will be used either as the primary means of providing for
the long-term maintenance of the stormwater facility, or as a backup vehicle in
the event the entity designated by the applicant as having primary maintenance
responsibility of the stormwater facility fails to adequately carry out its
duties. In that event, the County Board may enact an ordinance to levy an ad
valorem special tax against all taxable property within the proposed
maintenance special service area in order to fund the necessary maintenance and
other costs set forth herein. In furtherance of this requirement, the applicant
shall submit to the Plat Committee a request to propose the maintenance special
service area.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the MSSA request, the Plat Committee shall submit a
proposing ordinance, pursuant to the Special Service Area Tax Law, to the
County Board for its consideration.
      (3)   In the event the County Board adopts the proposing ordinance, an
MSSA hearing shall be held pursuant to the terms of the proposing ordinance and
Special Service Area Tax Law.
      (4)   The County Board shall consider and vote upon the establishment of
the maintenance special service area after the later to occur of:
         (a)   Expiration of the MSSA objection period or, in the event the
State’s Attorney determines that sufficient consents to the formation of the
proposed maintenance special service area have been obtained which adequately
waive the right to object to the formation of the proposed maintenance special
service area under the Special Service Area Tax Law, then upon that
determination; or
         (b)   The date all authorized signatures are on the final plat.
(Ord. 11-46, passed 2-17-2011)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 164.120 SCOPE OF REGULATION.
   This chapter applies to all development within the unincorporated areas of
the county.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.121 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to a development which has been
substantially completed before the effective date of the chapter.
   (B)   Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any
manner unless the replacement or enlargement conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.122 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall be liberally construed to protect the health,
welfare, safety and the environment of the residents of the county and to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and the enabling legislation.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to consent to, license, permit
to locate, construct or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation, or
to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or activity.
   (C)   When provisions of this chapter differ from any other applicable law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall
apply.
   (D)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all other laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations which relate to the subject matter
hereof and, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as a limitation upon the application or enforcement
of any such law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent
with the provisions of any other laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations, and with each other, to the end that all provisions may be given
their fullest application.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.123 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond
the control of any governmental authority. This chapter does not, therefore,
guarantee that areas outside the floodplain or permitted land uses within the
floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied in any manner to
create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the county, any
municipality or other governmental authority, or any elected official, or any
officer, agent or employee of any of the foregoing, or any certified review
specialist for any flood damage resulting from reliance on the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.124 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development
without first securing a site development permit as required by this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect
and refuse to comply with, or resist enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or any condition of a site development permit.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010) Penalty, see §
164.999
§ 164.125 AMENDMENTS.
   No amendment to this chapter may be passed without a public hearing first
being held before the Land Use and Zoning Committee of the County Board upon
notice as provided in §
164.167.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.126 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect for all purposes and its effective date shall
be June 17, 2010.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
VARIANCES
§ 164.140 PURPOSE.
   In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be
granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is
impossible or impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this
chapter may be granted according to the standards set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.141 APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   An application for a variance, signed by the owner or developer of
the development to which it relates, shall be filed with the Chief Subdivision
Engineer, who shall forward a copy of the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for public hearing. The application shall be in a form,
contain information and be accompanied by plans as the Commission may by rule
require. No application for a variance will be accepted for filing unless it
relates to a previously or contemporaneously filed application for a site
development permit. Applications for a variance shall be filed in a number of
duplicate copies as the Commission may by rule require. No action will be taken
on an application for a variance unless it and the corresponding application
for a site development permit to which it relates are complete as determined by
the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
      (2)   An application for variance shall set forth:
         (a)   The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands
comprising the development;
         (b)   The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal
title of all lands comprising the development;
         (c)   If title to any of the land comprising the development is held
in trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust;
         (d)   The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if
different from the owner;
         (e)   The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the
developer in connection with the application for a variance;
         (f)   The names and addresses of all property owners within 250 feet
of the development;
         (g)   The specific feature or features of the development that require
a variance;
         (h)   The specific provision of this ordinance from which a variance
is sought and the precise extent of the variance there from;
         (i)   A statement of the characteristics of the development that
prevent compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
         (j)   A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance
necessary to permit the development; and
         (k)   A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the
standards set forth in §
164.144 of this chapter.
   (B)   Application and notice of hearing. Not more than 30 nor less than 15
days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent, by the applicant,
certified letter return receipt requested to the following: the Director, to
all property owners within 250 feet of the development as disclosed in the
application, and to each certified community within the same watershed as the
development. Within the same time period, notice of the hearing shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
The notices given under the section shall meet the requirements set forth in
ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-12009. The published notice may be supplemented by an
additional form of notice as the Commission may provide by rule. The Commission
may dismiss any application whenever the applicant fails to appear for a
scheduled and advertised public hearing, or whenever the applicant fails at
more than one meeting to provide the documentation necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the notice requirements. No variation shall be made without
first having posted a sign(s) on the property in accordance with the provision
of division (C) below.
   (C)   Sign posting requirements. The applicant shall be required to erect at
least one sign for every 500 linear feet of street frontage with a minimum of
one sign on each street abutting the property in order to adequately inform the
public. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that the sign(s) is/are
placed and maintained as herein provided. Failure to properly post sign(s)
shall be grounds for deferral or denial of the application. Sign(s) shall be
posted upon the subject property at least 15 days prior and not more than 30
days prior to the public hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for
removing the sign(s) within five days after completion of the public hearing.
Should the applicant and/or his or her assigned agent refuse or fail to remove
the sign or signs as herein provided, the Land Use Department shall cause the
sign(s) to be removed and shall bill the applicant for the cost of the removal.
The applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the Planning and Zoning
Commission Secretary that the notice was posted upon the subject property prior
to the public hearing. The Chief Subdivision Engineer, or his or her designee,
may vary the provisions of this division when these provisions are found
inappropriate under the circumstances to provide the intended notice. This
discretion shall rest solely with the Chief Subdivision Engineer, or his or her
designee, and not with the applicant; shall include, but not limited to, sign
content, format, size, material, quantity and location; notwithstanding the
exercise of this discretion, the minimum requirements provided in this division
shall be satisfied. All expenses incurred to fulfill the requirements of this
division shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.142 APPLICATION FEE.
   With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay
the fee prescribed by a separate act of the County Board.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.143 PUBLIC HEARING.
   A public hearing for the variance shall be held by the Planning and Zoning
Commission within 90 days after its filing.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.144 GRANTING OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   A variance from the provisions of this chapter shall not be granted
unless the variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter (§
164.002) and meets the following standards based upon substantial evidence
submitted at the hearing.
      (1)   The variance will not increase measurably the probability of flood
damage to insurable structures.
      (2)   The variance requested is the minimum required considering each of
the following statements of underlying intent of this chapter and there are no
means other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardships can be
avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable
continuation of the development.
         (a)   Detention of stormwater shall also contribute to the improvement
of the quality of stormwater runoff.
         (b)   The volume of detention storage provided in open air vegetated
facilities is maximized consistent with other land use site constraints
including zoning requirements essential for the proposed development.
         (c)   Conveyance of stormwater from the project shall not increase
peak discharges from existing off-site conveyance facilities beyond design
capacity for any storm event from the two-year to the 100-year flood frequency.
         (d)   High quality natural areas shall be preserved on the site,
including, but not limited to, wetlands, woodlands, natural floodplain storage
and other valuable environmental and biological resources, as determined by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer.
         (e)   The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of
increasing the density of the development nor impervious areas on the site.
         (f)   The variance is not requested solely as a result of economic
hardship.
         (g)   If applicable, the variance is required due to unique, natural
topographical features of the site.
         (h)   The applicant’s circumstances are not self-imposed.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory
floodway, the effect of which would be to create regulation less restrictive
than the federal or state minimum standards applicable to development in those
areas.
   (C)   When a variance would lessen the degree of flood surface runoff
protection to any structure, the Chief Subdivision Engineer shall notify the
applicant that the variance, if granted, may result in increased rates for
flood insurance.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.145 RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer or his or her designee shall review the
application for a variance and present his or her written recommendations to
the Land Use and Development Committee at the public hearing.
   (B)   Not more than 45 days after the close of the hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall forward its written recommendations to the Land Use and
Development Committee or its successor. The written recommendations of the
Planning and Zoning Commission , when forwarded, shall be accompanied by
written findings of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth
in §
164.144 with citations to the evidence taken at the public hearing.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.146 DECISION.
   The County Board shall grant the variation, grant the variation with
modifications or conditions or deny the variation in writing within 45 days
after receipt of the written request for variance, but in the event the County
Board does not act as aforesaid then the application is denied.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.147 CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted
when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief, but not to the
relief requested.
   (B)   In granting a variance, the County Board may impose specific
conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating to the purposes and
objectives of this chapter on the applicant as may be necessary or appropriate.
   (C)   Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or
limitation to be met by the applicant, upon meeting those conditions, the
applicant shall file evidence to that effect with the Chief Subdivision
Engineer.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.148 BUILDING PERMITS AND SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or grading
commence without a building permit, site development permit or other
appropriate permit. No building permit, and no other permit pertaining to other
use of land, buildings or structures, shall be issued by employees of the
county unless the proposed use thereof complies with all the provisions of this
chapter, nor shall any permit be issued unless the application for the permit
has certification thereon under oath by the Chief Subdivision Engineer that the
proposed use is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit
issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be void.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.149 EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   No order of the County Board granting a variation shall be valid for a
period longer than one year from the date of the order unless a building permit
or site development permit is obtained within the period and the erection or
alteration of a building, any excavation or grading, is started or the use is
commenced within the period. The Board may grant an extension of this period,
valid for no more than 180 additional days, upon written application and good
cause shown, without notice or hearing. The Board may grant one additional
extension of this period, valid for no more than 180 additional days, upon
written application within the initial extension and upon good cause shown
without notice or hearing. If any of the benefits conferred by any variation,
whether heretofore or hereafter granted, are abandoned, or are not utilized for
any continuous period of one year, the variation shall, to the extent of the
abandonment or non-utilization, become invalid after a public hearing as
provided for herein.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.150 REVERSION.
   (A)   Scope of authority. A variance shall be reverted or revoked as
provided in this section if the testimony upon which the variance was falsely
given.
   (B)   Initiation. Reversions may be proposed by the County Board, Planning
and Zoning Commission, or by any person aggrieved by a variance from this
chapter.
   (C)   Processing. The process for reverting a variance shall be as follows.
      (1)   An application for a reversion shall be filed with the Chief
Subdivision Engineer and shall be in a form, contain information and be
accompanied by those plans as the Planning and Zoning Commission by rule may
require.
      (2)   A copy of the application shall thereafter be forwarded by the
Chief Subdivision Engineer to the Planning and Zoning Commission with a request
to hold a public hearing.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing
within 90 days after receiving the application from the Chief Subdivision
Engineer. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at
least once, not less than 15 days before the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county. A copy of the notice of public hearing shall be
mailed to the Clerk of each municipality within the same watershed where the
variance was granted. Copy of the notice shall be mailed by registered letter
to the current interest holders of the land as found on the last tax
assessment.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall within 60 days after the
hearing transmit a written report giving its findings and recommendations to
the County Board.
   (D)   Decision. The County Board, upon recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, may grant or deny any proposed reversion or may refer it
back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration.
   (E)   Permits affected by reversion. When a reversion action has been
initiated, no building permit or site development permits for the site shall be
issued, until the County Board has decided the matter of the reversion.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 164.160 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The County Board shall determine policy related to this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer shall administer this chapter. In
performing his or her duties, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may delegate and
oversee enforcement of responsibilities to any named designee.
   (C)   The county shall remain solely responsible for unincorporated county’s
standing in the national flood insurance program, including:
      (1)   The maintenance of all records and the submission of all reports
required for eligibility in the program, including elevation certificates,
flood proofing certificates and lowest floor elevations; and
      (2)   The notification of the Director of the County Stormwater
Management Committee, FEMA and IDNR-OWR of any proposed amendment to this
chapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.161 DUTIES OF COUNTY EXECUTIVE.
   The County Executive shall supervise the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.162 DUTIES OF CHIEF SUBDIVISION ENGINEER.
   The Chief Subdivision Engineer shall:
   (A)   Receive a listing of all required federal, state, regional and county
permit applications filed for the project prior to issuing a permit under this
chapter for areas covered by other stormwater related jurisdictions. The Chief
Subdivision Engineer may request copies of the stormwater related permit
applications;
   (B)   Ascertain whether any floodplains/floodways exist on any site that is
the subject of an application for a permit under this chapter and whether or
not any new development is within the SFHA;
   (C)   Review permit applications and determine whether to issue or deny
permits;
   (D)   Ensure that the required notice of an application for a variance has
been given in accordance with §§
164.143,
164.166 and
164.167;
   (E)   Notify an applicant for a variance that the variance may result in
increased rates for flood insurance;
   (F)   Notify the Director of an application for a variance;
   (G)   Provide for inspections of developments as required by this chapter;
   (H)   Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter;
   (I)   Notify violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to comply
with the provisions of the national flood insurance program could make them
ineligible to receive flood insurance;
   (J)   Initiate any proceeding necessary to enforce this chapter;
   (K)   Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to
promote the purposes of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain copies of all applications and submittals, federal and state
permits, variances, CLOMR, LOMR, CLOMA, LOMA and all documentation associated
with any of the foregoing for public inspection;
   (M)   Maintain documentation and data on the cost of any improvement to a
structure in the floodplain in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to substantial improvements to those structures; and
   (N)   Notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to issuing a
permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.163 REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.
   In all cases when any action is taken by the Chief Subdivision Engineer or
his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
the action shall be taken either in the name of the county and neither the
Chief Subdivision Engineer nor his or her designee, in so acting shall be
rendered personally liable.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.164 OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
   The Land Use and Development Committee shall act as the oversight committee
for the county.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.165 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise stated herein, the Planning and Zoning
Commission’s creation, membership, meetings and rules, and its finality of
decisions shall follow § 14.4 of the County Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby vested with
the following jurisdiction and authority:
      (1)   To hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Chief Subdivision Engineer under this chapter;
      (2)   To hear and pass upon application for variations from the terms
provided in this chapter in the manner prescribed by, and subject to, the
standards established herein; and
      (3)   To hear and make recommendations to the County Board on all matters
as is required under this comprehensive amendment as prescribed by statute.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.166 SERVICE.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, service of any notice or instrument under
this chapter may be made upon any person in one of the following manners:
   (A)   By certified mail/return receipt requested, postage prepaid and
addressed to the address then on file for the person, if any, or if none, to
the person’s last known address; or
   (B)   By any method prescribed under the State Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.167 PUBLICATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of any notice or other
instrument under this chapter shall be made by publishing the notice or other
instrument once in a newspaper published within the county having a general
circulation within the county, the publication being not less than 15 or more
than 30 days before the hearing or other event to which the publication
relates.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
PERFORMANCE SECURITY
§ 164.180 GENERAL SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. As security to the county for the performance by the
developer of the developer’s obligations to complete the construction of any
stormwater facilities required by the site development permit, to pay all
costs, fees and charges due from the developer pursuant to the permitting
authorities of this chapter and to otherwise faithfully perform the developer’s
undertakings pursuant to this chapter the developer shall, prior to issuance of
a site development permit:
      (1)   Post a development security as provided in §
164.181 of this chapter;
      (2)   Post a sediment and erosion control security as provided in §
164.182 of this chapter, if a sediment and erosion control plan is required
pursuant to §
164.082 of this chapter;
      (3)   Post a maintenance and monitoring security for wetland mitigation.
See §
164.067; and
      (4)   A single letter of credit may be provided combining divisions (A)
(1) and (A)(2) above if approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer.
   (B)   Cost and responsibility. The developer shall bear the full cost and
responsibility of securing and maintaining the securities required by this
section.
   (C)   Exemptions. A development security shall not be required for any of
the following developments unless the Chief Subdivision Engineer deems one
necessary for the project:
      (1)   Developments on individual parcels that are associated with a
single-family residence, including but not limited to homes, additions, decks,
sheds and swimming pools; and
      (2)   Agricultural practices applicable under §
164.024 of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.181 DEVELOPMENT SECURITY.
   (A)   A development security shall be posted and shall include:
      (1)   A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the Chief Subdivision
Engineer, for the completion of the construction of any stormwater facilities
required by the permit;
      (2)   An irrevocable letter of credit, or cash deposit as the Chief
Subdivision Engineer may approve, in an amount equal to not less than 125% of
the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any stormwater
facilities required by the development permit, which estimated probable cost
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be approved
by the Chief Subdivision Engineer. A corporation with a bond rating of “A” or
higher from a major investment firm (i.e., Standard and Poor, Moody or
equivalent) would be deemed to have adequate credit worthiness and is not
required to post a letter of credit for projects that are not required to be
located in public easements;
      (3)   A statement signed by the applicant granting the Chief Subdivision
Engineer the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete required work in the event that work is not
completed according to the work schedule; and
      (4)   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall
indemnify the Department for any additional costs incurred attributable to the
concurrent activities of or conflicts between the applicant’s contractor and
the Department’s remedial contractor at the site.
   (B)   The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed
by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the Chief Subdivision Engineer
until the conditions set forth in this section or other applicable provisions
are satisfied.
   (C)   The Chief Subdivision Engineer may approve periodic reductions in the
letter of credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than 75%
of the security provided for in this section may be released prior to approval
of record drawings and final inspection. A minimum of 25% or $3,000, whichever
is greater, of the security shall be retained for a period of time not to
exceed two years after completion of construction of all stormwater facilities
required by the permit.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.182 SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL SECURITY.
   (A)   If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to §
164.082 of this chapter, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be
required. This security shall include:
      (1)   An irrevocable letter of credit, or cash deposit as the Chief
Subdivision Engineer shall approve, in an amount equal to not less than 125% of
the estimated probable cost to install and maintain the sediment and erosion
control measures, which estimated probable cost shall be approved by the Chief
Subdivision Engineer. A corporation with a bond rating of “A” or higher from a
major investment firm (i.e., Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent) would be
deemed to have adequate credit worthiness and is not required to post a letter
of credit for projects that are not required to be located in public easements;
and
      (2)   A statement signed by the applicant granting the Chief Subdivision
Engineer the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete sediment and erosion control measures in the event
that the measures are not installed and/or maintained according to the
established schedule.
   (B)   The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed
by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the Chief Subdivision Engineer
until the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied.
   (C)   After completion of construction, establishment of vegetation, removal
of all sediment from stormwater facilities, and final inspection and approval
by the Chief Subdivision Engineer, 100% of the sediment and erosion control
security shall be released.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.183 LETTERS OF CREDIT.
   (A)   Letters of credit posted pursuant to §§
164.180 through
164.182 of this chapter shall be in a form satisfactory to the Chief
Subdivision Engineer.
   (B)   Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution:
      (1)   Acceptable to the Chief Subdivision Engineer;
      (2)   Having capital resources of at least $10,000,000, or other amount
acceptable to the Chief Subdivision Engineer;
      (3)   With an office in the Chicago Metropolitan Area; and
      (4)   Insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
   (C)   Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
      (1)   It shall be fully, irrevocably and unconditionally in effect until
the installation and construction of the site improvements are completed and
approved by the Chief Subdivision Engineer or for a period not to exceed 15
months, whichever is later. It shall not be canceled without the prior written
consent of the Chief Subdivision Engineer and shall not expire without written
notification to the Chief Subdivision Engineer at least 45 days prior to
expiration;
      (2)   It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw
on it by the Chief Subdivision Engineer; and
      (3)   If at any time it will expire within 45 or any lesser number of
days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the Chief
Subdivision Engineer, and if any applicable obligation of the developer for
which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the Chief
Subdivision Engineer may, without notice and without being required to take any
further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of
credit and thereafter either hold all proceeds as security for the satisfactory
completion of all obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all
obligations and reimburse the county for any and all costs and expenses,
including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the county, as the
Chief Subdivision Engineer shall determine.
   (D)   If at any time the Chief Subdivision Engineer determines that the
funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to
pay in full the remaining unpaid cost of all stormwater facility construction
or sediment and erosion control measures, then, within ten days following a
demand by the Chief Subdivision Engineer, the developer shall increase the
amount of the letter of credit to an amount determined by the Chief Subdivision
Engineer to be sufficient to pay such unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the
amount of the security shall be grounds for the Chief Subdivision Engineer to
draw down the entire remaining balance of the letter of credit.
   (E)   If at any time the Chief Subdivision Engineer determines that the bank
issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least
$10,000,000, is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves,
is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is otherwise in
danger of being unable to honor a letter of credit at any time during its term,
or if the Chief Subdivision Engineer otherwise reasonably deems the bank to be
insecure, then the Chief Subdivision Engineer shall have the right to demand
that the developer provide a replacement letter of credit from a bank
satisfactory to the Chief Subdivision Engineer. The replacement letter of
credit shall be deposited with the Chief Subdivision Engineer not later than
ten days following the demand. Upon the deposit, the Chief Subdivision Engineer
shall surrender the original letter of credit to the developer.
   (F)   If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations
under this chapter then the Chief Subdivision Engineer may, in his or her
discretion, draw on and retain all or any of the funds remaining in the letter
of credit. The Chief Subdivision Engineer thereafter shall have the right to
take any action he or she deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the
effects of the failure or refusal, and to reimburse the county from the
proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and expenses, including
legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result
of the developer’s failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations under this
chapter. If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to
repay fully the county for all costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash
reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time the
letter of credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the
developer shall, upon demand of the Chief Subdivision Engineer therefore,
immediately deposit with the Chief Subdivision Engineer additional funds as the
Chief Subdivision Engineer determines are necessary to fully repay the costs
and expenses and to establish the cash reserve.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 164.195 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-1104 and 5-
1062, the county may, after ten days’ notice to the owner or occupant, enter
upon any lands or waters within the county for the purpose of inspecting and/or
maintaining stormwater facilities or causing the removal of any obstruction to
an affected watercourse.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.196 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   Any development constructed pursuant to a site development permit shall be
subject to periodic inspections by the Chief Subdivision Engineer or his or her
designee to ensure conformity with permit provisions and conditions.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
§ 164.197 OFFENSES.
   (A)   Generally. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses
to comply with or resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter
(“ordinance violation”) or any requirement or condition in any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter (“permit violation”), and, in the case of a permit
violation, fails to correct the violation, omission or neglect, or cease the
disobedience, refusal or resistance after notice and reinspection as provided
in division (B) below, shall be guilty of an offense under this chapter.
   (B)   Permit violation; notice. Whenever the Chief Subdivision Engineer
determines that a permit violation exists, he or she shall give notice of the
violation in the manner prescribed in §
164.166 to the permittee. The notice shall state the nature of the violation
and fix a date not less than ten days after the date of the notice when the
site will be reinspected.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010) Penalty, see §
164.999
§ 164.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found guilty of an offense under this chapter shall pay a
civil fine in an amount not less than $25 and not more than $1,000. Each
calendar day during which the violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed under division (A) above, the Chief
Subdivision Engineer may revoke any site development permit issued to that
person.
   (C)   In addition to any fine imposed under division (A) above or action
taken under division (B) above, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may issue an
order requiring the suspension of any further work on the site. This stop-work
order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for its issuance, and
shall specify the action, if any, required to be taken in order to resume work.
One copy of the stop-work order shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous
place and one copy shall be delivered in the manner prescribed in §
164.166 to the permittee, if any, or if none, to the person in whose name the
site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records of the Supervisor
of Assessments.
   (D)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the Chief Subdivision Engineer may
bring any action, legal or equitable, including an action for injunctive relief
that may be necessary.
   (E)   Any person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by
state law that commences any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or
filling of land without first obtaining a site development permit from the
county shall be required to obtain an after the fact site development permit.
Refer to County Board Resolution 07-86 et seq. for the after the fact site
development permit fee.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
APPENDIX A: SAMPLE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA ORDINANCES
   The foregoing special service area ordinances are just draft examples of
county special service area ordinances. The county is not giving legal advice
on how to go about proposing, establishing or enacting a special service area
and users should not rely on these documents in proposing, establishing or
enacting any special service areas. Each unit of government that wishes to
establish a special service area should work with an attorney to obtain legal
advice on all aspects of proposing, establishing and enacting a special service
area.
Draft 1
Draft 1
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NUMBER      IN THE COUNTY OF WILL AND
PROVIDING FOR OTHER PROCEDURES IN CONNECTION
THEREWITH
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE WILL COUNTY BOARD, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Authority.
The County of Will (“county”) is authorized pursuant to Article VII, § 7(6) of the Constitution of the
State of Illinois, and pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Special Service Area Tax Law, ILCS Ch.
35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq. (“Act”) which provides, inter alia, the manner of levying taxes and issuing
bonds for the provision of special services to areas within the boundaries of municipalities and
counties.
Section 2. Findings.
The Will County Board finds and determines as follows:
   (a)   The owners of record (“owners”) of the property within that portion of the county as legally
described in Exhibit A (“subject property”), which is attached hereto and incorporated herein, have
expressed an interest in the performance of various special services to their properties.
   (b)   Pursuant to § 27-20 of the Act, the owners filed an application (“application”) with the County
of Will with jurisdiction over the subject property, requesting the county to establish a special
service area (“special service area”) for the subject property.
   (c)   It is in the public interest that the Will County Board considers the creation of the requested
special service area for the subject property.
   (d)   The proposed special service area is compact and contiguous and commonly described as: a
portion of the property located                                 all in the County of Will, Illinois
which proposed special service area is also outlined on the map of a portion of the county, which is
attached hereto and incorporated herein as “Exhibit B”.
   (e)   The proposed special service area will benefit from the special services to be provided
thereto.
Section 5. Notice of Public Hearing.
Notice of hearing shall be published in accordance with provisions as provided in § 1007 of the Water
Resource Ordinance for Unincorporated Will County and the Illinois Special Service Area Tax Law, ILCS
Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et. seq. If notice by mail is required, the notice shall be sent postage
prepaid, to the person whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid. In the event
that general taxes for the preceding year were not paid, the notice shall be sent to the person last
listed on the tax rolls prior to that year as the owner of the property.
Section 6. Supersede Conflicting Ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
Section 7. Bonds.
The county has heretofore incurred preliminary expenditures, including architectural, legal, engineering
and similar costs, in connection with the special services prior to the issuance of the bonds. The
county reasonably expects to reimburse such costs with proceeds of the bonds. This resolution
constitutes a declaration of official intent under Treasury Regulation § 1.150-2.
Section 8. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval in the manner
provided by law.
 
Draft 2
Draft 2
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NUMBER      IN THE COUNTY OF WILL
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE WILL COUNTY BOARD, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Authority.
The Will County Board (“county”) is authorized pursuant to Article VII, § 7(6) of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Special Service Area Tax Law, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq. (“Act”) to establish
special service areas for the provision of special governmental services in the portions
of the county and to levy or impose a special tax and to issue bonds for the provision of
such special services.
Section 2. Findings.
   (a)   The question of establishment of the area hereinafter described as a special
service area was considered by the Will County Board pursuant to “An Ordinance Proposing
the Establishment of Special Service Area Number         in Will County and Providing for
Other Procedures in Connection Therewith”, as Ordinance No.         , adopted on        .
The establishment of the Special Service Area was considered at a public hearing held on
       , (“public hearing”). The public hearing was held pursuant to notice duly published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the county, pursuant to the Special Service
Area Tax Law, ordinance requirements and to notice by mail addressed to the person(s) in
whose the name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid on each lot, block,
tract or parcel of land lying within the special service area. A certificate of
publication of notice and evidence of mailing of notice are attached to this ordinance as
Exhibit A and Exhibit B, respectively. The notices conform to the requirements of the
Special Service Area Tax Law and pertinent ordinances.
Section 3. Will County Special Service Area No.         Established.
A special service area to be known as designated as “Will County Maintenance Special
Service Area No.         ” is hereby established and shall consist of the continuous
territory legally described on Exhibit D attached hereto and made a part hereof, and
outlined as on Exhibit E, attached hereto and made a part hereof
Section 4. Purpose of Area.
Will County Maintenance Special Service Area No.         is established to provide special
services to the special service area. Maintenance Special Service Area No.         is
formed with the intent that the county shall only levy taxes thereunder in the event the
Will County Board determines, in its sole discretion, that the applicant, the homeowners’
association operating the subject property or any other such entity which is charged with
the upkeep and maintenance of the special service area fails to perform special services
as provided in the site development permit, attached hereto and incorporated herein as
Exhibit F and required by the Water Resource Ordinance for Unincorporated Will County.
Section 5. Ad Valorem Taxation.
The special taxes levied and extended under Maintenance Special Service Area No.        
shall be levied and extended on an ad valorem basis against all taxable property within
the special service area.
Section 6. Supersede Conflicting Ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance
are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 7. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval
in the manner provided by law.
 
(Ord. 11-46, passed 2-17-2011)
APPENDIX B: FEMA FIRM MAPS EFFECTIVE
   FEMA FIRM maps effective as follows:
PANEL NUMBER EFFECTIVE DATE
PANEL NUMBER EFFECTIVE DATE
17197C0017G  2/15/2019
17197C0030G  2/15/2019
17197C0031G  2/15/2019
17197C0032G  2/15/2019
17197C0033G  2/15/2019
17197C0034G  2/15/2019
17197C0036G  2/15/2019
17197C0037G  2/15/2019
17197C0038G  2/15/2019
17197C0039G  2/15/2019
17197C0045G  2/15/2019
17197C0051G  2/15/2019
17197C0052G  2/15/2019
17197C0053G  2/15/2019
17197C0054G  2/15/2019
17197C0056G  2/15/2019
17197C0057G  2/15/2019
17197C0058G  2/15/2019
17197C0059G  2/15/2019
17197C0061G  2/15/2019
17197C0062G  2/15/2019
17197C0065G  2/15/2019
17197C0070G  2/15/2019
17197C0090G  2/15/2019
17197C0095G  2/15/2019
17197C0110G  2/15/2019
17197C0126G  2/15/2019
17197C0127G  2/15/2019
17197C0130G  2/15/2019
17197C0134G  2/15/2019
17197C0135G  2/15/2019
17197C0137G  2/15/2019
17197C0139G  2/15/2019
17197C0140G  2/15/2019
17197C0141G  2/15/2019
17197C0142G  2/15/2019
17197C0143G  2/15/2019
17197C0144G  2/15/2019
17197C0153G  2/15/2019
17197C0154G  2/15/2019
17197C0155G  2/15/2019
17197C0156G  2/15/2019
17197C0157G  2/15/2019
17197C0158G  2/15/2019
17197C0159G  2/15/2019
17197C0161G  2/15/2019
17197C0162G  2/15/2019
17197C0163G  2/15/2019
17197C0164G  2/15/2019
17197C0170G  2/15/2019
17197C0180G  2/15/2019
17197C0185G  2/15/2019
17197C0190G  2/15/2019
17197C0195G  2/15/2019
17197C0211G  2/15/2019
17197C0212G  2/15/2019
17197C0213G  2/15/2019
17197C0214G  2/15/2019
17197C0216G  2/15/2019
17197C0218G  2/15/2019
17197C0255G  2/15/2019
17197C0260G  2/15/2019
17197C0265G  2/15/2019
17197C0270G  2/15/2019
17197C0280G  2/15/2019
17197C0285G  2/15/2019
17197C0286G  2/15/2019
17197C0290G  2/15/2019
17197C0295G  2/15/2019
17197C0303G  2/15/2019
17197C0305G  2/15/2019
17197C0310G  2/15/2019
17197C0311G  2/15/2019
17197C0315G  2/15/2019
17197C0320G  2/15/2019
17197C0326G  2/15/2019
17197C0327G  2/15/2019
17197C0330G  2/15/2019
17197C0331G  2/15/2019
17197C0335G  2/15/2019
17197C0340G  2/15/2019
17197C0345G  2/15/2019
17197C0353G  2/15/2019
17197C0354G  2/15/2019
17197C0358G  2/15/2019
17197C0359G  2/15/2019
17197C0361G  2/15/2019
17197C0362G  2/15/2019
17197C0365G  2/15/2019
17197C0366G  2/15/2019
17197C0367G  2/15/2019
17197C0370G  2/15/2019
17197C0378G  2/15/2019
17197C0379G  2/15/2019
17197C0385G  2/15/2019
17197C0386G  2/15/2019
17197C0390G  2/15/2019
17197C0395G  2/15/2019
17197C0405G  2/15/2019
17197C0408G  2/15/2019
17197C0409G  2/15/2019
17197C0410G  2/15/2019
17197C0415G  2/15/2019
17197C0416G  2/15/2019
17197C0417G  2/15/2019
17197C0420G  2/15/2019
17197C0430G  2/15/2019
17197C0440G  2/15/2019
17197C0450G  2/15/2019
17197C0475G  2/15/2019
17197C0500G  2/15/2019
17197C0505G  2/15/2019
17197C0507G  2/15/2019
17197C0509G  2/15/2019
17197C0510G  2/15/2019
17197C0515G  2/15/2019
17197C0520G  2/15/2019
17197C0526G  2/15/2019
17197C0528G  2/15/2019
17197C0530G  2/15/2019
17197C0535G  2/15/2019
17197C0540G  2/15/2019
17197C0545G  2/15/2019
17197C0560G  2/15/2019
17197C0580G  2/15/2019
17197C0585G  2/15/2019
 
 
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010; Ord. 18-306, passed 11-15-2018)
APPENDIX C: PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER
   http://dnr.state.il.us/owr/resman/3704RULE.htm#370440
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER or PUBLIC WATERS. All lakes, rivers, streams and
waterways which are or were navigable and are open or dedicated to public use
including all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and submerged lands connected by
water to the main channel or body of water during normal flows or stages.
The following public bodies of water were navigable in their natural condition
or were improved for navigation and opened to public use. The entire length and
surface area in Illinois, including all backwater lakes and sloughs open to the
main channel or body of water at normal flows or stages, are open to the public
unless limited to a head of navigation as stated. Head of navigation
descriptions use the United States rectangular survey system and these
abbreviations: T = township, R = range, PM = principal meridian, Sec. =
section, 1/4 = quarter section, N = north, E = east, S = south, W = west, USGS
= U.S. Geological Survey.
- Kankakee River
The following public bodies of water are primarily artificial navigable waters
that were opened to public use.
- Illinois and Michigan Canal
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
APPENDIX D: COMMENT BY IDNR
   Streams Studied by Detailed Methods within the Flood Insurance Study
Butterfield Creek     Kahler Road Drainage Ditch  Spring Creek
Deer Creek            Kankakee River              Springhole Creek
Des Plaines River     Lily Cache Creek            St. Anne School Tributary
DuPage River          Long Run Creek              St. Francis Academy Creek
Marley Creek          Manhattan Creek             Sugar Run
Fiddyment Creek       Marley Creek                Sunnyland Drain
Forked Creek          Milne Creek                 Thorn Creek
Goose Creek           Naperville Road Tributary   Thorne Creek
Hammel Creek          Normand Drain               Trim Creek
Hickory Creek         Plum Creek                  Union Drainage Ditch
Illinois and Michigan Robin Hill Drive Split Flow Unnamed Creek (South of
Canal                                             87th Street)
Jackson Creek         Rock Run                    Wolf Creek
 
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
APPENDIX E: HIGH QUALITY AQUATIC RESOURCES (HQAR)
   The following descriptions of high-quality aquatic resources. This list is
to be used as a guideline for identifying high quality resources in Will
County. High quality aquatic resources are reviewed on a case-by-case basis and
may include species not found in this list.
   ADVANCED IDENTIFICATION (ADID) SITES. Aquatic sites that have been
identified by the District and United States Environmental Protection Agency,
in advance of specific permit requests, as areas generally unsuitable for
disposal of dredged or fill material. ADID sites include various waters of the
United States, including wetlands, identified in Kane, Lake and McHenry
Counties.
   BOG. A low nutrient peatland, usually in a glacial depression, that is
acidic in the surface stratum and often dominated at least in part by the genus
Sphagnum. P.
   EPHEMERAL POOL. A seasonally inundated depression within a forested wetland
or upland community, usually located on a moraine, glacial outwash plain, or in
an area shallow to bedrock; also known locally as a VERNAL POOL. These areas
may not be permanently vegetated.
   DUNE AND SWALE COMPLEX. Areas usually parallel to the Lake Michigan
shoreline and typified by sandy, linear, upland ridges alternating with low-
relief wetland created over time during changes in the Lake Michigan’s water
levels.
   FEN. A peatland, herbaceous (including calcareous floating mats) or wooded,
with calcareous groundwater flow.
   FORESTED WETLAND. A wetland dominated by native woody vegetation with at
least one of the following species or genera present: Carya spp., Cephalanthus
occidentalis, Cornus alternifolia, Fraxinus nigra, Juglans cinerea, Nyssa
sylvatica, Quercus spp., Thuja occidentalis, Betula nigra, Betula
alleghaniensis, Betula papyrifera, Fagus grandifolia.
   SEDGE MEADOW. A wetland dominated by at least one of the following genera:
Carex, Calamagrostis, Cladium, Deschampsia, Eleocharis, Rhynchospora, Scleria
or Eriophorum.
   SEEP. A wetland, herbaceous or wooded, with saturated soil or inundation
resulting from the diffuse flow of groundwater to the surface stratum.
   STREAMS RATED A OR B IN THE ILLINOIS BIOLOGICAL STREAM CHARACTERIZATION
STUDY. Reference Illinois Environmental Protection Agency’s Biological Stream
Characterization (BSC): Biological Assessment of Illinois Stream Quality
(latest edition) for a current listing.
   WET PRAIRIE. A wetland dominated by native graminoid species with a diverse
indigenous forb component that is seasonally saturated and/or temporarily
inundated and may be resemble a fen in its best development. Species found in a
high quality wet prairie include at least one of the following: Calamagrostis
Canadensis, Spartina pectinata, Aster puniceus firmus, Beckmannia syzigachne,
Chelone glabra, Eleocharis wolfii, Lysimachia quadrifolia, Oenothera perennis,
Oenothera pilosella, Pedicularis lanceolata and Solidago ohioensis.
   WETLANDS SUPPORTING FEDERAL OR ILLINOIS ENDANGERED OR THREATENED SPECIES.
For current state-listed species, reference Illinois Endangered Species
Protection Board’s Checklist of Endangered and Threatened Animals and Plants of
Illinois and/or contact the Illinois Department of Natural Resources. For
federally-listed species, reference the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service’s Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants list (latest edition)
and/or contact the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
   WETLANDS WITH A FLORISTIC QUALITY INDEX OF 20 OR GREATER OR A MEAN C-VALUE
OF 3.5 OR GREATER. Reference Plants of the Chicago Region (F. Swink and G.
Wilhelm, 4th edition, Indianapolis: Indiana Academy of Science, 1994).
   Further information on the areas described above can be found in the United
States Environmental Protection Agency’s Advanced Identification studies for
Kane, Lake and McHenry Counties, the Chicago Wilderness’ Biodiversity Recovery
Plan, the Forest Preserve District of Cook County’s The Natural Communities of
Cook County: An Ecological Classification System for Terrestrial Communities,
Swink and Wilhelm’s Plants of the Chicago Region, and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency’s Biological Stream Characterization (BSC):
Biological Assessment of Illinois Stream.
(Ord. 10-164, passed 6-17-2010)
CHAPTER 165: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 166: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
General Provisions
   
166.001   Purposes and intent
   
166.002   Definitions
   
166.003   General provisions
Historic Preservation Commission
   
166.015   Organization
   
166.016   Powers and authorities
Designation of Landmarks and Historic Districts
   
166.025   Surveys and research
   
166.026   Preservation plan
   
166.027   Nomination of landmarks and historic districts
   
166.028   Criteria for consideration of nomination
   
166.029   Initial Report and Recommendation of preservation Commission
   
166.030   Notification of nomination
   
166.031   Hearing
   
166.032   Recommendation of Preservation Commission
   
166.033   Designation
   
166.034   Resubmission of application
   
166.035   Notice of designation
   
166.036   Publication of map
   
166.037   Appeals
   
166.038   Interim code
   
166.039   Marking by attachment of a plaque
   
166.040   Amendment and rescission of designation
   
166.041   Transfer of jurisdictional control
   
166.042   National Register review procedures
Alteration, Construction, Demolition, and Maintenance
   
166.050   Scope
   
166.051   Certificate of appropriateness
   
166.052   Economic hardship
   
166.053   Maintenance of historic properties
   
166.054   Public safety exclusion
Enforcement and Equitable Relief
   
166.065   Enforcement
   
166.066   Equitable relief
 
   
166.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 166.001 PURPOSES AND INTENT.
   The purposes and intent of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   To identify, designate, protect, preserve, and encourage the
restoration, rehabilitation, and adaptation for continued use of those
properties and structures which represent or reflect the historical, cultural,
artistic, social, economic, ethnic or political heritage of the United States
of America, State of Illinois, or County of Will or which may be representative
of an architectural or engineering type inherently valuable for the study of
style, period, craftsmanship, method of construction or use of indigenous
materials;
   (B)   To strengthen the economy of the county;
   (C)   To stabilize and improve the economic vitality and value of designated
landmarks and preservation districts, in particular, and of the County of Will,
in general;
   (D)   To protect, enhance, and interpret the County's resources for tourists
and visitors as well as to support and provide stimulus to business and
industry;
   (E)   To foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past;
   (F)   To safeguard the county's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage
and as embodied and reflected in structures, landscape features, and scenic
areas; and
   (G)   To promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for the
education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, phrases, and terms shall
have the following meanings:
   ALTERATION. Any act or process that changes one or more historic,
architectural, or physical features of an area, site, landscape, place, and/or
structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction,
reconstruction, or removal of any structure; the expansion or significant
modification of agricultural activities; surface mining; and clearing, grading
or other modification of an area, site or landscape that changes its current or
natural condition.
   ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE. Embodying the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, style or method of construction or use of indigenous materials,
or representing the work of an important builder, designer, architect,
engineer, or craftsman who has contributed to the development of the community,
county, state or nation.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE. Importance as an area, site, place or landscape
that  has yielded or is likely to yield information concerning past patterns of
human settlement, or artifacts or information concerning previous cultures in
Illinois or previous periods of the present culture. Areas, sites or landscapes
of archaeological significance may include, but are not limited to, aboriginal
mounds, forts, earthworks, burial grounds, historic or prehistoric ruins,
locations of villages, mine excavations or tailing.
    BUILDING.  Any structure designed or constructed for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural or other use.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate issued by a Preservation
Commission indicating its approval of plans for alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal affecting a nominated or designated landmark or property
within a nominated or designated preservation district.
   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. A certificate issued by the Preservation
Commission authorizing an alteration, construction, removal or demolition even
though a Certificate of Appropriateness has previously been denied or may be
denied.
   COMMISSIONERS. Members of the Preservation Commission.
   CONSERVATION RIGHT. A term that includes easements, covenants, deed
restrictions or any other type of less than full fee simple interest as that
term is defined in Illinois Revised Statutes, Section 1 of "An Act relating to
conservation rights in real property," approved September 12, 1977, as amended.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of adding an addition to a structure or the erection
of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
   DEMOLITION.  Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a
landmark or a building or structure within a preservation district.
   DESIGN CRITERIA. Standards of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic, architectural,  scenic or aesthetic character of a landmark or
preservation district.
   DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. The development rights of a landmark or of a property
within a preservation district as defined in Section 11-48.2-1A of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
   DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS BANK. A reserve for the deposit of development rights as
defined in Section 11-48.2-1A of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE. The architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a building or structure, including but not
limited to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the type,
design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and
appurtenant elements.
   HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE.  Character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage, or culture of the community, county, state or nation; as
the location of an important local, county, state or national event; or through
identification with a person or persons who made important contributions to the
development of the community, county, state or nation.
   LANDMARK. A property or structure designated as a "Landmark" by ordinance of
the County Board, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, which is worthy of
rehabilitation, restoration, or preservation because of its historic, or
scenic, or architectural significance.
   LANDSCAPE.  A natural feature or group of natural features such as, but not
limited to: valleys, rivers, lakes, marshes, swamps, forests, woods, or hills;
or a combination of natural features and buildings, structures, objects
cultivated, fields, or orchards in a predominantly rural setting.
   OBJECT. Any tangible items, including any items of personal property,
including, but not limited to: wagons, boats, and farm machinery that may be
easily moved or removed from real estate property.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The person or corporation or other legal entity in whose
name the property appears on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
   PRESERVATION DISTRICT. An area designated as a "preservation district" by
ordinance of the County Board and which may contain within definable geographic
boundaries one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other
properties, areas, sites, landscapes or structures, while not of such historic,
architectural or scenic significance to be designated as landmarks,
nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the district.
   REMOVAL. Any relocation of a structure, object or artifact on its site or to
another site.
   REPAIR. Any change that is not construction, alteration, demolition, or
removal and is necessary or useful for continuing normal maintenance.
   SCENIC SIGNIFICANCE. Importance as a result of appearance or character that
remains relatively unchanged from and embodies the essential appearance related
to a culture from an earlier historic or prehistoric period; as a result of a
unique location, appearance, or physical character that creates an established
or familiar vista or visual feature; or as a geologic or natural feature
associated with the development, heritage, or culture of the community, county,
state, or nation.
   SITE. The traditional, documented or legendary location of an event,
occurrence, action, or structure significant in the life or lives of a person,
persons, group, or tribe, including but not limited to, cemeteries, burial
grounds, campsites, battlefields, settlements, estates, gardens, groves, river
crossings, routes, trails, caves, quarries, mines, or significant trees or
other plant life.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including (but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing), barns;  smokehouses; advertising
signs; billboards; backstops for tennis courts; bridges; fences; pergolas;
gazebos; radio and television antennae, solar collectors, and microwave
antennae, including supporting towers; roads; ruins or remnants (including
foundations); swimming pools; or walkways.
   SURVEY. The systematic gathering of information on the architectural,
historic, scenic, and archaeological significance of buildings, sites,
structures, areas, or landscapes through visual assessment in the field and
historical research, for the purpose of identifying landmarks or districts
worthy of preservation.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.003 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The following are general provisions propounded to make more clear matters
relative to scope and jurisdiction of this chapter.
   (A)   No provision herein shall supersede the powers of other local
legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any property owner from complying
with the requirements of any other state statute or code or ordinance of the
county or individual municipal ordinances or regulations, and any permit or
license required thereunder shall be required in addition to any Certificate of
Appropriateness or Economic Hardship which may be required hereunder; provided,
however, that where a Certificate of Appropriateness or Economic Hardship is
required, no such other permit or license shall be issued by any other agency
under the jurisdiction of the Will County Board before a certificate has been
issued by the Commission as herein provided.
   (B)   The use of property and improvements which have been designated under
this chapter shall be governed by the Will County Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
   (C)   If any particular section of this chapter is declared to be
unconstitutional or void, only the particular section is affected, and all
other sections of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
   (D)   For purposes of remedying emergency conditions determined to be
dangerous to life, health or property, the Commission may waive the procedures
set forth herein and grant immediate approval for a Certificate of
Appropriateness. The Commission shall state its reasons in writing for such
approval.
   (E)   No member of the Preservation Commission shall vote on any matter that
may materially or apparently affect the property, income, or business interest
of that member.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 166.015 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Appointment. The Will County Board shall by ordinance appoint members
to the Will County Preservation Commission from names submitted by the County
Executive.
   (B)   Composition.  The Preservation Commission shall consist of nine
members. All members shall be residents of Will County. The County Executive
shall nominate to the Preservation Commission at least one attorney, one
historian or architectural historian, one architect/engineer, and one real
estate professional knowledgeable in preservation; the other members shall be
persons with a demonstrated interest in pre-history, history, architecture,
engineering, or preservation. In addition to the nine (9) voting members, the
Planning Director of the Will County Land Use Department or the Director's
designee shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Commission and
shall be responsible for providing staff support. The President of the Forest
Preserve District of Will County or the President's designee shall also serve
as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Commission.
   (C)   Terms.  Terms of the members shall be staggered so that three
Commissioners appointed to fill those positions that are scheduled to expire in
December of 2004 shall serve one year terms; two Commissioners appointed to
fill those positions that are scheduled to expire in December of 2004 shall
serve two year terms; three Commissioners appointed to fill those positions
that are scheduled to expire in December of 2005 shall serve three year terms;
two Commissioners appointed to fill positions that are scheduled to expire in
2006 shall serve three year terms; three Commissioners appointed to fill
positions that are scheduled to expire in 2007 shall serve three year terms and
one Commissioner appointed to fill positions that are scheduled to expire in
2007 shall serve a two year term. Successors appointed after the year 2007
shall serve for three year terms. All ex-officio members shall serve until
their successors are appointed.
   (D)   Officers. One of the appointed members shall be named Chairman at the
time of appointment and Vice-Chairman and Secretary shall be elected by the
Preservation Commission. The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the
absence of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of the
Chairman. If both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman are absent, a temporary
chairman shall be elected by those present. The Planning Director and his staff
shall ensure that the following duties are performed.
      (1)   That minutes are taken of each Preservation Commission meeting;
      (2)   That copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions of the
Preservation Commission be published and distributed to the members of the
Preservation Commission.
      (3)   The Will County Executive is advised of vacancies on the
Preservation Commission and expiring terms of members; and
      (4)   That there be prepared and submitted to the Will County Board a
complete record of the proceedings before the Preservation Commission on any
matters requiring County Board consideration. The Will County Land Use
Department shall be the official keeper of the records.
   (E)   Rules and procedures. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have
the authority to develop and adopt rules and procedures necessary to carry out
its functions under the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Meetings. Meetings of the Preservation Commission shall be held no
less than monthly, except in those months when no business is pending, and
shall be held at such times and places within the County as the Commission
shall decide. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing a vote of each member
upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, and shall also keep
records of its official actions. Such minutes and records shall be open to the
public for inspection and maintained at offices of the Will County Land Use
Department.
   (G)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of five members. The transaction of
business shall be made by a majority vote of those members in attendance while
a quorum is present, except that the adoption, modification or recision of any
rule or part thereof shall require the affirmative vote of five members.
   (H)   Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation, but they
shall be reimbursed for their expenses necessarily incurred in the performance
of their duties as such and approved by the Director of the Land Use
Department.
   (I)   Annual report. The Commission shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the Will County Board.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992; Res. 04-530, passed 12-16-2004)
§ 166.016 POWERS AND AUTHORITIES.
   The Preservation Commission shall have the following powers and authority.
   (A)   To conduct an ongoing survey of the County to identify buildings,
structures, areas, sites and landscapes that are of historic, archaeological,
architectural, or scenic significance, and, therefore, potential landmarks or
preservation districts;
   (B)   To hold public hearings and recommend to the County Board the
designation of landmarks or preservation districts;
   (C)   To compile information concerning and prepare descriptions of the
landmarks or preservation districts identified and recommended for designation
and the characteristics that meet the standards for designation;
   (D)   To prepare, keep current, and publish a map or maps showing the
locations and exact boundaries of proposed and designated landmarks and
preservation districts, and, if the Commission so chooses, the locations and
boundaries of designated state or federal landmarks or districts;
   (E)   To keep a register of all designated landmarks and preservation
districts;
   (F)   To establish an appropriate system of markers or plaques for all
designated landmarks and preservation districts, and for streets, roads,
trails, and highways leading from one landmark or preservation district to
another and to confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or property
within preservation districts by means of certificates, plaques, or markers;
   (G)   To nominate landmarks and preservation districts to any state or
federal registers of historic places;
   (H)   To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property within
preservation districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on any
state or federal register of historic places;
   (I)   To inform and educate the citizens of the County concerning the
historic, archaeological, architectural, or scenic heritage of the County by
publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by
holding programs and seminars;
   (J)   To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction,
alteration, removal, or demolition affecting landmarks or property within
preservation districts and issue or deny Certificates of Appropriateness for
such actions;
   (K)   To consider applications for Certificates of Economic Hardship that
would allow the performance of work for which a Certificate of Appropriateness
has previously been denied;
   (L)   To develop specific criteria and guidelines for the proper alteration,
construction, demolition, or removal of landmarks, or of property within
preservation districts;
   (M)   To review proposed amendments to zoning regulations, applications for
special uses or applications for zoning variations that affect any and all
landmark or preservation district. Proposed zoning amendments, applications for
special use, or zoning variations that affect any landmark or preservation
district as defined in this chapter or any application for demolition of any
structure which is more than 30 years old shall be reviewed by support staff
and/or at the discretion of the staff shall be forwarded to the Preservation
Commission for review within seven working days.
   (N)   To administer on behalf of the County Board any property, or full or
partial interest in real property, including a conservation right, upon
designation by the County Board;
   (O)   To accept and administer on behalf of the County Board gifts, grants,
money or other personal property as may be appropriate for the purpose of this
chapter. Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures, for
hiring staff or consultants or performing otherwise appropriate functions for
the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the Preservation
Commission and the purposes of this chapter.
   (P)   To administer any system established by the County Board for the
transfer of development rights;
   (Q)   To call upon available county agencies and staff as well as other
experts for technical advice;
   (R)   To retain specialists or consultants, or to appoint citizen,
neighborhood or area advisory committees, as may be required;
   (S)   To testify before all boards and commissions including the Will County
Planning and Zoning Commission, also known as the Will County Regional Planning
Commission, on any matter affecting potential or designated landmarks or
preservation districts;
   (T)   To periodically review any county comprehensive plan and to develop a
preservation component in any comprehensive plan of the County and to recommend
it to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the County Board;
   (U)   To periodically consult the County zoning administrator, review any
County zoning ordinance and building code, and to recommend to the County Board
any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks or
property within preservation districts;
   (V)   To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to
the implementation of its powers and duties or the implementation of the
purposes of this chapter.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS
§ 166.025 SURVEYS AND RESEARCH.
   (A)   The Preservation Commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and
research effort in the County to identify areas, sites, structures, and objects
that have historic, cultural, community, architectural or aesthetic importance,
interest, or value. As part of the survey, the Commission shall review and
evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private
organization and compile appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs.
   (B)   The Commission shall make an effort to systematically identify
potential landmarks and districts and adopt procedures to nominate them in
groups based upon the following criteria:
      (1)   The potential landmarks or districts in one township or distinct
geographical area of the county;
      (2)   The potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event,
or historical period;
      (3)   The potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or
school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer, or
craftsman; or of a particular building material.
      (4)   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the Preservation
Commission to assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential
landmarks within the county.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.026 PRESERVATION PLAN.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission may prepare a "Historic Landmark
and District Preservation Plan."
   (B)   Any such Preservation Plan shall be presented to the Will County Land
Use Department for consideration and recommendation to the County Board for
inclusion in the Will County Land Resource Management Plan as amended. From
time to time, the Commission shall review the Plan and insert in the Historic
Preservation Commission minutes a report of such review and take appropriate
action on any amendments to the Plan deemed necessary.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.027 NOMINATION OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The Preservation Commission or any person may propose landmarks or
preservation districts for designation by the County Board by filing a
nomination for any property or properties and structures located in an
unincorporated area within the geographical boundaries of Will County and those
municipalities as provided for by statute. Nomination forms shall be filed with
the Will County Land Use Department.
   (B)   Such forms shall be provided by the Commission and, when submitted,
shall include or be accompanied by all of the following information:
      (1)   The name and address, as shown on the tax assessor's rolls of the
owner of record of the nominated property.
      (2)   The Permanent Index Number (PIN), legal description, and common
street address of the property proposed for designation.
      (3)   A map delineating the boundaries and location of the property
proposed for designation.
      (4)   A written statement describing the property and setting forth
reasons in support of the proposed designation.
      (5)   In nominating an area for designation as an preservation district,
a list enumerating all properties and improvements previously designated, or
currently pending designation, as a landmark by this Commission or listed on
any state or federal registers of historic places.
      (6)   There shall be no fee for submitting a nomination form to the
Commission for designation of a historic landmark or preservation district.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.028 CRITERIA FOR CONSIDERATION OF NOMINATION.
   The Commission may recommend to the County Board the designation of
landmarks and preservation districts, where not more than 50% of the property
owners whose property is located within the boundaries of the proposed district
object to designation, when after a thorough investigation results in a
determination that a property, structure or improvement, or area so recommended
meets one or more of the following criteria:
   (A)   It has character, interest, or value which is part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of a local community, the county, state
or the nation;
   (B)   Its location is a site of a significant local, county, state, or
national event;
   (C)   It is identified with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the local community, county, state, or the
nation;
   (D)   It embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
   (E)   It is identified with the work of a master builder, designer,
architect, engineer, or landscape architect whose individual work has
influenced the development of the local area, county, state, or the nation;
   (F)   It embodies elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship
that render it architecturally significant;
   (G)   It embodies design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
   (H)   It has a unique location or singular physical characteristics that
make it an established or familiar visual feature;
   (I)   It has character which is a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance;
   (J)   It is suitable for preservation or restoration;
   (K)   It is included in the National Register of Historic Places and/or the
Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   (L)   It has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to
pre-history, history or other areas of archaeological significance. In the
event a property, structure, or an area is found to be of such significant
character and quality where it is determined that its designation as a landmark
or preservation district is in the overall best interest of the general
welfare, any person may nominate and the Commission may recommend to the County
Board such appropriate designation.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.029 INITIAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Preservation Commission shall within 14 calendar days from receipt
of a completed application for designation cause to be written an initial
recommendation and report stating whether the nominated landmark or
preservation district does or does not meet the criteria for designation as
provided for in §
166.028.
   (B)   The report shall contain the following information:
      (1)   An explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated landmark or preservation district as it relates to the criteria for
designation;
      (2)   A description of the integrity or lack of integrity of the
nominated landmark or preservation district;
      (3)   In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for
designation:
         (a)   A description of the significant exterior architectural features
of the nominated landmark that should be protected;
         (b)   A description of the types of construction, alteration,
demolition, and removal, other than those requiring a building or demolition
permit, that should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions
of §
166.051(C) and (D);
      (4)   In the case of a nominated preservation district found to meet the
criteria for designation:
         (a)   A description of the types of significant exterior architectural
features of the structures within the nominated preservation district that
should be protected;
         (b)   Description of the types of alterations and demolitions that
should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of §
166.051(C) and (D);
      (5)   The relationship of the nominated landmark or preservation district
to the ongoing effort of the Preservation Commission to identify and nominate
all potential areas and structures that meet the criteria for designation;
      (6)   A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and the
boundaries of the nominated preservation district. The recommendation and
report shall be available to the public in the office of the Will County Land
Use Department.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.030 NOTIFICATION OF NOMINATION.
   (A)   The Preservation Commission shall within 30 days from completion of
the initial report and recommendation as described above in §
166.029, cause to be scheduled a public hearing on the nomination. Notice of
the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing and a copy of the
completed nomination form shall be sent by certified mail to the owner(s) of
record and to the nominators, as well as by regular mail to property owners
adjoining the nominated landmark or preservation district as least 15 days
prior to the date of the hearing.
   (B)   Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area surrounding the nominated property or district at least
15 days prior to the date of the hearing. All notices shall state the street,
address and Permanent Index Number or legal description of a nominated landmark
and the boundaries of a nominated preservation district.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.031 HEARING.
   (A)   A public hearing shall be scheduled, and notification made thereof,
pursuant to §
166.035, above. Oral or written testimony shall be taken at the public hearing
from any person or organization concerning the nomination.
   (B)   The Preservation Commission may solicit expert testimony or present
its own evidence regarding the historic, archaeological, or scenic significance
of a proposed landmark or of any property within a proposed preservation
district relative to compliance with criteria for consideration set forth above
in §
166.028.
   (C)   The owner of any nominated landmark or of any property within a
nominated preservation district shall be allowed reasonable opportunity to
present evidence regarding historic, archaeological, architectural or scenic
significance and shall be afforded the right of representation by counsel and
reasonable opportunity to cross-examine expert witnesses. The hearing shall be
closed upon completion of testimony.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.032 RECOMMENDATION OF PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 60 days following close of the public hearing, the Commission
shall make its determination upon the evidence whether the proposed landmark or
preservation district does or does not meet the criteria for designation. A
recommendation to the County Board regarding the proposed landmark or
preservation district shall be passed by resolution of the Preservation
Commission.
   (B)   This recommendation shall be accompanied by a report stating the
findings of the Preservation Commission concerning the historic,
archaeological, architectural or scenic significance of the proposed landmark
or preservation district.
   (C)   The Preservation Commission shall forward copies of the resolution and
report to the applicant and the owner of the subject property or representative
for petitioners of the subject area.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.033 DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The County Board, upon a recommendation from the Preservation
Commission that the proposed landmark or preservation district should be
designated, shall review the report and recommendations of the Preservation
Commission. The County Board after reviewing the report and recommendation
shall within 60 days from receipt of the recommendation of the Preservation
Commission take one of the following steps:
      (1)   Designate the landmark or preservation district by ordinance; or
      (2)   Refer the report and recommendation back to the Preservation
Commission with suggestions for revisions stating its reason for such action.
   (B)   Upon return of the report and recommendation to the Commission, the
Committee shall review the County Board action resubmission therein finding
within 45 days of the County Board meeting. The County Board shall designate or
not designate the landmark or preservation district at the next regularly
scheduled County Board meeting. If the County Board fails to act on the
Preservation Commission recommendation within 60 days the recommendation of the
Preservation Commission shall be deemed approved.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.034 RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION.
   Resubmission of any application for landmark or preservation district
designation may be made not sooner than 90 days of County Board action. Not
more than one re-submission may be made within a 12-month period.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.035 NOTICE OF DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Notice of the action of the County Board including a copy of the
ordinance designating the landmark or preservation district, shall be sent by
regular mail to all persons of record, including but not limited to each owner
of record of a landmark or property within a preservation district and to
owners of adjacent and immediately surrounding properties affected by a
Certificate of Appropriateness.
   (B)   Further, as soon as is reasonably possible, the County Executive shall
cause to be notified the Will County Land Use Department, the Recorder of
Deeds, the County Clerk, and the Will County Collector by forwarding to each a
copy of the designation ordinance. The Recorder of Deeds shall ensure that the
designation be recorded on all directly affected parcels.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.036 PUBLICATION OF MAP.
   A map showing the location of all designated landmarks and preservation
districts shall be published and amended upon each designation. Copies of the
map shall be available to the public at the office of the Will County Land Use
Department and at the same location and in the same manner as any County zoning
map.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.037 APPEALS.
   Adoption of an ordinance designating a landmark or preservation district by
the Will County Board shall be a final action reviewable under Section 3-101 of
the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.038 INTERIM CODE.
   No building permit shall be issued by the Building Officer for alteration,
construction, demolition, or removal of a nominated landmark or of any property
or structure within a nominated preservation district from the date of the
meeting of the Preservation Commission at which a completed nomination form is
first presented until the final disposition of the nomination by the County
Board unless such alteration, removal, or demolition is necessary for public
health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay be for more than 120
days.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.039 MARKING BY ATTACHMENT OF A PLAQUE.
   Each designated landmark, landmark site and preservation district may be
marked by an appropriate plaque carrying a brief description and account of the
historical significance of the property.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.040 AMENDMENT AND RESCISSION OF DESIGNATION.
   The County Board, upon recommendation of the Preservation Commission, may
amend or rescind designation by the same procedure and according to the same
standards and considerations set forth for designation.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.041 TRANSFER OF JURISDICTIONAL CONTROL.
   Should a designated landmark, landmark site or preservation district be
incorporated into a municipality with a preservation ordinance, that
municipality's preservation ordinance shall govern. If a municipality annexes a
designated landmark, landmark site or preservation district and does not have a
preservation ordinance, the county's preservation ordinance will continue to
govern.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.042 NATIONAL REGISTER REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Persons wishing to be notified of pending nominations and Commission
meetings should provide their name and mailing address to the Will County Land
Use Department.
   (B)   Each nomination received from the State Historic Preservation Officer
(SHPO) will be logged in, with date and materials received noted. Copies of the
nomination will be distributed to: Commission members, individuals by request,
and others interested in the nomination.
   (C)   The National Register mailing list will be used to inform interested
parties of the proposed nomination. Copies of nominations will be available for
inspection at the Will County Land Use Department.
   (D)   The Will County Land Use Department will notify the owner of record
and the applicant that the proposed nomination has been received, and inform
them of the date, time, and place when the nomination will be reviewed by the
Will County Historic Preservation Commission.
   (E)   The Will County Land Use Department will schedule the nomination for
consideration at the next regularly scheduled Historic Preservation Commission
meeting. Notice of the next meeting will be forwarded to owners, applicants,
and interested individuals. If conditions warrant, the nomination may be
considered at a special meeting of the Will County Historic Preservation
Commission, provided all parties are notified.
   (F)   At the meeting in which the Will County Historic Preservation
Commission considers the nomination, interested parties will be invited to
comment upon the merits of the nomination. Persons interested in commenting are
encouraged to contact the Will County Land Use Department prior to the meeting.
   (G)   Following a discussion of the nomination's merits, the Will County
Historic Preservation Commission will vote on whether or not to recommend the
nomination to the Illinois Historic Sites Advisory Council (IHSAC).
   (H)   The written opinion of the Will County Historic Preservation
Commission and that of the Will County Board will be transmitted to the SHPO by
the deadline stipulated by the SHPO.
   (I)   The Will County Land Use Department will forward a copy of the
opinions of the Will County Historic Preservation Commission and the Will
County Board to the property owner, interested individuals upon request, and
the applicant, as notification that the nomination has been forwarded to the
SHPO for further consideration by IHSAC. The notification will include an
explanation of National Register review and appeal procedures.
(Ord. 13-198, passed 8-15-13)
ALTERATION, CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND MAINTENANCE
§ 166.050 SCOPE.
   Work on property and improvements so designated pursuant to this chapter
shall be regulated as follows:
   (A)   Landmarks. No significant alterations, exterior construction, exterior
or interior alteration which may affect the exterior appearance demolition may
be performed on property and structures which have been designated under this
chapter as landmarks, except as shall be approved by a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
   (B)   Preservation districts. No significant alterations, exterior
construction or exterior demolition or interior alteration which may affect the
exterior appearance may be performed on property and structures located within
an area which is designated under this chapter as a preservation district,
except as shall be approved by a Certificate of Appropriateness.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.051 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Requirement. A certificate of appropriateness from the Preservation
Commission established pursuant to this chapter shall be required before any
significant alteration, construction, demolition or removal that affects
pending or designated landmarks and preservation districts is undertaken. Such
a certificate is required for all such actions from the date a completed
nomination form is submitted to the Preservation Commission.
   (B)   Applications for certificates of appropriateness.
      (1)   Every application submitted to the Will County Land Use Department,
Division of Building and Zoning for a permit wherein the applicant represents
and/or delineates plans to commence any action as immediately described above
in division (A) affecting any such property, improvements or areas therein
described, shall be forwarded by the Director of Building and Zoning to a
representative or representatives of the Preservation Commission, within three
days following the receipt of said application by the Building and Zoning
Division.
      (2)   The Building and Zoning Division shall not issue the building or
demolition permit until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the
Preservation Commission. Any applicant may request a meeting with the
Preservation Commission before the application is sent by the Director of
Building and Zoning to the Preservation Commission or during the review of the
application.
      (3)   Application for review of construction, alteration, demolition, or
removal not requiring a building permit for which a certificate of
appropriateness is required shall be made on a form prepared by the
Preservation Commission and available at the office of Will County Land Use
Department.
      (4)   The Preservation Commission may schedule, provide notice and
conduct a public hearing concerning the application in the manner previously
described in §§
166.030 and
166.031.
      (5)   If a public hearing is not scheduled, the Commission may consider
the completed application at its next regular meeting and may grant a
certificate of appropriateness at that time.
      (6)   The Commission may further designate support staff be responsible
for reviewing routine applications for Certificates of Appropriateness when the
proposed work is clearly appropriate and in accordance with the criteria set
forth in division (C) and (D) below, and the purposes of this chapter.
      (7)   The Commission may seek technical advice from outside its members
on any application for a certificate of appropriateness. The applicant and each
commissioner shall receive a copy of the consultant's written opinion at least
seven days before a determination is to be made on the application.
      (8)   The Commission shall act promptly and in a reasonable manner in its
judgment of plans for new construction or for alteration, removal, or
demolition of structures in preservation districts that have little historic
value and that are not shown on priority lists, except where such construction,
alteration, removal, or demolition would seriously impair the historic or
architectural value of surrounding structures or the surrounding area.
   (C)   Design guidelines. The Commission shall consider the following factors
in reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness:
      (1)   Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction
should be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with
surrounding structures in a preservation district.
      (2)   Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should be compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark and with surrounding structures within a preservation
district.
      (3)   Relationship of building masses and spaces. The relationship of a
structure within a preservation district to open space between it and adjoining
structures should be compatible or similar to relationships commonly found
between similar structures in the district.
      (4)   Roof shape. The design of the roof should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and surrounding structures
which are similar in design in a preservation district.
      (5)   Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the
architectural character and appearance of the landmark and of surrounding
structures and landscapes in preservation districts.
      (6)   Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction,
or partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding structures in a preservation district.
      (7)   Directional expression. Facades in historic districts should blend
with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a
historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures or of its stylistic design. The
directional expression of a landmark after any alteration, construction, or
partial demolition should be compatible with its original architectural style
and character.
      (8)   Architectural Details.  Architectural details including materials
and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark compatible with its
original architectural style or character.
   (D)   Standards for review. The Commission, in considering the
appropriateness of any alteration, demolition, new construction, or removal to
any property or structures designated, or pending designation, as a landmark,
or any area designated, or pending designation as a preservation district shall
be guided by the following general standards in addition to any design
guidelines in the ordinance designating the landmark or preservation district,
as well as conformance to applicable zoning classification, height, and area
limitation:
      (1)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, or
site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose.
      (2)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure, site, and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or
alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural feature should
be avoided whenever possible.
      (3)   All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as
products of their time. Alterations that have no historical basis or that seek
to create an earlier/later appearance shall be discouraged.
      (4)   Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and
its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own
right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
      (5)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with
sensitivity.
      (6)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features,
substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
      (7)   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
utmost care and consideration. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that
will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
      (8)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
      (9)   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material, and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of
the property, neighborhood, or environment.
      (10)   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures
should be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to
be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure
would be impaired.
   (E)   Determination by Preservation Commission. Within 15 days (Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays excluded) after support staff review, or from the
date of the regular meeting, or from the close of a public hearing concerning
an application for a certificate of appropriateness, or within such further
time as the applicant for said certificate (and/or permit) approves in writing,
the Commission shall determine whether:
      (1)   The proposed construction, alteration, demolition, removal or other
modification will be appropriate to the preservation of the particular landmark
or preservation district and a certificate of appropriateness may be issued; or
      (2)   Such proposed modification is inappropriate to the preservation of
the particular landmark or preservation district and a certificate of
appropriateness may be denied. Written notice of the approval or denial of the
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be provided the
applicant, sent by certified mail with return receipt requested, and to the
Will County Land Use Department within seven days (Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays excluded) following the determination and shall be accompanied
by a certificate of appropriateness in the case of an approval.
   (F)   Denial of certificate of appropriateness. A denial of a certificate of
appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the
denial. The Preservation Commission shall make recommendations to the applicant
concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the
Preservation Commission to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the
applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the difference(s)
between the applicant and the Commission. The applicant may resubmit an amended
application or reapply for a building or demolition permit that takes into
consideration the recommendations of the Preservation Commission.
   (G)   Decision binding on director, building and zoning. The Director of the
Will County Land Use Department, shall be bound by the determination of the
Commission and approve, if in conformance with other provisions of the Building
Code, or disapprove any application for the proposed construction, alteration,
removal of an exterior architectural feature, or demolition of any building or
structure in a preservation district or any landmark in accordance with said
determination.
   (H)   Failure of Commission to review application in a timely manner.
Failure of the Commission to act upon an application for certificate of
appropriateness within 90 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence
shall be needed. This time limit may be waived only by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Commission.
   (I)   Demolitions.
      (1)    Pursuant to divisions (C) and (D) above, the Preservation
Commission may deny any application for a certificate of appropriateness where
demolition is proposed upon a finding that such proposed action will adversely
affect the historic, archeological, architectural, or scenic significance of a
landmark or preservation district. Upon receipt of an application for a
certificate of appropriateness for demolition, the Preservation Commission
shall as soon as possible make a determination, supported by written findings,
whether one or more of the following criteria are met:
         (a)   The structure is of such interest or quality that it would
reasonably meet national, state or local criteria for designation as an
historic or architectural landmark.
         (b)   The structure is of such unusual or uncommon design, texture or
materials that it could not be reproduced, or be reproduced only with great
difficulty and expense.
         (c)   Retention of the structure would aid substantially in preserving
and protecting another structure which meets criteria (a) or (b) hereinabove.
Where the Preservation Commission determines that one or more of these criteria
are met, no Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued and the application
shall be denied.
      (2)   The Preservation Commission shall also require the applicant to
submit for review and consideration post-demolition plans which shall include
drawings or sketches with sufficient detail to show, as far as they relate to
exterior appearance, the architectural design of any and all improvements
incorporated in such plans.
   (J)   Compliance with certificate. A certificate of appropriateness will
become void if:
      (1)   If there is any change in the scope of work pursuant to the
approved application subsequent to the issuance of the certificate; or
      (2)   If 24 months have elapsed after issuance of the Certificate and no
building permit has been issued or if 24 months have lapsed after issuance of
the last building permit and the project has not been completed.
   (K)   Appeals. A denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness is an
administrative decision as defined in Section 3-101 of the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, and it shall be subject to judicial review pursuant
to provisions of said Administrative Review Law and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and the rules adopted thereto.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.052 ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   (A)   The Preservation Commission may issue a certificate of economic
hardship upon determination that the failure to issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness has denied, or will deny, the owner of a landmark or of a
property within a preservation district all reasonable use of, or return on,
the property. Application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be made
on a form and in the manner as prescribed by the Preservation Commission. The
Preservation Commission may schedule a public hearing concerning the
application and provide notice in the same manner as prescribed in §
166.030, of this chapter and conduct the hearing in the same manner as
prescribed in §
166.031, of this chapter.
   (B)   The Preservation Commission may solicit expert testimony and the
applicant for a certificate of economic hardship shall submit all of the
following information in order to assist the Preservation Commission in its
determination on the application:
      (1)   An estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition, or removal, and an estimate of any additional cost that would be
incurred to comply with the recommendations of the Preservation Commission for
changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness;
      (2)   A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property
and their suitability for rehabilitation;
      (3)   Estimated market value of the property in its current condition;
after completion of the proposed constriction, alteration, demolition, or
removal; after any changes recommended by the Preservation Commission; and, in
the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property
for continued use;
      (4)   In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an
architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate
professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of
rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property;
      (5)   Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party
from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, of any,
between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property
was purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer;
      (6)   If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two years; itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash
flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;
      (7)   Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the
property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years;
      (8)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous two years;
      (9)   Assessed value of the property according to the two most recent
assessments;
      (10)   Real estate taxes for the previous two years;
      (11)   Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership,
joint venture, or other.
      (12)   Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the
owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property considered necessary
by the Preservation Commission to make a determination as to whether the
property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners.
   (C)   Determination of economic hardship. Within 60 days from receiving a
request for a Certificate of Economic Hardship, the Commission, upon a
determination that the denial of a certificate of appropriateness has denied,
or will deny the owner of a landmark or of a property within a preservation
district of all reasonable use of or return on the property, may undertake one
of the following actions:
      (1)   Offer the owner of the property reasonable financing, tax or other
incentives sufficient to allow a reasonable use of, or return on, the property;
or
      (2)   Offer to purchase the property at a reasonable price or institute
eminent domain proceedings pursuant to Article VII of the Illinois Code of
Civil Procedure; or
      (3)   Issue a Certificate of Appropriateness for the proposed
construction, alteration, demolition or removal. Written notice of the
determination shall be provided in the same manner as required by §
166.051(E). This time limit may be waived only by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Commission.
   (D)   Appeals. A denial of a certificate of economic hardship is an
administrative decision as defined in Section 3-101 of the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, and it shall be subject to judicial review pursuant
to provisions of said law and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the
rules adopted thereto.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.053 MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance of any exterior elements of a property or structures designated or
nominated as a landmark or located within a designated or nominated
preservation district.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.054 PUBLIC SAFETY EXCLUSION.
   None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent any
measures of construction, alteration, or demolition necessary to correct or
abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature or part
thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the
Director, Will County Building and Zoning Division, the Will County Health
Department or any Fire Protection District and where the proposed measures have
been declared necessary, by such department or departments to correct the said
condition; provided, however, that only such work as is reasonably necessary to
correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this
section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire
or other calamity, or by Act of Nature or by the public enemy, to such an
extent that, in the opinion of the aforesaid department or departments, it
cannot reasonably be repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity
with normal permit procedures and applicable laws.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
ENFORCEMENT AND EQUITABLE RELIEF
§ 166.065 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Will County Land Use Department, Division of Building and Zoning,
shall give written notification, sent by certified mail, return receipt,
postage prepaid requested, of any violation of this chapter to the owner of
record, lessor, the trustee, or other legally responsible party for such
property, stating in such notification that they have inspected the property
and have found it in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   They shall state in the notification in clear precise terms a
description or explanation of the violation.
   (C)   The property owner of record, trustee, lessor, or legally responsible
party shall have 30 days from the date he receives the notice in which to
correct such violation or to give satisfactory evidence that he or she has
taken steps that will lead to correcting such violation within a stated period
of time, which time must be agreeable to the Division of Building and Zoning as
being fair and reasonable.
   (D)   Upon petition of the Preservation Commission, the Circuit Court for
Will County may restrain and/or enjoin any construction, removal, alteration,
or demolition in violation of this Act and may order the removal in whole or
part of any exterior architectural feature existing in violation of this
chapter and may further order such reconstruction as may be necessary or
desirable to redress any alteration or demolition in said violation.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.066 EQUITABLE RELIEF.
   In addition to other remedies provided by law, the county may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, abate or correct a
violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, requiring the
restoration of property and improvements to its appearance prior to the
violation.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
§ 166.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $500 for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, or land, and any
architect, planner, surveyor, engineer, realtor, attorney, builder, contractor,
agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains
such violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Res. 92-192, passed 9-17-1992)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   CHANGE OF ROAD NAMES
      
III.   CONTRACTS
      
IV.   DEDICATIONS
      
V.   EASEMENTS
      
VI.   ELECTION DISTRICT CHANGES
      
VII.   FRANCHISES
      
VIII.   HISTORICAL REFERENCES
      
IX.   LEASES
      
X.   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
      
XI.   PLAT APPROVALS
      
XII.   PURCHASES AND ACQUISITIONS OF REAL ESTATE
      
XIII.   RAILROAD CROSSING AGREEMENTS
      
XIV.   SALE OF REAL ESTATE
      
XV.   VACATIONS
      
XVI.   VARIANCES
      
XVII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Book/Res./Ord.                   Date      Description
1964, p. 582 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236,           Approval of annexation of
p. 237)                          - -       sanitarium property to City of
                                           Joliet.
                                           Proposed annexation of
                                           approximately 156.84 acres to the
Res. 88-84                       6-16-1988 Village of Romeoville to be used
                                           for a sanitary landfill and stone
                                           and gravel quarries south of Joliet
                                           Road and south of Bluff Road.
                                          
 
TABLE II: CHANGE OF ROAD NAMES
Book and Page Date Description
Book and Page                                                                     Date Description
                                                                                       Oakland
                                                                                       Avenue in
1952, p. 450 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 352)                                          - -  Richards
                                                                                       Subdivision
                                                                                       to Doris
                                                                                       Avenue.
                                                                                       Waverly St.
1957, p. 243 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 5)                                            - -  in Lockport
                                                                                       Township to
                                                                                       Alma Drive.
                                                                                       Oldfield Road
                                                                                       (County
                                                                                       Highway 57)
                                                                                       through
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 97                                                       - -  Wheatland and
                                                                                       DuPage
                                                                                       Townships to
                                                                                       Boughton
                                                                                       Road.
                                                                                       Schmidt Road
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 475                                                      - -  to Luther
                                                                                       Drive.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 63
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Draper
                                                                                       Avenue,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south and
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       from Woodruff
                                                                                       Road, a point
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 2,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216— 220 and 259—2619- - principal
                                                                                  1964 meridian to
                                                                                       U.S. Route 6,
                                                                                       a pt. near
                                                                                       the southeast
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 11,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       39.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 42
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Theodore
                                                                                       Street
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       Larkin
                                                                                       Avenue, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 6,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261 9- - the 3rd
                                                                                  1964 principal
                                                                                       meridian to
                                                                                       U.S. Alt.
                                                                                       Route 66, a
                                                                                       pt. near the
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 4,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       60.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 42
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Larkin Avenue
                                                                                       and Meadow
                                                                                       Avenue,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south and
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       30, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 31,
                                                                                       Township 36
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - the 3rd
                                                                                  1964 principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Wheeler
                                                                                       Avenue, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 20,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       59.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 41A
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Hillcrest
                                                                                       Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       from U.S.
                                                                                       Route 30, a
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - pt. near the
                                                                                  1964 northwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 12,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Washington
                                                                                       Street, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       the northwest
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)    quarter of
(Cont’d)                                                                             Section 13,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       27.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 12A
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       52, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 18,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - principal
                                                                                  1964 meridian, to
                                                                                       pt. near the
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 18,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 34.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highways 12A
                                                                                       and 12 B
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south and
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       52, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 14,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       9 east of the
                                                                                  9- - 3rd principal
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 meridian, to
                                                                                       Larkin
                                                                                       Avenue, a pt.
                                                                                       near the
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of the
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 18,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 3 and
                                                                                       3 Extension
                                                                                       in Joliet.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 66
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       from County
                                                                                       Highway 14 at
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 13,
                                                                                       Township 37
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       9 east of the
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                  9- - meridian, to
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 the DuPage
                                                                                       County Line
                                                                                       at pt. near
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 1,
                                                                                       Township 37
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       the 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 67.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 37
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south along
                                                                                       west line of
                                                                                       Section 1,
                                                                                       Township 36
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                  9- - 11 east 3rd
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 principal
                                                                                       meridian,
                                                                                       from
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner to
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 1 is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 16.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 16
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east along
                                                                                       south line of
                                                                                       Section 1,
                                                                                       Township 36
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       11 east of
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - 3rd principal
                                                                                  1964 meridian,
                                                                                       from
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner to
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 1 is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       37.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 38A
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Marley Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 2,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                  9- - North, Range
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 11 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Wolf Road, a
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 6,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       12 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 38.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 2A
                                                                                       known as Wolf
                                                                                       Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 5,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       12 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                  9- - Front Street
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 in Mokena, a
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 8,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       12 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       2.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 2
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       from Wolf
                                                                                       Road, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 8,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                  9- - 12 east of
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 1,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       12 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 64
                                                                                       and 64
                                                                                       Extension in
                                                                                       Mokena.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 64A
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Lincolnway
                                                                                       Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       Francis Road,
                                                                                       a pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 12,
                                                                                       Township 35
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - North, Range
                                                                                  1964 11 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       30, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 24,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       11 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 63.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 28A
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Essex Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       Illinois
                                                                                       Route 113 to
                                                                                       Kankakee
                                                                                       County line,
                                                                                       from
                                                                                  9- - northwest
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 corner of
                                                                                       Section 15 to
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 34,
                                                                                       all in
                                                                                       Township 32
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       9 east of 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 28.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 8A
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       Illinois
                                                                                       Route 102 to
                                                                                       Kankakee
                                                                                       County line,
                                                                                       from pt. near
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                  9- - quarter of
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 17,
                                                                                       to southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 13,
                                                                                       all in
                                                                                       Township 32
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 8.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 6
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Manhattan-
                                                                                       Monee Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 21,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       13 east of
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - 3rd principal
                                                                                  1964 meridian, to
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       54, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 21 is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 30
                                                                                       and 30
                                                                                       Extension in
                                                                                       Monee.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 6,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 21,
                                                                                       at pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 22,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                  9- - North, Range
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 13 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Kankakee
                                                                                       County line,
                                                                                       at southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 34,
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       13 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 10.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 67
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Kankakee
                                                                                       County Line
                                                                                       Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       Illinois
                                                                                       Route 1, a
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 33,
                                                                                  9- - Township 33
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 North, Range
                                                                                       14 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Indiana state
                                                                                       line, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       fractional
                                                                                       Section 32,
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 58.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 21A,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       Alternate
                                                                                       Illinois
                                                                                       Route 1, a
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 21,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - 14 east of
                                                                                  1964 3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Indiana state
                                                                                       line, at pt.
                                                                                       near east
                                                                                       quarter
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       fractional
                                                                                       Section 20,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 21.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 21,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       from
                                                                                       Alternate
                                                                                       Illinois
                                                                                       Route 1, a
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 9,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       14 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                  9- - pt. near
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 18,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 49
                                                                                       and County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       49.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 21B,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 18,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                  9- - North, Range
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       Indiana state
                                                                                       line at pt.
                                                                                       near east
                                                                                       quarter
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       fractional
                                                                                       Section 17,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 49.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 21,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       from pt. near
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 18,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                  9- - Indiana state
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 line at pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       fractional
                                                                                       Section 17,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       15 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian,
                                                                                       then south to
                                                                                       east quarter
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       fractional
                                                                                       Section 17,
                                                                                       also a pt. on
                                                                                       Indiana St.
                                                                                       line, is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 60.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 24C,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       pt. of
                                                                                       departure of
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       54, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                  9- - southwest
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 quarter of
                                                                                       Section 19,
                                                                                       to Kankakee
                                                                                       County line
                                                                                       at southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 31,
                                                                                       all in
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       13 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 70.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 20B,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       from pt. near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 16 to
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                  9- - Section 15
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)1964 parallel to
                                                                                       Chicago,
                                                                                       Milwaukee,
                                                                                       St. Paul, and
                                                                                       Pacific R.R.,
                                                                                       then east to
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 14,
                                                                                       all in
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       12 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 45.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 20A,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 15 to
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 34,
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - then west to
                                                                                  1964 southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 33,
                                                                                       all in
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       11 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 43.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 25B,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 28 to
                                                                                       southwest
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - corner of
                                                                                  1964 Section 33,
                                                                                       all in
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       11 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 79.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 25A,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       from South
                                                                                       Avenue in
                                                                                       Village of
                                                                                       Symerton
                                                                                       south to
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 23,
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - Township 33
                                                                                  1964 North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, and
                                                                                       including the
                                                                                       extension to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 254A
                                                                                       approved 3-
                                                                                       13-1944 is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 73.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 7A
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Brown Church
                                                                                       Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       U.S.
                                                                                       Alternate
                                                                                       Route 66 to
                                                                                       U.S. Route
                                                                                       52, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 15,
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - Township 34
                                                                                  1964 North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian, to
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 17,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       11 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 17.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 7
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       South Chicago
                                                                                       Street,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                       corner to
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - southwest
                                                                                  1964 corner of
                                                                                       Section 27,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       15.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 31
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Lorenzo Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       east from
                                                                                       southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 7,
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       9 east of 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian, a
                                                                                       pt. on Grundy
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261)9- - County line,
                                                                                  1964 to U.S. Route
                                                                                       66, a pt.
                                                                                       near
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 9,
                                                                                       Township 33
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       9 east of 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 80
                                                                                       and County
                                                                                       Highway St.
                                                                                       80.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       former County
                                                                                       Highway 56A
                                                                                       known as
                                                                                       Essington
                                                                                       Road,
                                                                                       extending
                                                                                       south from
                                                                                       northwest
                                                                                  9- - corner to
1964, pp. 542—547 and 620—626 (Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, pp. 216—220 and 259—261 1964 southwest
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 12,
                                                                                       Township 35
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       9 east of 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian is
                                                                                       changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 12.
                                                                                       Beginning at
                                                                                       pt. near
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       quarter of
                                                                                       Section 36,
                                                                                       Township 32
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian,
                                                                                       which is also
                                                                                       the pt. of
                                                                                       intersection
                                                                                       of centerline
                                                                                       of County
                                                                                       Highway 85
                                                                                       and Illinois
                                                                                  3-   Route 102,
Hwy. Res. 5                                                                       21-  then
                                                                                  1979 proceeding
                                                                                       north along
                                                                                       said county
                                                                                       line to
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 24,
                                                                                       Township 32
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       10 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian,
                                                                                       which is also
                                                                                       on centerline
                                                                                       of County
                                                                                       Highway 8, a
                                                                                       distance of
                                                                                       2.52 miles,
                                                                                       is changed to
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 85.
                                                                                       Beginning at
                                                                                       pt.
                                                                                       approximately
                                                                                       1,229.06 feet
                                                                                       north of
                                                                                       southeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 12,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       13 east of
                                                                                       3rd principal
                                                                                       meridian on
                                                                                       east line of
                                                                                       Section 12,
                                                                                       which is also
                                                                                       pt. of
                                                                                       intersection
                                                                                       of center
                                                                                       lines of
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 49
                                                                                       and Western
                                                                                       Avenue, then
                                                                                  3-   north and
Hwy. Res. 6                                                                       21-  northwest
                                                                                  1979 along Western
                                                                                       Avenue
                                                                                       approximately
                                                                                       1.72 mi. to
                                                                                       pt. on Will-
                                                                                       Cook County
                                                                                       line,
                                                                                       approximately
                                                                                       781.44 feet
                                                                                       west of
                                                                                       northeast
                                                                                       corner of
                                                                                       Section 1,
                                                                                       Township 34
                                                                                       North, Range
                                                                                       13 east, 3rd
                                                                                       principal
                                                                                       meridian,
                                                                                       this addition
                                                                                       to be an
                                                                                       extension of
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 53
                                                                                       and numbered
                                                                                       the same.
                                                                                       Changing the
                                                                                  7-   name of a
Res. 88-95                                                                        21-  portion of
                                                                                  1988 Cumberland
                                                                                       Lane to
                                                                                       Norway Trail.
                                                                                       Northern
                                                                                  10-  segment of
Res. 89-278                                                                       19-  Split Rail
                                                                                  1989 Drive to Lost
                                                                                       Boy Lane.
                                                                                       Smit Drive
                                                                                       and Smit
                                                                                  5-   Court to
Res. 90-101                                                                       17-  Royal Crest
                                                                                  1990 Drive and
                                                                                       Royal Crest
                                                                                       Court,
                                                                                       respectively.
                                                                                       Raymond
                                                                                  1-   Drive, McKane
Res. 91-19                                                                        17-  Lane and Faul
                                                                                  1991 Court to
                                                                                       Flint Drive.
                                                                                  2-   Yale Street
Res. 91-38                                                                        21-  to Reverend
                                                                                  1991 James W.
                                                                                       Walton Drive.
                                                                                  3-   Changing the
Res. 92-52                                                                        19-  name of
                                                                                  1992 Bridge Street
                                                                                       to Oak Lane.
                                                                                       Assigning a
                                                                                       street name
                                                                                  5-   of Rincker
Res. 94-132                                                                       19-  Road to an
                                                                                  1994 unnamed
                                                                                       street in
                                                                                       Crete
                                                                                       Township.
                                                                                       Edinburgh
                                                                                       Court West to
                                                                                  5-   Marilynn
Res. 95-108                                                                       18-  Lane, and
                                                                                  1995 Edinburgh
                                                                                       Court East to
                                                                                       Helen Court.
                                                                                  6-   Part of
Res. 96-131                                                                       20-  County Road
                                                                                  1996 to Thornton
                                                                                       Street.
                                                                                  10-  Phillips Road
Res. 97-241                                                                       16-  renamed to
                                                                                  1997 Indian Trail
                                                                                       Road.
                                                                                       Lovell Road
                                                                                     renamed to
                                                                                       Kahler Road.
                                                                                       Allott Road
                                                                                     renamed to
                                                                                       County Road.
                                                                                       Armil Road
                                                                                     renamed to
                                                                                       Kennedy Road.
                                                                                       Kennedy and
                                                                                       Wesley Road
                                                                                     renamed to
                                                                                       Town Line
                                                                                       Road.
                                                                                       Quigley and
Res. 97-241 (Cont’d)                                                                South Arsenal
                                                                                       renamed to
                                                                                       Arsenal Road.
                                                                                       Old Chicago
                                                                                     Road renamed
                                                                                       to Chicago
                                                                                       Road.
                                                                                       Ceco Road
                                                                                     renamed to
                                                                                       Murphy Road.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       Oakwood Drive
                                                                                     renamed to
                                                                                       Oakwood
                                                                                       Court.
                                                                                       Supporting
                                                                                       Village of
                                                                                       Tinley Park
                                                                                       in adding a
                                                                                     secondary
                                                                                       street name
                                                                                       change to
                                                                                       80th Avenue
                                                                                       in Frankfort
                                                                                       Township.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 11
                                                                                       between Weber
                                                                                       Road and
                                                                                  8-   Illinois
Res. 01-338                                                                       16-  State Route
                                                                                  2001 59, known as
                                                                                       Joliet-
                                                                                       Naperville
                                                                                       Road, renamed
                                                                                       to Veterans
                                                                                       Parkway.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       Bond Street
                                                                                  10-  between
Res. 03-457                                                                       16-  Hillcrest
                                                                                  2003 Road and Park
                                                                                       Road renamed
                                                                                       to Hillcrest
                                                                                       Road.
                                                                                       Portion of
                                                                                       County
                                                                                       Highway 66
                                                                                       (111th
                                                                                       Street)
                                                                                  12-  between
Res. 03-565                                                                       18-  Illinois
                                                                                  2003 State Route
                                                                                       59 and
                                                                                       Plainfield-
                                                                                       Naperville
                                                                                       Road renamed
                                                                                       to Hassert
                                                                                       Boulevard.
                                                                                       Adding
                                                                                       honorary name
                                                                                       of Robert
                                                                                       Stanek
                                                                                       Memorial
                                                                                  12-  Drive to
Res. 03-566                                                                       18-  portion of
                                                                                  2003 County
                                                                                       Highway 84
                                                                                       (191st
                                                                                       Street)
                                                                                       between Wolf
                                                                                       Road and 80th
                                                                                       Avenue.
                                                                                       Recognizing
                                                                                       and
                                                                                  7-   reaffirming
Res. 09-207                                                                       16-  the name of
                                                                                  2009 County
                                                                                       Highway 17 as
                                                                                       Manhattan
                                                                                       Road.
                                                                                       Authorizes
                                                                                       the name
                                                                                       change of the
                                                                                       northern
                                                                                       segment of
                                                                                       Regan Road
                                                                                       located east
                                                                                       of Parker
                                                                                       Road, south
                                                                                  6-   of 187th and
Res. 15-185                                                                       18-  north of I-
                                                                                  2015 80, address
                                                                                       range 12600-
                                                                                       12799 in
                                                                                       County Board
                                                                                       District #7,
                                                                                       New Lenox
                                                                                       Township,
                                                                                       Mokena, IL to
                                                                                       Regan Trail
                                                                                       (Trl.).
                                                                                      
 
TABLE III: CONTRACTS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date Description
Ord.
1950, p. 403 - -  Contract with Western United Gas and Electric
(Sup.
Rec. Bk.         Co. in lieu of capital stock payments.
226, p. 199)
240, p. 304  - -  Contract with Governor’s State University; police services.
240, p. 345  - -  Contract with State Civil Defense Agency for community shelter planning.
241, p. 115  - -  Contract for police service to Town of Frankfort.
241, p. 164  - -  Contract with State Planning Commission.
241, p. 394  - -  Contract for police service to Crete Township.
1974, p. 592 - -  Contract for public service employment.
1975, p. 92  - -  Contract to provide planning assistance.
1975, p. 416 - -  Work-study contract with Governor’s State University.
1976, p. 492 - -  Contract with forest preserve district of the county for performance of certain
                  police services within preserve.
k.   , p. 7-
321          13-  Lockport Township contract for police service.
             1977
             4-   Contract to Azzarelli Construction Company for construction of the joint Will-
Hwy. Res. 3  23-  Kankakee County line bridge.
             1980
             5-   Contract to Joliet Construction Company for construction of vehicle maintenance
Res. 80-88   21-  facility for Sheriff’s Department.
             1980
             7-   Contract to John Grosso and Sons for construction of a joint Will-Kankakee County
Hwy. Res. 3  23-  line bridge.
             1980
             6-   Contract to Lockport Iron Works, Inc. for the construction of permanent
Res. 81-111  25-  scaffolding around two cooling towers.
             1981
             7-
Hwy. Res. 1  19-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1981
                Alpha Construction Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Preform Parking Engr., Inc.
                W.B. Persico Corporation.
             9-   Agreement with Court Homes of Frankfort Square to regulate the parking area and
Res. 81-178  24-  private roadways located within their complex.
             1981
             4-   Contract to Loitz Bros. Construction Co. for construction of a joint Will-
Hwy. Res. 2  21-  Kankakee County line bridge.
             1983
             4-   Agreement with Hofmann and Associates, Inc. to furnish engineering services and
Hwy. Res. 3  21-  inspection of construction work.
             1983
             5-
Hwy. Res. 1  19-  Contracts to the following for public highway improvements:
             1983
                Armco, Inc.
                Joliet Bridge & Construction Co.
                Joliet Sand & Gravel Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Mooney Construction Co.
                Preform Parking Engineers, Inc.
                Vulcan Materials Co.
             5-   Agreement with Jerry Capps to operate parking facility on county owned property
Res. 83-39   19-  (amended by Resolution 84-6, passed 1-19-1984).
             1983
             6-
Hwy. Res. 1  16-  Contracts awarded to the following for public highway improvements:
             1983
                H.P. Graham Construction
                Joliet Bridge and Construction
                Lenz Oil Service
                Mooney Construction Co.
                Tri-Con Corp.
             6-
Res. 83-44   16-  Contract to Ron Stonitsch Construction Co. for remodeling work.
             1983
             6-
Res. 83-45   16-  Contract to Ron Stonitsch Construction Co. for remodeling work.
             1983
             6-
Res. 83-46   16-  Contract to Ron Stonitsch Construction Co. for remodeling work.
             1983
             6-
Res. 83-46   16-  Contract to Markelz Office Products for court room furnishings.
             1983
             7-   Contracts awarded to Crown-Trugg Corp. and Delta Construction, Inc. for public
Hwy. Res. 1  21-  highway improvements.
             1983
             7-   Concurring in the award of a contract for construction of a joint Will-Kankakee
Hwy. Res. 3  21-  County line Bridge to Tobey’s Construction and Cartage, Inc.
             1983
             7-   Concurring in the award of contract for highway improvement to the Swenson
Hwy. Res. 4  21-  Company - P.T. Ferro Construction Company.
             1983
             8-
Hwy. Res. 1  18-  Contract to S.G. Hayes & Company for highway improvements.
             1983
             8-   Agreement between Collins and Rice and the county for professional engineering
Hwy. Res. 5  18-  services.
             1983
             8-
Res. 83-76   18-  Contract to Custom Business Systems for color coded file folders.
             1983
             8-
Res. 83-77   18-  Contract to Pro/File Systems, Inc. for a power file.
             1983
             10-
Res. 83-127  20-  Contract to Metropolitan Microforms, Ltd. for microfilm reader/printer.
             1983
             10-
Res. 83-134  20-  Contracts for renovation of county office building to the following:
             1983
                A.E. Berg and Associates
                Robert C. Brown Plumbing and Heating
                Kankakee Piping Systems, Inc.
                David E. McDaniel Co.
                Meade Electric Co. Inc.
                Stephen Construction Services, Inc.
             11-
Res. 83-137  17-  Contract to A-1 Disposal Corp. for refuse services.
             1983
             11-  Contract to Hera’s Office Machines for maintenance of all county-owned
Res. 83-138  17-  typewriters.
             1983
             11-
Res. 83-139  17-  Contract to Metrocom Service for maintenance of communications equipment.
             1983
             11-
Res. 83-140  17-  Contract to Telecom, Inc. for maintenance of closed circuit TV monitors.
             1983
             11-  Approving an agreement with the American Federation of State, County, and
Res. 83-142A 17-  Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local Union 1028.
             1983
             11-  Approving an agreement with the American Federation of State, County, and
Res. 83-142B 17-  Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local Union 2961.
             1983
             1-
Hwy. Res. 1  19-  Contract to the following for public highway improvements:
             1984
                Alpha Construction Co.
                Crown-Trugg Corp.
                Decker Supply Co., Inc.
                Delta Construction
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                H.P. Graham Construction Co.
                Joliet Sand and Gravel Co.
                Manteno Limestone Company
                Meyer Material
                Morton Salt
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Warning Lites of Illinois
                W.B. Persico Corp.
             1-   Agreement between the county and Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for
Hwy. Res. 3  19-  construction engineering services.
             1984
             1-   Agreement between the county and Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for
Hwy. Res. 4  19-  construction engineering services.
             1984
             2-   Agreement between the county and Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for
Hwy. Res. 2  16-  preliminary engineering services.
             1984
             2-   Agreement between the county and Collins and Rice, Inc. for preliminary
Hwy. Res. 3  16-  engineering services.
             1984
             2-   Contract to Will County Janitorial Service for cleaning of county building and
Res. 84-10   16-  annex building.
             1984
             2-   Contract with Scott/Wetzel to administer the county employees’ health insurance
Res. 84-13   16-  benefits program.
             1984
             3-
Hwy. Res. 1  15-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1984
                Delta Construction, Inc.
                Joliet Bridge and Construction Co.
                Tobey’s Construction and Cartage Co.
                Tri-Con Corporation.
             4-
Hwy. Res. 1  19-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1984
                Crown-Trygg Corporation Joliet Bridge and Construction Co.
             4-
Hwy. Res. 6  19-  Agreement between the state and the county for highway improvements.
             1984
             4-   Agreement between the county and Joliet Clothing Mart for uniforms for the
Res. 84-26   19-  Sheriff’s Department.
             1984
             4-
Res. 84-28   19-  Contract to ARC Window Cleaning for cleaning windows at the courthouse.
             1984
             4-   Allowing Lincoln National Pension Insurance Company to provide an alternate
Res. 84-38   19-  deferred compensation plan to county employees.
             1984
             5-
Hwy. Res. 1  17-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1984
                Armco, Inc.
                Flynn Drainage Products Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Meyer Material
                Vulcan Materials Co.
             5-   Contract to Talaga Sheet Metal Co. for the purchase and installation of smoke
Res. 84-48   17-  dampers at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1984
             5-   Substitution of Neumann’s Landscaping in lieu of Whitley Landscaping for
Res. 84-49   17-  landscaping at the county office building.
             1984
Res. 84-56   6-4- Change order contract with Berg and Associates.
             1984
Res. 84-59   6-4- Purchase of service agreement between the county and Urban Programming
             1984 Corporation of Illinois.
             6-
Hwy. Res. 1  21-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1984
                Azzarelli Construction Co.
                K-Five Construction Corp.
                Leininger Mid-States Paving
                Lenz Oil Service, Inc.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Tri-Con Corp.
                W.B. Persico Corp.
             6-   Authorizing Lincoln National Life Insurance Company to provide permanent life
Res. 84-67   21-  insurance at the option of county employees.
             1984
             6-   Renegotiation of insurance benefits with the American Federation of State,
Res. 86-68   21-  County, and Municipal Employees Union Local #1028 and #2961.
             1984
             6-   Contract with the Hartford Insurance Company to provide dental coverage for
Res. 84-69   21-  county employees.
             1984
             6-   Contract with Sun Life Insurance for group term life insurance coverage for
Res. 84-70   21-  county employees.
             1984
             6-   Contract with Sun Life Insurance for weekly disability income insurance coverage
Res. 84-71   21-  for county employees.
             1984
             6-   Substitution of Jungels Painting and Decoration, Ltd. for Atlas Drywall, Inc. for
Res. 84-75   21-  painting at the county office building.
             1984
             7-   Contract with Lockwood Furnace Company for the purchase and installation of an
Res. 84-82   19-  air conditioner for the Sheriff’s Department Auxiliary Building.
             1984
             7-   Contract with Pike Co.-Property Management to clear and haul away debris on
84-84        19-  specified county- owned scavenger lots.
             1984
             7-   Contract with AT&T Information Systems to order and install the equipment
84-85        19-  necessary for the new county office building.
             1984
             7-   Change order contract substituting Hajack Equipment Co. in lieu of McKee Overhead
84-87        19-  Door Co., Skes Construction Co. in lieu of Lockwood Furnace Co., and Persico
             1984 Corp. in lieu of Delta Construction.
             7-   Agreement with Sugar Creek Apartments for the county to regulate the parking of
Res. 84-91   19-  automobiles, motorcycles, and traffic at the parking area located within the
             1984 apartment complex.
             8-
Hwy. Res. 1  16-  Contract awarded to W.B. Persico Corp. for highway improvements.
             1984
             8-   Contract awarded to TTri-Con Corporation for construction of joint Will-Kankakee
Hwy. Res. 13 16-  County line bridge.
             1984
             8-
Res. 84-97   16-  Contract with Custom Business Systems, Inc. for file folders.
             1984
             8-   Customer work agreement with Commonwealth Edison Co. for removal of electrical
Res. 84-107  16-  poles from the parking lot of the new county office building.
             1984
             9-   Contract with Meade Electric Co. to provide conduit and cable for computer
Res. 84-121  20-  terminals at new County Office Building.
             1984
             10-  Change order contract with Stephen Construction Services, Inc. to remove
Res. 84-132  18-  additional asbestos materials at the County Office Building.
             1984
             10-  Contract with Ray O’Herron Co., Inc. for trade-in of revolvers for Sheriff’s
Res. 84-135  18-  Department.
             1984
             11-
Res. 84-144  15-  Contract with Bruce Dusek for maintenance of all county-owned typewriters.
             1984
             11-  Contract with Telecom, Inc. for maintenance of closed circuit TV monitors in the
Res. 84-145  15-  jail.
             1984
             11-
Res. 84-146  15-  Contract with A-1 Disposal Corp. for refuse service.
             1984
             11-  Contract with Metrocom Service for maintenance of communications equipment for
Res. 84-147  15-  the Sheriff’s Department.
             1984
             11-  Contract with Kraus Electronic Systems for installation of sound system at County
Res. 84-148  15-  Office Building.
             1984
             12-
Hwy. Res. 1  20-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1984
                Avery Gravel Company
                Crown-Trygg Corporation
                Decker Supply Company
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                H.P. Graham Construction Co.
                S.G. Hayes & Company
                Joliet Sand and Gravel Co.
                K-Five Construction Corp.
                Lincoln Paving Company
                Manteno Limestone Company
                Morton Salt
                W.B. Persico Corporation
Hwy. Res. 1  12-
(Cont’d)   20-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1984
                Unistrut Illinois
                Vulcan Materials Company
                Waring Lites of Illinois.
             12-  Agreement with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for construction engineering
Hwy. Res. 4  20-  services.
             1984
             12-  Agreement with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for preliminary engineering
Hwy. Res. 5  20-  services.
             1984
             12-
Res. 84-164  20-  Contract with Jerry Burke Ford for police vehicles.
             1984
             1-
Res. 85-3    17-  Change order contract with Berg and Associates.
             1985
             1-
Res. 85-4    17-  Contract with Jerry Burke Ford, Inc. for police vehicles.
             1985
             2-
Hwy. Res. 4  21-  Contract with W.B. Persico for highway improvements.
             1985
             2-   Contract with White Glove Janitorial and Building Maintenance for cleaning of
Res. 85-6    21-  County Building and Annex Building.
             1985
             2-   Contract with Bud Foster for miscellaneous demolition in basement of County
Res. 85-7    21-  Office Building.
             1985
             2-
Res. 85-8    21-  Service agreement with Illinois Bell Telephone.
             1985
             2-   Contract with Nelson-Niederguell Movers, Inc. for relocation of offices to County
Res. 85-12   21-  Office Building.
             1985
             3-
Hwy. Res. 2  21-  Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc. for preliminary engineering services.
             1985
             3-   Agreement with the Chicago District, United States Army Corp. of Engineers, for a
Res. 85-18   21-  study to reduce and stop flooding in the county.
             1985
             3-
Res. 85-19   21-  Contract with T.D.S. Real-Estate Appraisal Company for appraisal services.
             1985
             3-
Res. 85-21   21-  Agreement with Illinois Bell Telephone for direct inward dialing service.
             1985
             3-
Res. 85-22   21-  Contract with Bill Jacobs Chevrolet for purchase of police vehicles.
             1985
             3-
Res. 85-23   21-  Contract with Chicago Power Files for move of power files.
             1985
             3-   Contract with McDonald’s Building Maintenance and Janitorial Service, Inc. for
Res. 85-26   21-  cleaning of County Office Building.
             1985
             3-
Res. 85-30   21-  Contract with Berg and Associates to establish voter material storage space.
             1985
             4-
Res. 85-40   18-  Contract with Joliet Window Cleaning for cleaning windows at County Courthouse.
             1985
             5-
Hwy. Res. 1  16-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1985
                Tri-Con Corp.
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Leininger Mid-States.
             5-   Contract with Bill Jacobs Chevrolet for the purchase of an automobile for the
Res. 85-55   16-  coroner’s office.
             1985
             6-
Hwy. Res. 1  20-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1985
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                W.B. Persico Corp.
                S.G. Hayes and Co.
                Tri-Con Corp.
                Crown Trygg Corp.
                Preform Parking Engineer Inc.
             6-   Contract with L.J. Crowther Co. and DeYoung Architects, Inc. for roofing repair
Res. 85-69   20-  work at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1985
             6-   Contract with Global Van Lines for relocation of court rooms, judges’ chambers
Res. 85-70   20-  and the Circuit Clerk’s Office from the Emco Plaza Building.
             1985
             7-
Hwy. Res. 1  18-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1985
                Crown Trygg Corp.
                Blacktop Paving of Joliet
                H.P. Graham Construction Co. Inc.
                Vulcan Materials
                Flynn Drainage Products
                Monteno Limestone Co.
                Lee Metal Products
                The Swenson Company.
             7-
Res. 85-82   18-  Contract with Custom Business Systems, Inc. for the purchase of file folders.
             1985
             7-   Contract with Village Ford Sales, Inc. for the purchase of a van for the Animal
Res. 85-84   18-  Control Department.
             1985
             7-
Res. 85-86   18-  Contract with AT&T to provide long distance service.
             1985
             7-
Res. 85-90   18-  Contract with Gardner and Gardner for remodeling of the former County Board room.
             1985
Hwy. Res.    8-
85-100       15-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1985
                Blacktop Paving of Joliet
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Armco Co.
                Boughton Trucking and Materials, Inc.
             8-   Contract with Dictaphone for the purchase of a 30-channel recorder and reproducer
Res. 85-104  15-  for the Sheriff’s Department.
             1985
             8-   Contract with Wortmann Excavating for demolition of buildings, structures and
Res. 85-105  15-  site clearance.
             1985
             8-   Contract with Thomas Dodge for the purchase of 13 vehicles for the Sheriff’s
Res. 85-106  15-  Department (Amended by Resolution 85-141).
             1985
             9-   Contract with Motorola, Inc. for the purchase of radio equipment for the
Res. 85-83   19-  Emergency Services and Disaster Agency.
             1985
             9-   Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc. for engineering services in connection with
Res. 85-114  19-  the biennial inspection of local bridges.
             1985
             9-   Contract with the New Lenox Gas and Oil Co., Inc. for the purchase of gasoline
Res. 85-124  19-  for the Sheriff’s Department.
             1985
             9-
Res. 85-125  19-  Contract with Pasch and Sons Construction Co. for temporary courtroom remodeling.
             1985
             10-  Contract with Bill Secton of Honig Realty, Inc. for the auction sale of county
Res. 85-136  17-  scavenger property.
             1985
Hwy. Res.    10-
85-138       17-  Contract with Avery Gravel Co. for highway improvements.
             1985
             10-
Res. 85-141  17-  Amending Resolution 85-106 to replace a 1984 Impala with a 1983 Dodge.
             1985
             10-
Res. 85-143  17-  Contract with McGrath Office Equipment for the purchase of copy machines.
             1985
             11-  Contract with Video Master, Inc. for the maintenance of the closed circuit
Res. 85-159  21-  television, intercom and music system in the county jail.
             1985
             11-  Contract with Metrocom Service for maintenance of Sheriff’s Department
Res. 85-160  21-  communication equipment.
             1985
             11-  Contract with Telecom, Inc. for maintenance of Highway Department Communication
Res. 85-161  21-  equipment.
             1985
             11-  Contract with Carrier Building Service for maintenance of air conditioning
Res. 85-162  21-  equipment in the Courthouse.
             1985
             11-
Res. 85-163  21-  Contract with Otis Elevator Co. for elevator maintenance.
             1985
             11-  Contract with ChemLawn Services Corp. for yard maintenance of the County Office
Res. 85-164  21-  Building.
             1985
             11-
Res. 85-165  21-  Contract with Spelich Snow Removal for snow removal.
             1985
             11-
Res. 85-166  21-  Contract with A-1 Disposal Corp. for refuse service.
             1985
             11-  Contract with White Glove Janitorial and Building Maintenance for janitorial and
Res. 85-167  21-  cleaning service plus supplies at the County Courthouse and Annex.
             1985
             11-  Contract with United Cleaning Systems for janitorial and cleaning services plus
Res. 85-168  21-  supplies for the County Office Building.
             1985
             11-  Contract with New Lenox Gas and Oil Co., Inc. for the purchase of gasoline for
Res. 85-169  21-  the Sheriff’s Department.
             1985
             11-  Contract with Hera’s Office Machines for the maintenance of all county-owned
Res. 85-170  21-  typewriters.
             1985
Hwy. Res.    1-
86-4         16-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1986
                W.B. Persico
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                H.P. Graham Construction Co.
                Crown-Trygg Corp.
                S.G. Hayes and Co.
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Avery Gravel Co.
                Joliet Sand and Gravel
                Prairie Material Sales
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Domtar Industries, Inc.
                Warning Lites of Illinois
                Unistrat Illinois.
Hwy. Res.    2-
86-18        20-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1986
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
Hwy. Res.    2-   Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc. for preliminary engineering services in
86-22        20-  connection with a highway improvement in the Channahon Road District.
             1986
Hwy. Res.    2-   Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc. for preliminary engineering services in
86-23        20-  connection with highway improvements in the Wilton Road and Will Road Districts.
             1986
Hwy. Res.    2-   Agreement with Casler, Houser and Hutchinson, Inc. for preliminary engineering
86-24        20-  services in connection with bridge construction in New Lenox and Frankfort
             1986 Townships.
Hwy. Res.    2-   Agreement with Casler, Houser and Hutchinson, Inc. for engineering services in
86-25        20-  connection with a proposed storm sewer along Caton Farm Road.
             1986
             2-
Res. 86-27   20-  Contract with New Lenox Gas and Oil Co. for the purchase of gasoline.
             1986
Hwy. Res.    3-
86-39        20-  Contracts awarded to Manteno Limestone Co. for highway improvements.
             1986
Hwy. Res.    3-   Concurring in award of contract to Loitz Brothers Construction Co., Inc. for
86-48        20-  construction of a joint Will-Kankakee County Line bridge.
             1986
Hwy. Res.    4-
86-52        17-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1986
                Manteno Limestone
                Havana Metal Culvert
                Vulcan Material
                Flynn Drainage Products
                Harry W. Kuhn, Inc.
                W.B. Persico Corp.
                Crown-Trygg Corp.
                Decker Supply Co., Inc.
             4-   Contract with IBM for purchase of two personal computers for the Sheriff’s
Res. 86-54   17-  Department.
             1986
             4-   Contract with Inacomp Computer Center for the purchase of a personal computer for
Res. 86-55   17-  the Community and Economic Development Department.
             1986
Hwy. Res.    6-
86-81        19-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1986
H. P. Graham Construction Co.
                Blacktop Paving of Joliet
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                Tri-Con Corporation
                Swenson Company
                Midwest Fence Corporation
                John D. Simpson Construction Co.
                Rodawold Enterprises.
             6-
Res. 86-85   19-  Contract with New Lenox Gas and Oil Co. for the purchase of gasoline.
             1986
             7-
86-92        17-  Contract with TTri-Con Corp. for public highway improvements.
             1986
             8-
86-98        21-  Contract with TTri-Con Corp. for public highway improvements.
             1986
             8-
Res. 86-107  21-  Contract with Illinois Bell Telephone for pay telephone service.
             1986
             8-
Res. 86-108  21-  Contract with Custom Business Systems, Inc. for special court folders.
             1986
             10-
Res. 86-132  16-  Contract with Microimage Technology for a Minolta R/P 505 Reader/Printer.
             1986
             11-  Contract with Metrcom, Inc. for maintenance of communications equipment for the
Res. 86-146  20-  Sheriff’s Department.
             1986
             11-
Res. 86-147  20-  Contract with New Lenox Gas and Oil Co. for the purchase of gasoline.
             1986
             11-  Contract with Hera Office Machines for the maintenance of all county-owned
Res. 86-148  20-  typewriters.
             1986
             11-  Contract with Video Master, Inc. for the maintenance of the closed circuit
Res. 86-149  20-  television, intercom and music systems in the county jail.
             1986
             11-
Res. 86-159  25-  Contract with Thomas Dodge for the purchase of police vehicles.
             1986
             12-
Res. 86-161  18-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1986
                Barrett Paving Materials, Inc.
                K-Five Construction Corp.
                W. B. Persico Corp.
                S. G. Hayes & Co.
                Crown-Trygg Corp.
                H. P. Graham Construction Co.
                Du-Kane Asphalt Co.
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Joliet Sand & Gravel Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Morton Salt Division of Morton Thiokol, Inc.
                Tapsco, Division of Leahy Co.
                Decker Supply Company, Inc.
             1-   Contract with United Cleaning Systems, Inc. for janitorial services and supplies
Res. 86-150  15-  for the county annex building.
             1987
             1-
Res. 87-3    15-  Contract with J-M Printers for the purchase of office supplies.
             1987
             2-   Contracts with Manteno Limestone Co. and Vulcan Materials Co. for public highway
Res. 87-9    19-  improvements.
             1987
             2-   Agreement with Willett, Hofman and Associates, Inc. for preliminary professional
Agree. 87-11 19-  engineering services.
             1987
             2-   Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc. for preliminary professional engineering
Agree. 87-12 19-  services.
             1987
             2-   Contract with Ed James Chevrolet, Inc. for the purchase of a four-wheel drive
Res. 87-16   19-  vehicle for the ESDA.
             1987
             2-   Contract with Wortmann Excavating for demolition of building structure and site
Res. 87-18   19-  clearance.
             1987
             3-
Res. 87-26   19-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1987
                Manteno Limestone Co., Inc.
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                Warning Lites of Illinois
                Tri-Con Corp.
             5-
Res. 87-52   21-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1987
                Crown-Trygg Corporation
                K-Five Construction Corp.
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                W.B. Persico Corporation.
Hwy. Res.    6-
87-61        18-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1987
                Preform Traffic Control System
                Crown-Trygg Corporation
                Leininger-Mid States
                Blacktop Paving of Joliet, Inc.
                H. P. Graham Cons.
                S.G. Hayes and Co.
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Flynn Drainage Prod.
                Barcon Corporation
                Hulett Corp.
             6-   Contract to authorize the remodeling of clerical space in the laboratory of the
87-67        18-  County Health Department.
             1987
Hwy. Res.    7-
87-76        16-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1987
                K-Five Construction Corp.
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
                Crown-Trygg Corporation
                Tri Con Corp.
Hwy. Res.    7-
87-77        16-  Preliminary engineering services agreement with Casler, House and Hutchison, Inc.
             1987
             8-
Res. 87-91   20-  Contract with Knight Security Alarms, Inc. to furnish alarm monitoring system.
             1987
             8-   Agreement for preliminary engineering services with Willett, Hofmann and
Res. 87-102  20-  Associates, Inc.
             1987
Hwy. Res.    8-
87-103       20-  Proposal for negotiation services with Allen Consultant Services.
             1987
Hwy. Res.    9-
87-116       17-  Preliminary engineering services agreement for motor fuel tax funds.
             1987
             10-
Res. 87-139  15-  Awarding contract for purchase of gasoline.
             1997
             10-  Awarding contract for purchase of special court folders for Circuit Clerk’s
Res. 87-140  15-  office.
             1997
             10-
Res. 87-141  15-  Purchase of natural gas from Am-Gas, Inc.
             1997
             10-
Res. 87-142  15-  Amending county purchasing ordinance.
             1997
             11-
Res. 87-167  19-  Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc. for engineering services.
             1987
             11-  Awarding a contract to Hera’s Office Machines for maintenance of county-owned
Res. 87-170  19-  typewriters.
             1987
             11-  Awarding a contract to Metrocom, Inc. for the maintenance of communications
Res. 87-173  19-  equipment for the County Sheriff’s Department.
             1987
             12-
Res. 87-180  17-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1987
                S.G. Hayes and Co.
                Crown-Trygg Corporation
                K-Five Construction Corp.
                H.P. Graham Construction Co.
                Joliet Sand and Gravel Co.
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Avery Gravel Co, Inc.
                Mateno Limestone Co, Inc.
                Morton Salt Division of Morton Thiokol, Inc.
                Unistrut of Illinois
                Warning Lites of Illinois, Inc.
             12-  Adopting a collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME Local
Res. 87-185  17-  1028, AFL-CIO.
             1987
             1-   Awarding contract for Phase I of the solid waste management plan to Envirodyne
Res. 88-11   21-  Engineers, Inc.
             1988
             2-
Res. 88-16   18-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1988
                Manteno Limestone Co.
                Vulcan Materials Co.
             2-
Res. 88-18   18-  Agreement for preliminary engineering services with Collins and Rice, Inc.
             1988
             2-   Agreement for preliminary engineering services with Willett, Hofmann and
Res. 88-19   18-  Associates, Inc.
             1988
             2-   Awarding contract for purchase of van for animal control to Dralle Chevrolet and
Res. 88-23   18-  Buick.
             1988
             2-   Awarding contract for purchase of vehicles for Sheriff’s Department to Thomas
Res. 88-24   18-  Dodge.
             1988
             3-
Res. 88-29   17-  Confirming award of contract for highway improvements to:
             1988
                The Swenson Company
                Preform Traffic Control System
                Tri Con Corporation.
             3-   Award of space utilization study contract to Stromsland and DeYoung Architects,
Res. 88-33   17-  Inc.
             1988
             4-
Res. 88-43   21-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to:
             1988
                Hulett Corporation
                Leininger-Mid-States Paving
                P.T. Ferro Construction
                J.J. Newell Conc. Constr. Inc.
                Alpha Construction Co.
                K-Five Construction Corp.
             4-
Res. 88-45   21-  Authorizing entry into an architectural contract for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1988
             5-   Entering into a contract with Teska Associates, Inc. for the purchase of service
Res. 88-57   19-  of the tasks necessary to complete a land use plan for the county.
             1988
             6-
Res. 88-76   16-  Confirming award of a contract to:
             1988
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Blacktop Paving of Joliet, Inc.
                H.P. Graham Const. Co., Inc.
                Gallagher Asphalt Co.
             7-   Retaining Amundsen and Associates, Inc. to determine the extent of interest in
Res. 88-88   21-  the proposed multi-community water supply system.
             1988
             7-
Res. 88-88   21-  Confirming award of contract to the following:
             1988
                Gallagher Asphalt Co.
                K-Five Constr. Corp.
                Crown-Trygg Corp.
                Steve Spiess Constr., Inc.
                Harry W. Kuhn, Inc.
             7-   Awarding contract for architectural services to Stromsland and DeYoung,
Res. 88-99   21-  Architects, Inc.
             1988
             7-   Contract with Telecom, Inc. for maintenance of communications equipment for the
Res. 88-100  21-  County Sheriff’s Department.
             1988
             7-   Implementing the collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME
Res. 88-104  21-  Local 1028, AFL-CIO.
             1988
             9-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 88-121  15-  improvement.
             1988
             9-   Contracting with Corsetti and Russ, Ltd. for architectural and engineering
Res. 88-131  15-  services for the improvements to the Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1988
             10-  Awarding contract for purchase of special court folders for Circuit Clerk’s
Res. 88-139  20-  office to Bradford Systems Corporation.
             1988
             11-
Res. 88-158  17-  Awarding contract for maintenance of communications equipment to Telecom, Inc.
             1988
             11-  Awarding contract for refuse services for the county annex building to Banner/
Res. 88-159  17-  Western Disposal.
             1988
             11-  Renewing contract with Video Mater, Inc. for maintenance of closed circuit
Res. 88-161  17-  television, intercom and music system in the county jail.
             1988
             11-  Awarding contract for maintenance of county owned typewriters to Add-O-Type
Res. 88-162  17-  Office Machines.
             1988
             11-
Res. 88-163  17-  Awarding contract for purchase of gasoline to Gas City, Ltd.
             1988
             12-  Awarding contract for purchase of vehicles for the Sheriff’s Department to Thomas
Res. 88-177  15-  Dodge.
             1988
             12-
Res. 88-185  15-  Awarding contract for highway improvements to:
             1988
                Domtar Ind Inc.
                Decker Supply Co. Inc.
                Unistrut Illinois
                Vulcan Aluminum
                Warning Lites of IL, Inc.
                H.P. Graham Contr. Co.
                Crown-Trygg Corporation
                Vulcan Materials Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co., Inc.
                Joliet Sand and Gravel Co.
                K-Five Const. Corp.
                S.G. Hayes ad Co.
                Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
             12-
Res. 88-191  15-  Awarding contract for printing of tax bills to Reliance Business Forms.
             1988
             1-
Res. 89-3    19-  Awarding contract for annual audit to Peat, Marwick, Main and Company.
             1989
             1-   Awarding contract for purchase of vans for the Animal Control Department to Bill
Res. 89-4    19-  Jacobs Chevrolet.
             1989
             1-   Awarding contract for dental services for Sunny Hill Nursing Home to Anthony
Res. 89-14   19-  Lombardi, D.D.S.
             1989
             1-   Awarding contract for physical therapy services for Sunny Hill Nursing Home to
Res. 89-15   19-  Restorative Health Management, Inc.
             1989
             3-
Res. 89-30   16-  Contract with Mankoff Equipment, Inc., for purchase of gas pump.
             1989
             3-   Contract with Stromsland and DeYoung, Architects, for a space study and schematic
Res. 89-32   16-  site design of the Health Complex.
             1989
             3-
Res. 89-34   16-  Contract with AT&T for purchase of telecommunications equipment.
             1989
             3-
Res. 89-36   16-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1989
                Joliet Sand & Gravel Co.
                Manteno Limestone Co. Inc.
             3-   Agreement with Frankfort Estates Town Homes Condominium Association to regulate
Res. 89-38   16-  the traffic on a private road located within the limits of the county.
             1989
             3-   Contract for professional services of Dr. Simon Migale at Sunny Hill Nursing
Res. 89-45   16-  Home.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-53   20-  Contract with E.L. Marketing for purchase of I.B.M. 2501 Card Reader.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-54   20-  Contract for purchase of 17 facsimile terminals.
             1989
             4-   Contract with Glazebrook Fire Equipment, Inc., for purchase of two self-contained
Res. 89-56   20-  breathing apparatus.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-58   20-  Communications agreement with the Village of Manhattan.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-59   20-  Communications agreement with the Village of Rockdale.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-60   20-  Communications agreement with the Village of Shorewood.
             1989
             4-   Authorizing the County Executive to enter into agreements for the volume
Res. 89-61   20-  reduction/ recycling grant program.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-62   20-  Amendment to preliminary Engineering Services agreement.
             1989
             4-   Contract with Budher, Willis & Ratuff, Land Acquisitions, Inc., for right-of-way
Res. 89-63   20-  negotiation services.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-64   20-  Agreement with Collins and Rice, Inc., for bridge design engineering services.
             1989
             4-
Res. 89-65   20-  Contracts awarded to the following for highway improvements:
             1989
                “D” Construction, Inc.
                P.T. Ferro Construction, Inc.
             4-   Agreement with State Department of Transportation for improvement of State Route
Res. 89-66   20-  53.
             1989
             4-   Agreement with Willett, Hofmann & Associates, Inc. for bridge design engineering
Res. 89-68   20-  services.
             1989
             4-   Contract with Goldberg Medical Services, Inc., for the medical and dental
Res. 89-72   20-  consulting services for the new county jail.
             1989
             6-
Res. 89-100  15-  Contract to purchase four-wheel drive vehicle for Waste Services Division.
             1989
             6-
Res. 89-103  15-  Award of various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1989
             6-
Res. 89-107  15-  Execution of certain contracts for solid waste planning program.
             1989
             7-   Escrow agreement between county and Bradlink Ventures as to operation and
Res. 89-167  20-  maintenance of floodway conveyance on certain property.
             1989
             7-
Res. 89-168  20-  Contract with McGrath Office Equipment for purchase of office furniture.
             1989
             7-
Res. 89-169  20-  Contract with Sidwell Corporation for updating county maps.
             1989
             7-
Res. 89-177  20-  Award of contracts for public highway improvements.
             1989
             7-   Contract for highway improvement of approximately five miles on County Highway
Res. 89-178  20-  25.
             1989
             7-   Contract for highway improvement of approximately three miles on County Highway
Res. 89-179  20-  24.
             1989
             7-
Res. 89-180  20-  (Same description as for Resolution 89-179.)
             1989
             7-   Agreement with Randolph and Associates, Inc. for laboratory testing of water
Res. 89-181  20-  samples.
             1989
             7-   Contracts with Edmonds Enterprises, Inc. and Public Building Commission for
Res. 89-182  20-  county facilities recycling program.
             1989
             8-   Award of contracts for highway improvements to Monee Parking Lot and to County
Res. 89-201  17-  Highway 10 (Will-Center Road).
             1989
             8-   Contract with Silver Cross Hospital for laboratory services for Sunny Hill
Res. 89-209  17-  Nursing Home.
             1989
             8-
Res. 89-210  17-  Supplemental agreement with AFSCME Local 2961.
             1989
             8-   Contract for improvements at Sunny Hill Nursing Home, awarded to Cabay
Res. 89-217  17-  Construction.
             1989
             9-   Contract for inmate telephone services for county jail with Illinois Bell
Res. 89-196  21-  Telephone Company.
             1989
             9-   Contract for purchase of 20-channel playback reproducing unit with Magnasync
Res. 89-222  21-  Corp.
             1989
             9-   Contract for purchase of dictaphone system for county jail with Dictaphone of
Res. 89-223  21-  Bloomingdale.
             1989
             9-   Contract to purchase in-house paging system for county jail with Motorola of
Res. 89-224  21-  Schaumburg.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-225  21-  Contract to purchase mattresses for county jail with Robinson Textiles.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-226  21-  Contract to purchase tote bins for county jail with Edward Don and Co.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-227  21-  Contract to purchase booking equipment for county jail with Ray O’Herron Co.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-228  21-  Contract to purchase bus for county jail with Midwest Transit Equipment.
             1989
             9-   Contract to purchase clothing storage bags for county jail with Pacific Concepts,
Res. 89-229  21-  Inc.
             1989
             9-   Contract to purchase fork lift and pallet jack for county jail with Clarklift
Res. 89-230  21-  West, Inc.
             1989
             9-   Contract to purchase food tray inserts for county jail with Component Design and
Res. 89-231  21-  Supply.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-240  21-  Contract to purchase office furniture for county jail with Bensinger’s.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-241  21-  Amendment of Resolution 89-61 (volume reduction/ recycling grants).
             1989
             9-   Contract with Patrick Engineering for review of landfill site application by CDT
Res. 89-242  21-  Landfill Corp. to City of Joliet.
             1989
             9-   Award of public highway improvement contracts to Palumbo Bros., for section of
Res. 89-244  21-  County Highway 25 (Wilmington-Peotone Road).
             1989
             9-   Agreement for design engineering services for County Highway 37, 143rd Street
Res. 89-247  21-  with Bucher, Willis and Ratliff.
             1989
             9-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of contracts for administration of county
Res. 89-256  21-  community development block grant program.
             1989
             10-
Res. 89-267  19-  Contract for refuse service to Spee-Dee Disposal Service Inc.
             1989
             10-  Contract to purchase breathing apparatus for county jail with Great Lakes of
Res. 89-268  19-  Barrington.
             1989
             10-
Res. 89-271  19-  Contract for purchase of electric paper cutter with Markelz Office Products.
             1989
             10-  Elevator maintenance contract for County Office Building with Westinghouse
Res. 89-272  19-  Elevator.
             1989
             10-
Res. 89-274  19-  Contract to purchase inmate clothing for county jail with Robinson Textiles.
             1989
             11-  Contract for purchase of gasoline for County Sheriff and Highway Departments with
Res. 89-266  16-  Gas City, Ltd.
             1989
             11-
Res. 89-294  16-  Renewing typewriter maintenance contract with Add-O-Type Office Machines.
             1989
             11-
Res. 89-296  16-  Contract for purchase of folders for Circuit Clerk’s Office with Alpha File, Inc.
             1989
             11-  Amendment of Resolution 89-242 (contract with Patrick Engineering to review
Res. 89-305  16-  landfill site).
             1989
             12-  Contract for maintenance of communications equipment for County Sheriff’s
Res. 89-311  21-  Department with Motorola Communications.
             1989
             12-
Res. 89-318  21-  Contract to purchase a personal computer for County Board with IBM Corp.
             1989
             12-
Res. 89-319  21-  Contract for annual audit with Peat, Marwick, Main and Company.
             1989
             12-
Res. 89-335  21-  Physician consultant agreement for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Gary Trager, M.D.
             1989
             12-  Medical records consultant agreement for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Silver
Res. 89-336  21-  Cross Hospital.
             1989
             12-  Physical therapy agreement for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Restorative Health
Res. 89-337  21-  Management, Inc.
             1989
             12-  Speech therapy agreement for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Restorative Health
Res. 89-338  21-  Management, Inc.
             1989
             12-  Occupational therapy agreement for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Restorative
Res. 89-339  21-  Health Management, Inc.
             1989
             12-  Physical therapy agreement for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Restorative Health
Res. 89-340  21-  Management, Inc.
             1989
             1-
Res. 90-4    18-  Contract for printing of tax bills with Reliance Business Forms, Inc.
             1990
             1-   Amendment to preliminary engineering services agreement to improve County Highway
Res. 90-6    18-  14 (Plainville-Naperville Road), entered into with Willett, Hofmann and
             1990 Associates on 5-18-1989.
             1-   Agreement for preliminary engineering services between the county and Willett,
Res. 90-7    18-  Hofmann and Associates, for Renwick Road Bridge.
             1990
             2-   Contract for purchase of vehicles for County Sheriff’s Department, from Tirapelli
Res. 90-19   15-  Ford.
             1990
             2-
Res. 90-24   15-  Contract to purchase rotary file for County Clerk’s office with Chicago Power.
             1990
             2-
Res. 90-26   15-  Amendment of Resolution 89-61 above (volume reduction/recycling grants).
             1990
             2-
Res. 90-27   15-  Authorization to contract for highway improvement of part of County Highway 64.
             1990
             2-   Agreement for preliminary engineering services with Collins and Rice, for
90-28        15-  biennial bridge inspections.
             1990
             3-
90-44        15-  Contract to purchase trash compactor for county jail with Stanton Equipment Co.
             1990
             3-   Contract for maintenance and cleaning of County Office Building with White Glove
Res. 90-45   15-  Janitorial.
             1990
             3-
Res. 90-49   15-  Award of various public highway improvement contracts.
             1990
             3-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for several township
Res. 90-54   15-  bridges with Willett, Hofmann and Associates.
             1990
             3-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for bridges on County
Res. 90-55   15-  Highways 4 and 19 with Willett, Hofmann and Associates.
             1990
             3-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for bridges on Wilton Road
Res. 90-56   15-  and Will Road with Collins and Rice.
             1990
             3-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for two county bridges on
Res. 90-58   15-  County Highway 47 with Corsetti-Lambert.
             1990
             3-   Contract with Suburban Health Care Benefits, Inc. for third-party administration
Res. 90-63   15-  of county health care plan extended through 9-30-1991.
             1990
             3-   Pharmaceutical consultant agreement with David Darguzis for Sunny Hill Nursing
Res. 90-65   15-  Home.
             1990
             3-
Res. 90-66   15-  Physician services agreement with Dr. Simon Migale, for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1990
             4-   Amendment of Resolution 89-217 (contract with Cabay Construction for work for
Res. 90-71   19-  Sunny Hill Nursing Home).
             1990
             4-
Res. 90-72   19-  Contract for refuse service for county adult detention facility with Citiwaste.
             1990
             4-
Res. 90-77   19-  Award of various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1990
             4-
Res. 90-78   19-  Authority to contract for improvement of part of County Highway 43.
             1990
             4-
Res. 90-89   19-  Contract with AT&T for long distance on pay phones.
             1990
             4-
Res. 90-90   19-  Contract with Illinois Bell for local service on pay phones.
             1990
             5-
Res. 90-94   17-  Contract for roof repairs at Laraway Road Station with Elens and Maichin.
             1990
             5-   Contract with Sidwell Corporation for services in connection with updating county
Res. 90-95   17-  tax maps.
             1990
             5-
Res. 90-100  17-  Award of various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1990
             5-   Authorization to execute contract with Community and Economic Development Corp.
Res. 90-109  17-  of Will County, Inc. for administration of county community development block
             1990 grant program.
             5-   Authority to execute contract with Craig H. Hullinger, A.I.C.P., for
Res. 90-110  17-  environmental review process for County CDBG Program.
             1990
             6-   Employment contract for Richard Loding’s appointment to office of County
Res. 90-113  12-  Supervisor of Assessments.
             1990
             6-   Contract to purchase weapons for County Sheriff’s Department with Ray O’Herron
Res. 90-120  21-  Co.
             1990
             6-   Contract to purchase uniforms for County Sheriff’s Department with J.C.M.
Res. 90-121  21-  Uniforms.
             1990
             6-   Contract to purchase copy machines for Supervisor of Assessments Office with
Res. 90-125  21-  Xerox.
             1990
             6-   Authority to enter into contract with IBM for purchase of automation equipment
Res. 90-127  21-  for County Recorder of Deeds.
             1990
             6-   Authority to enter into contract with IBM for purchase of automation equipment
Res. 90-128  21-  for Circuit Court Clerk.
             1990
             6-
Res. 90-129  21-  Award to various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1990
             6-   Authority to contract for highway improvement for parts of County Highways 11 and
Res. 90-132  21-  67.
             1990
             6-   Authority to contract for highway improvement for parts of County Highways 16 and
Res. 90-133  21-  37.
             1990
             6-   Amendment to Resolution 89-84 (contract with Patrick Engineering for landfill/
Res. 90-135  21-  ashfill component of state-mandated solid waste management plan).
             1990
             6-   Amendment to contract with Patrick Engineering for review of landfill site
Res. 90-136  21-  application by Land and Lakes Company to Village of Romeoville.
             1990
             6-   Architectural contract for office of County Re- corder of Deeds with Stromsland
Res. 90-143  21-  and DeYoung.
             1990
             7-
Res. 90-152  19-  Contract for window cleaning at county jail with World Window Cleaning.
             1990
             7-
Res. 90-153  19-  Award of various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1990
             8-
Res. 90-173  16-  Awarding various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1990
             9-
Res. 90-186  20-  Contract for purchase of special court folders with The File Mart.
             1990
             9-   Contract for juvenile detention planning study with Kimme Planning and
Res. 90-200  20-  Architecture.
             1990
             11-  Awarding contract for purchase of gasoline for County Sheriff’s Department to Gas
Res. 90-235  15-  City, Ltd.
             1990
             11-
Res. 90-242  15-  Award of various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1990
             11-
Res. 90-250  15-  Contract for security services for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Wells Fargo.
             1990
             11-  Award of contract for maintenance of communication equipment of County Sheriff’s
Res. 90-253  15-  Department, to Motorola Communications.
             1990
             11-  Change order to contract with Patrick Engineering for landfill site review of
Res. 90-254  15-  application by Land and Lakes Company to Village of Romeoville.
             1990
             12-  Professional services agreement for construction engineering with Willett,
Res. 90-281  20-  Hofmann and Associates for various public highway improvements.
             1990
             12-  Professional services agreement for construction engineering with Willett,
Res. 90-282  20-  Hofmann and Associates for bridge on Renwick Road - County Highway 36.
             1990
             1-
Res. 91-15   17-  Contract for construction of improvements to County Highways 14 and 66.
             1991
             1-   Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering at Washington
Res. 91-17   17-  Street and County Highway 11 and Weber and Royce Roads with Willett, Hofmann and
             1991 Associates.
             1-
Res. 91-24   17-  Renewal of contract with Bluecross/Blueshield HMO.
             1991
             1-
Res. 91-25   17-  Contract for annual audit with Peat Marwick.
             1991
             1-
Res. 91-27   17-  Contract for printing of tax bills with Reliance Business Forms, Inc.
             1991
             2-
Res. 91-25A  21-  Contract for annual audit with Clifton, Gunderson & Co.
             1991
             2-
Res. 91-34   21-  Award of various contracts by the Public Works Committee.
             1991
             2-
Res. 91-41   21-  Contract between Automated Communications, Inc. and the county.
             1991
             3-
Res. 91-64   21-  Awarding a contract to Vulcan Materials Company.
             1991
             3-
Res. 91-75   21-  Contract for Pellet Meal Distribution System for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1991
             3-
Res. 91-81   21-  Entering into contracts with Prudential and Lloyds of London.
             1991
             5-
Res. 91-121  16-  Awarding various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1991
             5-
Res. 91-132  16-  Entering into contract for copy paper for the Microfilm Department.
             1991
             6-
Res. 91-148  20-  Awarding various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1991
             7-
Res. 91-185  18-  Awarding various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1991
             8-
Res. 91-211  15-  Awarding various contracts for public highway improvement.
             1991
             8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a contract for the solid waste
Res. 91-218  15-  planning program.
             1991
             9-
Res. 91-242  19-  Jail health services contract.
             1991
             9-
Res. 91-243  19-  Contract for the professional services of a chief labor negotiator.
             1991
             11-
Res. 91-294  21-  Contract for annual audit with Peat Marwick.
             1991
             1-
Res. 92-4    16-  Contract for the purchase of Sheriff’s squad cars with Miles Chevrolet, Inc.
             1992
             1-   Authorizing the County Executive to enter into an agreement with South Suburban
Res. 92-14   16-  Health Care Benefits to act as third party administrator of the county self-
             1992 insurance health care program.
             1-
Res. 92-19   16-  Ratification of union wage settlement between county and AFSCME Local 1028.
             1992
             1-
Res. 92-20   16-  Ratification of union contract between county and AFSCME Local 1028 - LPH Unit.
             1992
             2-
Res. 92-32   20-  Confirming award of contract for highway improvements to the following:
             1992
                Manteno Limestone Co. Inc.
                Vulcan Materials Company.
             2-   Professional services contract with Bucher, Willis and Ratliff/Land Acquisitions,
Res. 92-34   20-  Inc.
             1992
             2-
Res. 92-43   20-  Renewal of stop loss coverage.
             1992
             2-   Authorizing the County Executive to enter into a month to month agreement with
Res. 92-44   20-  South Suburban Health Care Benefits.
             1992
             2-   Adoption of a collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME Local
Res. 92-47   20-  2961, Deputies.
             1992
             2-   Adoption of a collective bargaining agreement between the county and the County
Res. 92-50   20-  Board of Health and Local 1028.
             1992
             3-   Approval of a professional services agreement for bridge inspection with Collins
Res. 92-57   19-  and Rice, Division of Tenney Pavoni Associates, Inc.
             1992
             4-
Res. 92-73   16-  Awarding various contracts for public highway improvements.
             1992
             4-   Contract with Ray O’Herron Co., Danville, Illinois for the purchase of 14
Res. 92-80   16-  Streethawk lightbars with sirens behind the grille.
             1992
             4-
Res. 92-81   16-  Contract for aerial photography with J.E. & Associates, West Chicago.
             1992
             4-   Contract for rehabilitation services direct care with Restorative Health
Res. 92-82   16-  Management.
             1992
             4-   Contract for rehabilitation services DPA 2700 program - physical rehabilitation
Res. 92-83   16-  with Restorative Health Management.
             1992
             4-   Contract for consulting physician services with Dr. Kishor Ajmere, M.D. and Dr.
Res. 92-84   16-  Simon Migale, M.D. to serve the Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1992
             6-   Professional services agreement with Willet, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for
Res. 92-129  18-  design and construction engineering.
             1992
             6-   Professional services agreement with Oyzurt and Stone, Inc. for design and
Res. 92-130  18-  construction engineering.
             1992
             6-   Professional services agreement with Strand Associates, Inc. for design and
Res. 92-131  18-  construction engineering.
             1992
             6-   Professional services agreement with Collins and Rice for design and construction
Res. 92-132  18-  engineering.
             1992
             6-   Professional services agreement with Willet, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for
Res. 92-133  18-  construction engineering.
             1992
             6-
Res. 92-134  18-  Confirming award of contract with several businesses.
             1992
             7-   Professional services agreement with Robinson Engineering, Ltd. for design and
Res. 92-151  16-  construction engineering.
             1992
             7-
Res. 92-153  16-  Confirming award of contract with various businesses.
             1992
             7-
Res. 92-163  16-  Renewal of contract with AT&T for pay phones.
             1992
             8-
Res. 92-184  20-  Contract with Hannah Information Systems for legislative computer service.
             1992
             8-
Res. 92-187  20-  Contract for roof repairs/architectural review at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1992
             9-
Res. 92-201  17-  Contract for preparations of budget, planning and various computer programs.
             1992
             10-  Contract for maintenance of communications equipment in Sheriff’s Department with
Res. 92-225  15-  Motorola, Inc.
             1992
             10-
Res. 92-227  15-  Contract for computer monitor software with Legent Corporation.
             1992
             12-
Res. 92-269  17-  Contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield to provide HMO insurance to employees.
             1992
             1-
Res. 93-8    21-  Contract with Reliance Business Forms, Inc. for printing of tax bills.
             1993
             1-
Res. 93-16   21-  Agreement with Collins and Rice for engineering services.
             1993
             1-
Res. 93-26   21-  Contract with Feat Marwick for insurance consultant services.
             1993
             2-   Contract with Diamond Detective Agency for security guard services at Sunny Hill
Res. 93-36   18-  Nursing Home.
             1993
             2-
Res. 93-42   18-  Professional service agreement for Phase I Preliminary Engineering.
             1993
             2-
Res. 93-43   18-  Confirming awards of contract with various businesses.
             1993
             3-
Res. 93-66   18-  Confirming award of contract with various businesses.
             1993
             3-   Professional services agreement with Teng and Associates, Inc. for design and
Res. 93-67   18-  construction engineering.
             1993
             3-   Professional services agreement with Midwest Consulting Engineers/Dames and
Res. 93-69   18-  Moore, Inc., for design and construction engineering.
             1993
             4-
Res. 93-95   15-  Confirming award of contract with various businesses.
             1993
             5-
Res. 93-109  20-  Awarding contract to provide firearms to the Sheriff’s Dept to Ray O’Herron.
             1993
             5-
Res. 93-115  20-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1993
             5-   Authorizing agreement for design and construction engineering with Willett,
Res. 93-116  20-  Hoffmann and Associates, Inc.
             1993
             5-   Authorizing agreement for design and construction engineering with Willett,
Res. 93-117  20-  Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             1993
Res. 93-131  6-7- Awarding bid for computer system support services for MIS Department to DTA
             1993 Technical Services, Inc.
             6-   Awarding bid for sale of retired surplus vehicles in Sheriff’s Department to T &
Res. 93-132  17-  S of Lockport.
             1993
             6-
Res. 93-135  17-  Confirming award of contract with various businesses.
             1993
             6-   Approving a professional services agreement for design and construction
Res. 93-138  17-  engineering with Ozyurt and Stone, Inc.
             1993
             7-
Res. 93-152  15-  Awarding bid for sale of scavenger property to Esequiel Morales.
             1993
             7-
Res. 93-156  15-  Confirming award of contract with various businesses.
             1993
             8-
Res. 93-182  19-  Executing a contract with Northern Illinois Gas.
             1993
             8-
Res. 93-191  19-  Confirming award of contract with various businesses.
             1993
             9-
Res. 93-199  16-  Contracting for front door work at Sunny Hill with Tee Jay Service Company, Inc.
             1993
             9-   Renewing contract for communications equipment maintenance in Sheriff’s
Res. 93-200  16-  Department with Motorola, Inc.
             1993
             9-
Res. 93-203  16-  Authorizing the sale of surplus guns to Ray O’Herron Company, Inc.
             1993
             9-
Res. 93-205  16-  Contracting with CMS for additional nursing position in Sheriff’s Department.
             1993
             9-   Awarding contract for county board room and infrared hearing-impaired sound
Res. 93-206  16-  systems with Audio Electronics.
             1993
             9-
Res. 93-214  16-  Contracting with lobbyist for riverboat gambling legislation.
             1993
             10-  Awarding contract for sidewalk repair and wall restoration at Sunny Hill with
Res. 93-216  14-  Cabay Construction.
             1993
             10-
Res. 93-223  21-  Awarding contract for dietary management service at Sunny Hill to Canteen Corp.
             1993
             10-
Res. 93-224  21-  Awarding contract for refuse service to Citiwaste, Inc.
             1993
             10-  Awarding contract for elevator maintenance at county office building to Schindler
Res. 93-225  21-  Elevator.
             1993
             10-
Res. 93-226  21-  Authorizing the sale of surplus guns to Ray O’Herron Company, Inc.
             1993
             11-  Awarding the contract for gasoline for the Sheriff’s Department to Petroleum
Res. 93-244  18-  Traders.
             1993
             11-  Awarding contract for supervisor of assessments aerial photo reproduction to
Res. 93-245  18-  Vardal Engineering.
             1993
             11-
Res. 93-246  18-  Awarding contract for supervisor of assessments map machine to FDC Drafting Aids.
             1993
             11-  Awarding contract for cleaning of county office building to White Glove
Res. 93-247  18-  Janitorial.
             1993
             11-
Res. 93-248  18-  Authorizing purchase of beds for Sunny Hill from Moerns Healthcare, Inc.
             1993
             11-  Renewing the contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield to provide HMO insurance to its
Res. 93-267  18-  employees.
             1993
             11-  Authorizing county executive to negotiate and execute contract with Blue Cross
Res. 93-268  18-  Blue Shield.
             1993
             11-
Res. 93-271  18-  Contracting for services of chief negotiator with Nicholas Sakellariou.
             1993
             12-  Awarding contract for cleaning of Land Use Department with White Glove
Res. 93-273  16-  Janitorial.
             1993
             12-
Res. 93-276  16-  Awarding contract for printing of tax bills with Reliance Business Forms, Inc.
             1993
             12-
Res. 93-287  16-  Awarding contract with United National for liability insurance.
             1993
             1-
Res. 94-4    20-  Contracting with Chapman & Cutler as bond counsel for issuance of TAW’s.
             1994
             1-   Contracting for unleaded gasoline for Sheriff’s Department with Crown Energy,
Res. 94-5    20-  Inc.
             1994
             1-
Res. 94-6    20-  Awarding bid for computer paper for MIS to American Computer Equipment.
             1994
             1-   Contracting with Poehner, Dillman and Mahalik for the repair of the heating
Res. 94-10   20-  system in the Sheriff’s Eagles Building.
             1994
             1-   Entering into a contract for legislative consultant with Michael Waters, Waters
Res. 94-20   20-  and Associates.
             1994
             2-
Res. 94-32   17-  Entering into a contract to collect delinquent fines with Transworld, Inc.
             1994
             2-
Res. 94-33   17-  Entering into a contract with New World for financial computer system.
             1994
             2-
Res. 94-42   17-  Awarding bid for body armor for Sheriff’s Department to U.S. Armor Corp.
             1994
             2-
Res. 94-45   17-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1994
             3-
Res. 94-57   17-  Contracting for typewriter and printer ribbons with American Computer Supplies.
             1994
             3-
Res. 94-68   17-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1994
             3-   Agreement for design and construction engineering services with Teng &
Res. 94-69   17-  Associates, Inc.
             1994
             3-   Entering into a contract with Stromsland & De Young/Kimme & Associates for
Res. 94-76   17-  juvenile detention facility.
             1994
             4-   Agreement with Bucher, Willis and Ratliff/Land Acquisitions, Inc. for right-of-
Res. 94-106  21-  way acquisition services for 191st Street in the county.
             1994
             4-   An agreement with Teng & Associates, Inc. for design and construction engineering
Res. 94-107  21-  for Wolf Road in the county.
             1994
             4-   A contract with Ben B. Cabay Company for window renovation work at the County
Res. 94-110  21-  Highway Department.
             1994
             4-   An extension to the agreement between the State Environmental Protection Agency
Res. 94-111  21-  and the county.
             1994
             5-   A contract with Safe-Way Tuck Pointing for restoration of exterior walls at the
Res. 94-123  19-  county office building.
             1994
             5-
Res. 94-124  19-  A contract with AT&T for a period of 36 months.
             1994
             5-   An agreement for design and construction engineering services with Willett,
Res. 94-128  19-  Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             1994
             5-
Res. 94-129  19-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1994
             5-   An agreement with Illinois Central Railroad Company for the construction and
Res. 94-130  19-  maintenance of a 48 inch gravity storm sewer.
             1994
             6-
Res. 94-160  16-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1994
             6-   An intergovernmental agreement with the County and Sheriff of Kankakee about
Res. 94-171  16-  housing county prisoners.
             1994
             6-   A contract with Ruettiger, Tonelli and Associates for surveying services for a
Res. 94-173  16-  juvenile detention facility.
             1994
             6-   An intergovernmental agreement creating the Interstate 355 Souther Extension
Res. 94-174  16-  Corridor Planning Council.
             1994
             7-   A contract with Red Rose Construction for the demolition of properties located at
Res. 94-189  21-  403 and 417 Patterson Road.
             1994
             7-
Res. 94-190  21-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1994
             8-   Adoption of collective bargaining agreement between county and County State’s
Res. 94-230a 18-  Attorney, and AFSCME LOCAL 1028 - Asst. St. Atty.
             1994
             8-   Contract between county and Joseph E. Meyer for delinquent real estate tax
Res. 94-230c 18-  liquidation program. Mr. Meyer will act as the Tax Agent for the county.
             1994
             9-
94-240       15-  Confirming award of contracts to various businesses.
             1994
             10-  Contract for security guard service at Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Diamond
94-249       20-  Detective Agency.
             1994
             10-
94-250       20-  Awarding a refuse service contract with Citiwaste, Inc.
             1994
             10-
94-251       20-  Awarding a contract for computer paper to Moore Business Forms.
             1994
             10-  A contract with McMahon Maintenance for maintenance and cleaning of the county
94-252       20-  office building.
             1994
             10-  A contract with Ron Stonitsch Construction for laundry renovation and dryer
94-253       20-  replacement and installation at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1994
             11-  Awarding a contract to Sentinel Computer for computer maintenance and service in
94-282       17-  MIS Department.
             1994
             11-  Authorizing contract for paving and surfacing of parking lot at Sunny Hill
94-285       17-  Nursing Home to A & K Construction Co.
             1994
             11-  Entering into an agreement with Richards/Johnson & Associates, Inc. for
94-295       17-  architectural design and construction inspection.
             1994
             11-
94-296       17-  A contract with Red Rose Construction for demolition at 2101 California.
             1994
             11-
94-297       17-  A contract with Red Rose Construction for demolition at 2124 Luther.
             1994
             11-  Authorizing extension of contract with Correctional Medical Services, Inc. on a
94-308       17-  monthly basis to provide jail medical services.
             1994
             12-
94-315       15-  Awarding contract for printing of tax bills.
             1994
             12-
94-316       15-  Contracting with NI Gas for service to various county buildings.
             1994
             12-  Contract for demolition of property located at 2124 Luther Avenue with Wortmann
94-319       15-  Construction.
             1994
             12-  Authorizing approval of preliminary engineering services with Bucher, Willis &
94-326       15-  Rattliff for design of intersection.
             1994
             12-
94-330       15-  Renewing contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield.
             1994
             1-   Contract with Banner/Western Disposal Service for the collection of recyclable
95-7         19-  materials from five county buildings.
             1995
             1-
95-10        19-  Contract for typewriter and printer ribbons awarded to Add-o-Type.
             1995
             1-
95-15        19-  Confirming awards of various contracts.
             1995
             2-
95-35        16-  Confirming awards of various contracts.
             1995
             2-   Contract with Hay Management Consultants, Inc. for the purpose of providing
95-37        16-  health insurance consulting services.
             1995
             3-   Contract for maintenance and cleaning of Land Use Department with White Glove
95-49        16-  Janitorial.
             1995
             3-   Contract with Barton-Aschman Associates, Inc. for consultation status in the
95-62        16-  development of the transportation plan.
             1995
             4-   Agreement between HUD and Senior Services Center of Will County and the county on
95-66        13-  the allocation and use of HOME funds for FY 93.
             1995
             4-
95-72        20-  Contract for inmate medical services at ADF with Correctional Medical Services.
             1995
             4-   Contract with Construction Consultants, Inc. for consulting services for the
95-74        20-  replacement or repair of sections of the County Office building roof.
             1995
             4-   Contract with Engineering Consultants, Inc. to provide air condition repairs at
95-75        20-  the County Office Building.
             1995
             4-
95-78        20-  Confirming award of contracts and purchases.
             1995
             4-   A contract with Crowther Enterprises for roofing replacement work at the County
95-82        20-  Highway Department.
             1995
             5-
95-95        18-  A contract for unleaded gasoline for Sheriff’s Department.
             1995
             5-
95-100       18-  A resolution confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             1995
             6-   A resolution authorizing professional services contract with F.E.R.S. for
95-114       15-  policies/procedures for financial computer system.
             1995
             6-
95-118       15-  Contracts with Com Ed for electric service.
             1995
             6-
95-119       15-  Pay phone service agreement with variable compensation with Ameritech.
             1995
             6-
95-122       15-  A resolution confirming the award of contract for public highway improvements.
             1995
             7-   A resolution confirming the award of contracts and purchases for pubic highway
95-152       20-  improvements and Highway Department equipment.
             1995
             7-   A resolution authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design
95-153       20-  and construction engineering services.
             1995
             7-   A contract with Stromsland & DeYoung/Kimme & Associates Architects to prepare
95-156       20-  construction documents for juvenile detention facility.
             1995
             8-
95-143       17-  A contract for action plan for the establishment of mapping and GIS project.
             1995
             9-
95-188       21-  A contract for services with the County Chamber/CED.
             1995
             9-   A resolution entering into a contract with Kimme & Associates Architects for
95-198       21-  updated Courthouse Master Plan.
             1995
             9-   A resolution entering into a contract with Belli & Belli Architects for County
95-199       21-  Office Building space study.
             1995
             9-
95-208       21-  A contract for public highway improvements.
             1995
             9-   A resolution adopting an agreement with the Community Services Council of
95-219       21-  Northern Will County.
             1995
             10-
95-223       19-  A contract for unleaded gasoline for the Sheriff’s Department.
             1995
             10-
95-226       19-  A resolution awarding a bid for computer paper for the MIS Department.
             1995
             10-  A contract for fuel dispensing system at the Sheriff’s Department Garage -
95-228       19-  Laraway.
             1995
             10-
95-229       19-  A contract for maintenance and cleaning services for the Land Use Department.
             1995
             10-
95-230       19-  A contract for roof replacement at Sheriff’s Department - Laraway Road.
             1995
             10-  A professional services contract with F.E.R.S. for an implementation plan for a
95-233       19-  financial computer system.
             1995
             10-
95-234       19-  A contract for communications equipment maintenance in the Sheriff’s Department.
             1995
             11-  A resolution awarding a bid for rigid PVC wall covering at Sunny Hill Nursing
95-251       16-  Home.
             1995
             11-
95-254       16-  A contract with Patrick Engineering for consulting services.
             1995
             11-  A resolution for awarding bid for vapor recovery system at the Sheriff’s
95-258       16-  Department - Laraway garage.
             1995
             11-
95-259       16-  A resolution confirming the award of contract by the Public Works Committee.
             1995
             11-  A resolution authorizing by contract the improvement of County Highway 32 under
95-261       16-  the State Highway Code.
             1995
             11-  A resolution authorizing the hiring of a CPA to assist the Landfill Proposal
95-263       16-  Review Committee.
             1995
             11-  A resolution the County Executive to execute contracts for various insurance
95-267       16-  policies.
             1995
             12-  A resolution authorizing by contract the improvement of County Highway 4 under
95-289       21-  the State Highway Code.
             1995
             12-  A resolution authorizing approval of a professional services for design
95-290       21-  engineering services agreement.
             1995
             12-  A resolution authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for
95-291       21-  preliminary engineering.
             1995
             12-
95-292       21-  Agreement for the County Engineer’s salary.
             1995
             12-
95-303       21-  A resolution renewing contracts Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
             1995
             12-
95-304       21-  A resolution renewing a contract with HMO Illinois.
             1995
             12-  A resolution adopting the County Home Investment Partnership Community Housing
95-310       21-  Development Organization Agreement.
             1995
             1-
96-6         18-  A contract for printing of real estate property tax bills.
             1996
             1-
96-9         18-  A resolution entering into a contract to collect delinquent fines.
             1996
             2-
96-27        15-  A contract for maintenance and cleaning of the county office building.
             1996
             2-
96-29        15-  A resolution awarding a contract for public highway improvements.
             1996
             2-   A professional service agreement with Orion Management, Inc. for the
96-39        15-  investigation of the landfill proposal companies.
             1996
             3-   A contract for engineering services to specify air conditioning replacement at
96-44        21-  Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1996
             3-   A contract for purchase of 340 ton air cooled chiller package at Sunny Hill
96-45        21-  Nursing Home.
             1996
             3-
96-49        21-  A contract for refuse service for county buildings.
             1996
             3-   A resolution awarding a bid for purchase of computer equipment for the
96-50        21-  Treasurer’s office network.
             1996
             3-
96-56        21-  A resolution confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             1996
             3-
96-58        21-  A resolution for the improvement of county highways under the State Highway Code.
             1996
             3-   A resolution for the improvement of County Highway 84 under the State Highway
96-59        21-  Code.
             1996
             3-   A professional service contract for evaluation of Wheatland prairie permit
96-61        21-  application.
             1996
             4-   A contract for installation of 340 ton air cooled chiller package at Sunny Hill
96-72        18-  Nursing Home.
             1996
             4-   A resolution renewing contract with Nicor Energy Management Services at county
96-73        18-  buildings.
             1996
             4-
96-75        18-  A resolution for the purchase of a laser printer system for MIS.
             1996
             4-   A contract extension for the services of the CPA firm of Wermer, Rogers, Doran &
96-81        18-  Ruzon for county landfill proposal review.
             1996
             4-   A contract extension for consultant for evaluation of Wheatland prairie permit
96-82        18-  application.
             1996
             4-
96-84        18-  A contract for public highway improvements.
             1996
             4-   A resolution authorizing approval of professional services for design engineering
96-85        18-  services agreement.
             1996
             4-
96-86        18-  A contract for public highway improvements.
             1996
             4-
96-87        18-  A contract for public highway improvements.
             1996
             4-   A resolution declaring an emergency and authorizing the repair of the bridge on
96-89        18-  County Highway 66.
             1996
             5-
96-96        16-  A contract for roof repair/replacement at the County Office Building.
             1996
             5-
96-109       16-  A contract extension for an attorney for the county landfill proposal review.
             1996
             5-   A resolution adopting the County Home Investment Partnership Community Housing
96-114       16-  Development Organization Agreement.
             1996
             7-
96-156       24-  A contract for public highway improvements.
             1996
             7-   A resolution authorizing approval of professional services for design engineering
96-157       24-  services agreement.
             1996
             7-   A resolution authorizing approval of professional services for design engineering
96-158       24-  services agreement.
             1996
             8-   Authorizing county executive to execute contract with NICOR Energy Management
96-173       15-  Services.
             1996
             8-
96-176       15-  Authorizing sale of highway equipment.
             1996
             9-   Renewing contract for communication equipment maintenance in Sheriff’s
96-202       19-  Department.
             1996
             9-
96-205       19-  Confirming awards of contract for highway improvements.
             1996
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute a contract for
96-214       19-  consulting services for a county wide Global Positions Satellite (GPS) Survey.
             1996
             10-  Authorizing county executive to execute an agreement with NIPC for preliminary
96-222       17-  county-wide Stormwater Management Plan.
             1996
             10-
96-237       17-  Confirming award of contracts and purchases for equipment and building.
             1996
             11-
96-235       21-  Awarding bid for reroofing Eagle Building.
             1996
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute a contract for a county
96-254       21-  radio system and establish funding.
             1996
             11-  Authorizing the extension of the professional services contract between the
96-258       21-  county and the CPA firm of Wermers, Rogers, Doran & Ruzon to complete their
             1996 review of the landfill proposals.
             11-  Authorizing extension of contract for consulting services for a county-wide
96-259       21-  Global Positioning Satellite (GPS) survey.
             1996
             11-
96-261       21-  Awarding bid for reroofing and sheet metal work at Health Department.
             1996
             11-
96-262       21-  Awarding bid for parking lot preparation at Health Department.
             1996
             11-
96-263       21-  Awarding contract for maintenance and cleaning of County Office Building.
             1996
             11-
96-264       21-  Awarding contract for maintenance and cleaning of Land Use Department.
             1996
             11-
96-265       21-  Awarding bid for replacement of interior doors at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1996
             11-
96-266       21-  Awarding bid for laundry renovation at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1996
             11-
96-267       21-  Awarding bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1996
             11-
96-268       21-  Awarding bid for computer LAN network for County Clerk.
             1996
             11-  Awarding contract for signature digitalization system for Elections Department,
96-271       21-  County Clerk’s Office.
             1996
             11-
96-274       21-  Contracts and awards for public highway improvements.
             1996
             11-  Authorizing contract with the county and Michael Browning to improve Naperville
96-285       21-  Road at the Crossroad Parkway Extension.
             1996
             11-
96-287       21-  Renewing contracts with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
             1996
             11-
96-288       21-  Renewing contract with HMO Illinois.
             1996
             11-
96-289       21-  Authorizing contracts for various insurance policies.
             1996
             11-  Awarding professional services contract for Sheriff’s radio room renovation for
96-296       21-  new radio system.
             1996
             2-
97-26        20-  Awarding contracts for public highway improvements.
             1997
             4-
97-76        17-  Awarding contracts for public highway improvements.
             1997
             4-
97-77        17-  Approving professional services for design engineering services agreement.
             1997
             5-   Awarding contract to Stromsland & DeYoung for architectural services to evaluate
97-106       15-  potential uses of the Old County Jail/Courthouse lower level.
             1997
             5-   Awarding contract to Bell, Boyd & Lloyd for legal services to serve as bond and/
97-107       15-  or underwriter’s counsel for the acquisition and/or construction of additional
             1997 office space for the county.
             5-   Awarding contract to William A McCann & Associates to provide real estate
97-108       15-  appraisal services for the acquisition of additional office space for the county.
             1997
             5-   Awarding contract to Merrill Lynch to provide underwriters services for
97-109       15-  acquisition and/or construction of additional office space for the county.
             1997
             5-   Awarding contract to Andrew R. Partak, Jr., architect to provide architectural
97-110       15-  services to evaluate and make recommendations to requests for office space from
             1997 the County Auditor, Treasurer and County Clerk.
             5-   Awarding contract for financial advisor services for the acquisition and/or
97-111       15-  construction of additional office space for the county.
             1997
             5-   Awarding contract to Stromsland & DeYoung, for architectural services to evaluate
97-112       15-  potential uses of four downtown Joliet buildings.
             1997
             5-   Authorizing county executive to execute contract with NICOR Energy Management
97-113       15-  Services.
             1997
             6-
97-128       19-  Confirming award of contract to various bidders for public highway improvements.
             1997
             7-   Awarding contract to Stromsland and DeYoung for architectural services to
97-166       17-  evaluate structures and potential uses of three Joliet buildings.
             1997
             7-   Awarding contract to Andrew R. Partak, Jr. to provide architectural services for
97-167       17-  additional space to provide law enforcement needs of Sheriff at Laraway Road
             1997 police facility.
             7-   Awarding contract to Andrew R. Partak, Jr. to provide architectural services to
97-171       17-  provide office space for Radio Systems Manager.
             1997
             8-
97-172       21-  Extension of medical services contract for ADF and juvenile detention.
             1997
             8-   Renewing contract for communications equipment maintenance in Sheriff’s
97-177       21-  Department.
             1997
             8-
97-180       21-  Confirming award of contracts and purchases for public highway improvements.
             1997
             8-
97-186       21-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvement.
             1997
             8-   Amending the county HOME grant CHDO Agreement with Easter Seal Rehabilitation
97-194       21-  Center of Will/Grundy Counties.
             1997
             9-
97-209       18-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to various bidders.
             1997
             9-
97-210       18-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to various bidders.
             1997
             9-
97-211       18-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to various bidders.
             1997
             9-
97-219       18-  Authorizing execution of long distance telephone service agreement with AT & T.
             1997
             10-  Extending contract for computer equipment maintenance and service - MIS
97-226       16-  Department.
             1997
             10-  Authorizing contract for unleaded gasoline for Sheriff’s Department and Highway
97-227       16-  Department.
             1997
             10-
97-228       16-  Awarding bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1997
             10-
97-229       16-  Awarding bid for computer paper for MIS Department.
             1997
             10-
97-230       16-  Awarding bid for refuse services for county buildings.
             1997
             10-
97-231       16-  Awarding contract for maintenance and cleaning of County Office Building.
             1997
             10-
97-232       16-  Awarding contract for maintenance and cleaning of Land Use Department.
             1997
             10-  Awarding contract for remodeling work to provide office space for Radio Systems
97-233       16-  Manager.
             1997
             10-
97-234       16-  Awarding bid for computer and networking equipment for the Highway Department.
             1997
             10-  Authorizing execution of modification to software license agreement with New
97-235       16-  World Systems.
             1997
             10-  Authorizing purchase of additional telephone equipment for county-wide radio
97-236       16-  system.
             1997
             10-
97-239       16-  Awarding contract for annual audit to Wermer, Rogers, Duran & Ruzon.
             1997
             10-
97-243       16-  Authorizing contract with Hay Group for EECO consulting services.
             1997
             10-  Awarding contract to Stromsland and DeYoung for architectural services to
97-246       16-  evaluate space needs of Recorder of Deeds and Land Use Department.
             1997
             10-  Authorizing execution of memo of agreement between the county and Village of
97-249       16-  Plainfield for geographic information system.
             1997
             11-  Authorizing contract between the county, Joliet/County Center for Economic
97-258       20-  Development and County Chamber of Commerce.
             1997
             11-
97-261       20-  Awarding bid for purchase of copier for Circuit Clerk’s office.
             1997
             11-  Awarding bid for purchase of duplicator with stand and envelope feeder for
97-262       20-  Microfilm/Copying Department.
             1997
             11-  Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering with Willett,
97-274       20-  Hofmann & Associates.
             1997
             11-  Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering with Consoer
97-275       20-  Townsend Envirodyne Engineers, Inc.
             1997
             11-
97-277       20-  Authorizing contract for property and casualty insurance and loss prevention.
             1997
             12-  Cancelling previous contract and awarding new contract for maintenance and
97-288       18-  cleaning of Land Use Department.
             1997
             12-
97-292       18-  Reaffirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             1997
             12-  Authorizing professional services agreement for preliminary engineering services
97-297       18-  for biennial bridge inspections.
             1997
             12-
97-299       18-  Authorizing contract for dental and vision insurance programs.
             1997
             12-
97-300       18-  Renewing contract with HMO Illinois.
             1997
             12-
97-301       18-  Renewing contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
             1997
             1-
98-1         15-  Authorizing purchase of nursing stations for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             1998
             1-
98-2         15-  Awarding contract for printing of tax bills/ envelopes.
             1998
             1-
98-3         15-  Authorizing purchase of two power files for Recorder’s office.
             1998
             1-   Authorizing agreement between the county and Kankakee County for juvenile
98-12        15-  detention space.
             1998
             1-   Authorizing engagement of Johnson Lambert & Co. to conduct review of financial
98-14        15-  statements of GIE.
             1998
             1-   Authorizing engagement of Reliastar Life Insurance Co. to seek recovery of any
98-15        15-  funds paid by SHCB for inappropriate or fraudulent service.
             1998
             2-
Res. 99-54   18-  Contract to Vulcan Materials Company for highway improvements.
             1998
             2-
Res. 99-55   18-  Contract to Vulcan Materials Company for highway improvements.
             1998
             2-
98-31        19-  Authorizing lease/purchase of vehicles for Sheriff’s Department.
             1998
             2-
98-33        19-  Confirming award of contracts for public highway improvements.
             1998
             2-
98-36        19-  Rescinding award of contract to Lovewell Fencing, Inc. (Res. 97-292).
             1998
             2-
98-37        19-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             2-   Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering with Casler,
98-39        19-  Houser & Hutchinson.
             1998
             3-
98-54        19-  Awarding bid for CAD computer equipment for Highway Department.
             1998
             3-
98-60        19-  Awarding contract for computer upgrade for MIS.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering with Rice,
98-61        19-  Berry & Uzman.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering with Willett,
98-62        19-  Hofmann & Associates.
             1998
             3-
98-63        19-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             3-
98-64        19-  Confirming award of purchases for Highway Department equipment.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing agreement between the county and City of Joliet to delete Caton Farm
98-65        19-  Road from county highway system.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering with McDonough
98-69        19-  Associates, Inc.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing execution of documents necessary to receive the State Environmental
98-74        19-  Protection Agency Enforcement grant.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing contract with William McCann & Associates to provide real estate
98-81        19-  appraisal services for building for Land Use Department.
             1998
             4-
98-106(a)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-106(b)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-106(c)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(a)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(b)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(c)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(d)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(e)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(f)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-
98-107(g)    16-  Confirming contract for public highway improvements.
             1998
             4-   Authorizing agreement between the county and Waste Management, Inc. to provide
98-109       16-  waste collection services.
             1998
             4-
98-112       16-  Authorizing contract with Willis Corroon Advanced Risk Management Services.
             1998
             5-
Res. 98-131  21-  Contract with Prairie Materials for highway improvements.
             1998
             5-
Res. 98-132  21-  Contract with Steve Krause Construction, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1998
             5-
Res. 98-133  21-  Contract with Steve Krause Construction, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1998
             5-
Res. 98-134  21-  Contract with Steve Krause Construction, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1998
             6-
Res. 98-162  18-  Contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvements.
             1998
             6-
Res. 98-163  18-  Contract with K-Five Construction Co. for highway improvements.
             1998
             6-
Res. 98-164  18-  Contract with D Construction, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1998
             6-
Res. 98-165  18-  Contract with D Construction, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1998
             6-   Contract with Clark Excavation for the demolition of property at 2145 Luther
Res. 98-173  18-  Avenue in Lockport Township.
             1998
             7-
Res. 98-192  16-  Contract to K-Five Construction Corp. for highway improvements.
             1998
             7-
Res. 98-193  16-  Contract to Steve Krause, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1998
             7-
Res. 98-194  16-  Contract to Harry W. Kuhn for highway improvements.
             1998
             8-
Res. 98-218  20-  Contract to Burke Electrical Construction for standby power system.
             1998
             8-
Res. 98-219  20-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvements.
             1998
             8-
Res. 98-220  20-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvements.
             1998
             8-
Res. 98-221  20-  Contract to Metal Culverts for highway improvements.
             1998
             9-
Res. 98-234  17-  Contract to Tire Grinders Transporters for tire collection event.
             1998
             9-
Res. 98-235  17-  Contract to Culligan Water Conditioning for bottled water service for county.
             1998
             9-
Res. 98-241  17-  Contract to Making Specialists Corporation for raised pavement markers.
             1998
             10-  Extending contract with Sentinel Technologies for computer equipment maintenance
Res. 98-278  15-  and service, MIS Department.
             1998
             10-  Contract to Petroleum Traders for gasoline for Sheriff’s Department and Highway
Res. 98-279  15-  Department.
             1998
             10-  Authorizing contract for Employee Assistance Program (EAP) with Ceridian
Res. 98-294  15-  Performance Partners.
             1998
             10-
Res. 98-297  15-  Contract with Clark Excavation for demolition of property at Woodruff Avenue.
             1998
             11-
Res. 98-350  19-  Contract with J. Merle Jones & Sons for the purchase of two dump trucks.
             1998
             11-
Res. 98-355  19-  Renewing contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
             1998
             11-
Res. 98-356  19-  Renewing contract with HMO Illinois.
             1998
             11-
Res. 98-358  19-  Contract for property and casualty insurance and loss prevention.
             1998
             1-
Res. 98-381  21-  Contract with Delta Dental Plan for dental insurance program.
             1999
             1-
Res. 99-4    21-  Contract to J.J. Collins Printers for printing of real estate property tax bills.
             1999
             1-
Res. 99-10   21-  Contract to Vulcan Signs for highway improvements.
             1999
             1-
Res. 99-11   21-  Contract to Vulcan Signs for highway improvements.
             1999
             1-
Res. 99-12   21-  Contract to Unistrut Illinois for highway improvements.
             1999
             1-
Res. 99-13   21-  Contract to Decker Supply Co. for highway improvements.
             1999
             1-   Contract to H.P. Graham Construction, Gallagher Asphalt Corp., P.T. Ferro
Res. 99-14   21-  Construction, Lincoln Paving Company for highway improvements.
             1999
             1-   Contract to H.P Graham Construction and P.T. Ferro Construction for highway
Res. 99-15   21-  improvements.
             1999
             1-   Contract to Vulcan Materials Co., Joliet Sand & Gravel Co., and Prairie Group LLC
Res. 99-16   21-  for highway improvements.
             1999
             2-
Res. 99-52   18-  Contract to Vulcan Materials Co. for highway improvements.
             1999
             2-
Res. 99-53   18-  Contract to Prairie Group LLC for highway improvements.
             1999
             2-
Res. 99-56   18-  Contract to Prairie Group LLC for highway improvements.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-87   18-  Contract to W/CMS for medical services for juvenile detention facility.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-94   18-  Contract to Harry W. Kuhn, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-95   18-  Contract to Harry W. Kuhn, Inc. for highway improvements.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-96   18-  Contract to James D. Fiala for highway improvements.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-97   18-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction for highway improvements.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-98   18-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction for highway improvements.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-113  18-  Contract to Hoyle Road Equipment for snow plow replacement.
             1999
             3-
Res. 99-127  18-  Contract to NICOR Energy for natural gas.
             1999
             4-   Contract to Duke Construction for the demolition of the property at 814 Diamond K
Res. 99-135  15-  Lane.
             1999
             4-
Res. 99-136  15-  Contract to Prairie Group, LLC for highway improvement.
             1999
             4-
Res. 99-137  15-  Contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for highway improvement.
             1999
             4-
Res. 99-138  15-  Contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for highway improvement.
             1999
             4-
Res. 99-139  15-  Contract to Preform Traffic Control Systems for highway improvement.
             1999
             4-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for design
Res. 99-143  15-  engineering.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-145  20-  Contract to Dralle-Chevrolet-Buick-Geo for a Suburban.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-160  20-  Contract to D&BV Fabricators and Fibrex Products for recycling containers.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-162  20-  Contract to Washburn Machinery, Inc. for garment storage conveyors.
             1999
             5-   Contract to The Sirchie Group for forensic evidence drying cabinets for the
Res. 99-163  20-  Sheriff’s Department.
             1999
             5-   Contract to Lombardi Chevy Buick for a special operations group vehicle for the
Res. 99-164  20-  Sheriff’s Department.
             1999
             5-   Authorizing service contracts with Unisys Corporation and Sverdrup CRSS for Y2K
Res. 99-169  20-  compliance.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-171  20-  Contract to Riber Construction, Inc. for the Green Garden Road District.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-172  20-  Contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for the Green Garden Road District.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-173  20-  Contract to Prairie Group for the Green Garden Road District.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-174  20-  Contract to Grosso Construction Co. for the Peotone Road District.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-175  20-  Contract to Grosso Construction Co. for the Will Road District.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-176  20-  Contract to “D” Construction Inc. for highway improvement.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-178  20-  Contract to “D” Construction Inc. for highway improvement.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-180  20-  Contract to K-Five Construction Corp. for highway improvement.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-182  20-  Contract to “D” Construction Inc. for highway improvement.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-196  20-  Contract to Forney Inc. for a concrete compression testing machine.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-197  20-  Contract to Rendel’s Inc. for one-ton cab and chassis.
             1999
             5-
Res. 99-198  20-  Contract to Rendel’s Inc. for a single axle dump truck.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-222  17-  Amendment to contract between the county and Barton-Aschman Associates, Inc.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-228  17-  Contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for the Crete Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-229  17-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the New Lenox Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-230  17-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the Troy Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-231  17-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the Green Garden Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-232  17-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the Washington Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-233  17-  Contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for the Florence Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-234  17-  Contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for the Washington Road District.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-235  17-  Contract to Harry W. Kuhn, Inc. for highway improvement.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-237  17-  Contract to Boubonnais Supply Inc. for portable light towers.
             1999
             6-
Res. 99-253  17-  Authorizing contracts with Ameritech for TI facilities.
             1999
             7-
Res. 99-275  15-  Contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for highway improvement.
             1999
             7-
Res. 99-277  15-  Contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for highway improvement.
             1999
             7-
Res. 99-279  15-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvement.
             1999
             7-
Res. 99-281  15-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the Homer Road District.
             1999
             7-
Res. 99-282  15-  Contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for the Washington Road District.
             1999
             8-   Authorization for contract with Christopher B. Burks Engineering to assist in
Res. 99-291  19-  writing a Draft Countywide Stormwater Management Ordinance.
             1999
             8-
Res. 99-297  19-  Contract to Lindblad Construction for concrete floor project.
             1999
             8-   Authorizing contracts with Ameritech for TI and ISDN lines for new land use
Res. 99-300  19-  office.
             1999
             8-
Res. 99-302  19-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvement.
             1999
             8-
Res. 99-303  19-  Contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for highway improvement.
             1999
             8-
Res. 99-304  19-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvement.
             1999
             8-   Authorizing contract for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois health coverage for
Res. 99-321  19-  the county retirees.
             1999
             8-
Res. 99-322  19-  Authorizing contract for HMO Illinois health coverage for the county retirees.
             1999
             8-   Contract with Bechstein Construction Corp. for the demolition of property located
Res. 99-327  19-  at the southeast corner of Sehring & Seneca and Cayuga Street, both in Joliet
             1999 Township, and Luther Avenue in Lockport Township.
             9-
Res. 99-331  16-  Authorizing contract with Burke Engineering.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-345  16-  Contract to Midwest Fence Corp. for highway improvement.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-347  16-  Contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for highway improvement.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-349  16-  Contract to Construction by Camco, Inc. for replacement of pipe culverts.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-351  16-  Contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for highway improvement.
             1999
             9-   Contract to Metro Environmental Construction for underground fuel storage tank
Res. 99-353  16-  concrete pads.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-354  16-  Contract to J & L Enterprise for a trailer mounted high pressure sewer cleaner.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-355  16-  Contract to Monroe Truck Equipment for heavy duty underbody scrapers.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-360  16-  Authorizing contracts for the administration of the indemnity/PPO plan.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-361  16-  Authorizing contracts for the administration of the dental plan.
             1999
             9-
Res. 99-362  16-  Authorizing contracts for the administration of the vision plan.
             1999
             9-   Authorizing contracts for the administration of life insurance and accidental and
Res. 99-363  16-  disability benefits.
             1999
             10-  Contract for implementation of E-9-1-1 for River Valley Justice Center and
Res. 99-376  21-  Executive Center.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-379  21-  Contract for unleaded gasoline for various locations.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-380  21-  Contract to Schindler Elevator Co. for elevator maintenance.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-383  21-  Contract to Waste Management for refuse service for county buildings.
             1999
             10-  Contract to Jenkins Security for security guard services at Sunny Hill Nursing
Res. 99-384  21-  Home.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-386  21-  Contract to Hinckley Spring Water for bottled water service.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-387  21-  Contract to Sentinel Technologies for computer equipment maintenance and service.
             1999
             10-  Contract to Poehner, Dillman & Mahalik, Inc. for installation of water service at
Res. 99-394  21-  the Sheriff’s Laraway Road facility.
             1999
             10-  Contract to Portable Tool Sales and Service for a Target Pro 35 III 26S Premium
Res. 99-395  21-  walk behind saw.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-396  21-  Contract to West Side Tractor Sales for a front wheel loader.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-397  21-  Contract to Finkbiner Equipment Company for a trailer.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-398  21-  Contract to United Rentals for a front mounted hydraulic sweeper.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-399  21-  Contract to Monroe Truck Equipment for six front mounted wing plows.
             1999
             10-
Res. 99-400  21-  Contract to Bulk Storage, Inc. for storage building with conveyor.
             1999
             10-  Contract to Clark Excavation for the demolition of the property located at
Res. 99-415  21-  Dellwood Avenue.
             1999
             10-  Contract to Duke Construction for the demolition of the property located at 13308
Res. 99-416  21-  Naperville- Plainville Road.
             1999
             11-  Authorizing contracts with Reliance National, Safety National, The Hartford, and
Res. 99-453  18-  Executive Risk (Chubb Insurance) for property and casualty insurance and loss
             1999 prevention.
             11-  Contract with Ameritech for an additional T-1 circuit for the Recorder of Deeds
Res. 99-462  18-  office.
             1999
             12-  Contract to Wexford Health Services for inmate medical services at the adult
Res. 99-469  16-  detention facility.
             1999
             12-
Res. 99-472  16-  Contract to J.J. Collins Printers for printing of real estate property tax bills.
             1999
             12-  Contract to Clark Excavation and Trucking for the demolition of the property
Res. 99-487  16-  located at 304 Bass Street.
             1999
             12-  Contract to Clark Excavation and Trucking for the demolition of the property
Res. 99-488  16-  located at Woodruff Avenue.
             1999
             12-  Contract to Clark Excavation and Trucking for the demolition of the property
Res. 99-489  16-  located at 528 Steger Road.
             1999
             12-  Contract to Clark Excavation and Trucking for the demolition of the property
Res. 99-490  16-  located at 514 N. Hebbard Street.
             1999
             1-
Res. 00-15   20-  Authorizing a professional services contract to initiate fixed asset inventory.
             2000
             1-
Res. 00-32   20-  Contract to Rocal, Inc. for sign material.
             2000
             1-
Res. 00-33   20-  Contract to Rocal, Inc. for sheet aluminum sign panels.
             2000
             1-
Res. 00-34   20-  Contract to Unistrut Illinois for telescopic metal posts.
             2000
             1-
Res. 00-35   20-  Contract to 3M for preformed retroreflective pavement marking words/symbols.
             2000
             1-   Contracts to P.T. Ferro Construction, Gallagher Asphalt Corp., H.P. Graham
Res. 00-36   20-  Construction Co. and James D. Fiala Paving Inc. for bituminous patching mixture.
             2000
             1-   Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co., Gallagher Asphalt Corp. and H.P. Graham
Res. 00-37   20-  Construction Co. for bituminous material prime coat.
             2000
             1-   Contract to Vulcan Construction Materials and NCM/Prairie Group for gravel or
Res. 00-38   20-  crushed stone.
             2000
             1-
Res. 00-40   20-  Contract to Gaffney’s Protective Maintenance for highway improvement.
             2000
             2-   Contract to Clark Excavation for the demolition of property located on State
Res. 00-70   17-  Street.
             2000
             2-
Res. 00-71   17-  Contract to Vulcan Construction Materials for the Jackson Road District.
             2000
             2-
Res. 00-72   17-  Contract to NCM/Prairie Group for the Peotone Road District.
             2000
             2-
Res. 00-73   17-  Contract to Vulcan Construction Materials for the Washington Road District.
             2000
             2-
Res. 00-74   17-  Contract to NCM/Prairie Group for the Wilton Road District.
             2000
             2-
Res. 00-75   17-  Contract to “D” Construction Inc. for highway improvement.
             2000
             2-
Res. 00-76   17-  Contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway improvement.
             2000
             3-   Contract to McMahon Maintenance for maintenance and cleaning services for the
Res. 00-101  16-  county office building and executive center.
             2000
             3-   Emergency contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for rebuilding the County Highway 17
Res. 00-134  16-  bridge over Jackson Creek.
             2000
             4-   Awarding bid for re-paving Sheriff’s Crete Sub- Station Parking Lot to J.M. Crist
Res. 00-139  20-  Co., Inc.
             2000
             4-   Awarding bid for purchase of mobile filing system to Bradford Systems
Res. 00-141  20-  Corporation.
             2000
             4-   Awarding bid for purchase of forensic/measuring devices and total workstation to
Res. 00-142  20-  Kara Company.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-143  20-  Awarding bid for air duct cleaning to Service Master West Suburban.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-153  20-  Contract with Preform Traffic Control System for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-155  20-  Contract with K-Five Construction Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-157  20-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-158  20-  Contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-159  20-  Contract with Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-160  20-  Contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-161  20-  Contract with “D” Construction Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-162  20-  Contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-163  20-  Contract with “D” Construction Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-164  20-  Contract with DeAngelo Brothers, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-165  20-  Contract with Grosso Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-
Res. 00-166  20-  Contract with Grosso Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             4-   Agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for appraisals with Polach
Res. 00-169  20-  Appraisal Group, Inc.
             2000
             5-   Contract for maintenance and cleaning of county office building and executive
Res. 00-191  18-  center with Imperial Service Systems, Inc.
             2000
             5-   Awarding bid for renovation of the B.A.C. cooling tower at the Sheriff’s adult
Res. 00-192  18-  detention facility to Independent Mechanical Industries, Inc.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-196  18-  Awarding bid for local phone services to Ameritech.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-197  18-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group, LLC for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-198  18-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-199  18-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-200  18-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-202  18-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-204  18-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-205  18-  Contract with Alpha Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-206  18-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-207  18-  Contract with Harry W. Kuhn, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-209  18-  Contract with Steve Krause Construction for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-211  18-  Contract with Midwest Fence Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-213  18-  Contract with Fahrner Asphalt Sealers for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-217  18-  Contract with James F. Fiala Paving Co. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-
Res. 00-215  18-  Contract with Callaghan Paving, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             5-   Contract with Clark Excavation for the demolition of the property located on
Res. 00-227  18-  Ontario Street in Joliet Township.
             2000
             5-   Contract with Clark Excavation for the demolition of the property located on S.
Res. 00-228  18-  Ashland Avenue in Washington Township.
             2000
             6-   Awarding bid for Nicholson Street Warehouse re- roofing to Crowther Enterprises,
Res. 00-193  15-  Inc.
             2000
             6-   Adopting the County Five Year Consolidated Plan; the County Citizen Participation
Res. 00-254  15-  Plan; and the Year 2000 Action Plan for the CDBG and Home Programs.
             2000
             7-   Awarding bid for purchase of mini crime scope 400 for Sheriff’s Department from
Res. 00-266  20-  Instruments SA, Inc./Spex.
             2000
             7-   Contract with ComNet Ericcson for the full- featured console for the adult
Res. 00-270  20-  detention facility.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-271  20-  Contract with J. Merle Jones & Sons, Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-272  20-  Contract with Gast International Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-273  20-  Contract with J. Merle Jones & Sons, Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-274  20-  Contract with J. Merle Jones & Sons, Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-275  20-  Contract with Bulk Storage Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-277  20-  Contract with Callaghan Paving, Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-279  20-  Contract with James. D. Fiala Paving Co., Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-280  20-  Contract with Riber Construction Inc. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-282  20-  Contract with Riber Construction Inc. for public highway improvement.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-284  20-  Contract with Grosso Construction Co. for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             7-
Res. 00-285  20-  Contract with Gallagher Asphalt Corp for purchase of equipment.
             2000
             8-
Res. 00-319  17-  Contract with Building Technology Associates, Inc. for roof consulting services.
             2000
             8-
Res. 00-322  17-  Contract with “D” Construction Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             8-
Res. 00-324  17-  Contract with P.T. Ferro Construction for public highway improvements.
             2000
             8-
Res. 00-328  17-  Contract with Kara Company for public highway improvements.
             2000
             8-   Accepting bid for printing and distribution/services for the next three issues of
Res. 00-329  17-  a newsletter to Unistate, Inc.
             2000
             9-   Awarding bid for purchase of wireless CRT Console System for ADF to ComNet
Res. 00-342  21-  Ericsson Critical Radio Systems, Inc.
             2000
             9-   Awarding bid for nurses call system, medical unit Sheriff’s ADF Facility to
Res. 00-344  21-  Commercial Electronic Systems.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-346  21-  Contract with United Rentals Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-347  21-  Contract with Vermeer-Midwest (Illinois) for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-348  21-  Contract with Martin Implement Sales, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-349  21-  Contract with L & H Services, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-350  21-  Contract with J. Merle Jones and Sons for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-351  21-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-
Res. 00-352  21-  Contract with Gallagher Asphalt for public highway improvements.
             2000
             9-   Contract with Hostert Brothers Excavating, LLC for the site clearance of the
Res. 00-363  21-  property located on McKinley Avenue in Joliet Township.
             2000
             9-   Cancellation of contract for security guard services at the Sunny Hill Skilled
Res. 00-377  21-  Rehab Center.
             2000
             9-   Contract with Health Management Associates for human resource and benefits
Res. 00-379  21-  consulting services.
             2000
             10-  Awarding bid for telecommunications equipment maintenance, time and material
Res. 00-385  19-  service to Tel Assist Communication.
             2000
             10-
Res. 00-387  19-  Contract with Petroleum Traders for unleaded gasoline for various locations.
             2000
             10-  Awarding bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 00-393  19-  Diamond Detective Agency, Inc.
             2000
             10-
Res. 00-399  19-  Contract with James D. Fiala Paving Co., Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             10-
Res. 00-401  19-  Contract with Bonnell Industries Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             10-  Contract with Health Management Associates to review the current health plan
Res. 00-418  19-  design.
             2000
             11-
Res. 00-433  16-  Awarding bid for reader/printer for Treasurer’s office to Ambassador Canon.
             2000
             11-
Res. 00-439  16-  Purchase of web communication software from Esker Corridor.
             2000
             11-
Res. 00-446  16-  Contract with FBI Buildings, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2000
             11-  Contracts for property and casualty insurance and loss prevention with Reliance
Res. 00-470  16-  National, Safety National, the Hartford, and Executive Risk (Chubb Insurance).
             2000
             12-  Contract for printing of real estate property tax bills with J.J. Collins
Res. 00-486  21-  Printers.
             2000
             12-  Awarding bid for computer printer remanufactured and new toner cartridges with
Res. 00-490  21-  Cardinal Cartridge.
             2000
             12-  Contract with Lardi Construction for demolition of properties located on
Res. 00-500  21-  Englewood Avenue in Lockport Township.
             2000
             1-   Awarding bid for master lease purchase agreement for Sheriff’s Department with
Res. 01-04   18-  LaSalle Bank.
             2001
             1-
Res. 01-05   18-  Awarding bid for cellular equipment and service to Nextel Communications.
             2001
             1-   Contracts with H.P. Graham Construction; James D. Fiala Paving Co.; Gallagher
Res. 01-17   18-  Materials Corp.; and R&K Cartage, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             1-   Contracts with H.P. Graham Construction and Gallagher Materials Corp. for public
Res. 01-18   18-  highway improvements.
             2001
             1-   Contracts with NCM/Prairie Group LLC; Vulcan Materials Co.; and Joliet Sand &
Res. 01-19   18-  Gravel Co. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             1-
Res. 01-20   18-  Contract with Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             1-
Res. 01-21   18-  Contract with Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             1-
Res. 01-22   18-  Contract with Decker Supply Co., Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             1-
Res. 01-23   18-  Contract with Decker Supply Co., Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             2-
Res. 01-44   15-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2001
             2-
Res. 01-45   15-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2001
             2-
Res. 01-46   15-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2001
             2-
Res. 01-47   15-  Contract with Steve Krause Construction for public highway improvements.
             2001
             2-
Res. 01-49   15-  Contract with Metro Environmental Construction for public highway improvements.
             2001
             2-   Renewing contract with Highmark for third party administrator for Cobra and
Res. 01-58   15-  retiree programs.
             2001
             2-
Res. 01-60   15-  Renewing contract with Willis for property and casualty.
             2001
             3-
Res. 01-66   15-  Awarding bid for Nicholson Warehouse improvements to R. Berti & Sons.
             2001
             3-
Res. 01-67   15-  Awarding bid for Nicholson Warehouse mezzanine structure to Cubic Design.
             2001
             3-
Res. 01-75   15-  Contract with R.W. Dunteman Company for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-98   19-  Awarding bid for Nicholson Fire Suppression System to Grinnell Fire Protection.
             2001
             4-   Contract with Gould Excavating for the demolition of the property located on Rev.
Res. 01-105  19-  Walter Drive in Lockport Township.
             2001
             4-   Contract with Lardi Construction for the demolition of the property located on
Res. 01-106  19-  Englewood Avenue in Lockport Township.
             2001
             4-   Contract with Lardi Construction for the demolition of the property located on W.
Res. 01-107  19-  Zauratsky in Channahon Township.
             2001
             4-   Contract with Gould Excavating for the demolition of the property located on Rev.
Res. 01-108  19-  Walter Drive in Lockport Township.
             2001
             4-   Contract with Gould Excavating for the demolition of the property located on Rev.
Res. 01-109  19-  Walter Drive in Lockport Township.
             2001
             4-   Contract with Grosshening Industrial Service Company for the demolition of the
Res. 01-110  19-  property located at 11502 W. 195th Street in Frankfort Township.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-111  19-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-112  19-  Contract with Harry W. Kuhn, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-113  19-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-114  19-  Contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-115  19-  Contract with Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-116  19-  Contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-117  19-  Contract with DeAngelo Brothers, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-118  19-  Contract with Perform Traffic Control Systems for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-120  19-  Contract with Grosso Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-121  19-  Contract with Grosso Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-122  19-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-123  19-  Contract with NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-124  19-  Contract with Gallagher Material Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-125  19-  Contract with Alpha Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-127  19-  Contract with “D” Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-129  19-  Contract with Callaghan Paving for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-
Res. 01-131  19-  Contract with Steve Krause Construction for public highway improvements.
             2001
             4-   Agreement for design engineering services with Willett, Hofmann & Associates,
Res. 01-133  19-  Inc.
             2001
             4-   Agreement for design engineering services with Willett, Hofmann & Associates,
Res. 01-135  19-  Inc.
             2001
             4-   Agreement for additional design engineering services with Casler, Houser &
Res. 01-137  19-  Hutchison, Inc.
             2001
             5-   Authorizing execution of contract with People’s Energy Services to provide
Res. 01-181  17-  natural gas.
             2001
             5-
Res. 01-186  17-  Awarding contract to K-Five Construction Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             5-
Res. 01-188  17-  Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             5-
Res. 01-190  17-  Awarding contract to Callaghan Paving, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             5-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-191  17-  improvements.
             2001
             5-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-192  17-  improvements.
             2001
             5-
Res. 01-193  17-  Awarding contract to NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2001
             5-   Authorizing the execution of agreement for design engineering services with Rice,
Res. 01-194  17-  Berry and Uzman.
             2001
             5-   Agreement for professional services for design engineering with Rice, Berry and
Res. 01-196  17-  Uzman.
             2001
             5-   Agreement for professional services for design engineering with Rice, Berry and
Res. 01-198  17-  Uzman.
             2001
             6-   Contract for rural structural survey between the county and Wiss, Janney,
Res. 01-213  21-  Elsterner Associates, Inc.
             2001
             6-
Res. 01-227  21-  Agreement of intent to abate property taxes for Guinness UDV NA, Inc.
             2001
             6-   Authorizing the execution of documents and other agreements necessary to receive
Res. 01-232  21-  the state environmental protection agency enforcement grant through the duration
             2001 of the delegation agreement.
             6-
Res. 01-233  21-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             6-
Res. 01-235  21-  Awarding contract to Kenneth RA. Hartman, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             6-
Res. 01-237  21-  Awarding contract to IHC Group, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             6-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-239  21-  improvements.
             2001
             6-   Professional services agreement for construction engineering for a bridge on
Res. 01-240  21-  County Highway 20 with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             2001
             6-   Professional services agreement for construction engineering for the Briggs
Res. 01-243  21-  Street bridge over Hickory Creek and METRA with HNTB.
             2001
             6-   Professional services agreement for design and construction engineering for
Res. 01-245  21-  entrance improvements at the new Caton Farm Road Maintenance Facility with Strand
             2001 Associates, Inc.
             6-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for the County Highway 23
Res. 01-247  21-  (Goodenow Road) at Kedzie Avenue intersection improvement with Ruettiger, Tonelli
             2001 and Associates, Inc.
             6-   Professional services agreement for design and construction engineering for
Res. 01-249  21-  County Highway 6 (Manhattan-Monee Road) and 88th Avenue intersection improvement
             2001 with Ruettiger, Tonelli and Associates, Inc.
             6-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for the improvement of
Res. 01-252  21-  Joliet- Naperville Road from Illinois Route 53 to 107th Street (Lily Cache Lane)
             2001 with Baxter and Woodman Consulting Engineers.
             6-   Agreement between the county and Raceway Associates, LLC, regarding temporary
Res. 01-258  21-  traffic control devices.
             2001
             6-   Agreement between the county and Commonwealth Edison Company to procure
Res. 01-259  21-  electrical service at Caton Farm Road.
             2001
             6-   Authorizing execution of a grant agreement with the State Emergency Management
Res. 01-261  21-  Agency for the purpose of assistance with expenses associated with hosting a
             2001 course for the National Interagency Civil-Military Institute.
             6-   Authorizing the county’s Negotiating Committee to prepare and approve a final
Res. 01-263  21-  revised collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME Local 2961.
             2001
             6-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement between the county and Blue Cross Blue
Res. 01-265  21-  Shield.
             2001
             7-
Res. 01-288  19-  Awarding bid for radio accessories to Tri- Electronics.
             2001
             7-
Res. 01-291  19-  Awarding bid for laptop computers to Dell Corporation.
             2001
             7-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-293  19-  improvements.
             2001
             7-
Res. 01-295  19-  Awarding contract to G.F. Structures Corporation for public highway improvements.
             2001
             7-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-297  19-  improvements.
             2001
             7-   Awarding contract to Steve Krause Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-300  19-  improvements.
             2001
             7-
Res. 01-301  19-  Awarding contract to Riber Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             7-
Res. 01-302  19-  Awarding contract to J. Merle Jones and Sons for public highway improvements.
             2001
             7-
Res. 01-303  19-  Awarding contract to J. Merle Jones and Sons for public highway improvements.
             2001
             7-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement for an additional expenditure from the
Res. 01-304  19-  County Motor Fuel Tax Fund.
             2001
             7-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for County Highway 19
Res. 01-306  19-  (Center Road) with Ruettiger, Tonelli and Associates, Inc.
             2001
             7-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for the improvement of
Res. 01-308  19-  Weber Road intersection with Renwick Road with Earth Tech, Inc.
             2001
             7-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the State Department of
Res. 01-316  19-  Transportation for the exchange of GIS data.
             2001
             8-
Res. 01-318  16-  Authorizing an agreement with the Will County Local Development Company.
             2001
             8-   Awarding bid for air conditioning unit for MIS Department to Johansen and
Res. 01-326  16-  Anderson.
             2001
             8-
Res. 01-331  16-  Awarding contract to Grosso Construction Company for public highway improvements.
             2001
             8-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for the preparation of
Res. 01-332  16-  contract plans for County Highway 37 with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
             2001
             8-   Professional services supplemental agreement for design engineering for the
Res. 01-334  16-  preparation of contract plans for County Highway 76 with HNTB Corp.
             2001
             8-
Res. 01-341  16-  Renewing contract with broker/consultant for property and casualty.
             2001
             8-
Res. 01-345  16-  Accepting the Sidwell Marketing agreement amendment.
             2001
             9-   Authorizing and directing the execution of a contract between the county and
Res. 01-364  20-  Ameritech for T1 facilities.
             2001
             9-
Res. 01-365  20-  Awarding contract to Harry W. Kuhn, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2001
             9-   Awarding contract to Steve Krause Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-367  20-  improvements.
             2001
             9-   Awarding contract to McCann Industries, Inc. for one skid steer loader with
Res. 01-369  20-  attachment.
             2001
             9-
Res. 01-370  20-  Awarding contract to Finkbiner Equipment Company for one trailer.
             2001
             9-   Awarding contract to Standard Equipment Co. for one six wheel street sweeper with
Res. 01-371  20-  belt conveyor.
             2001
             9-   Professional services agreement for construction engineering for a bridge on
Res. 01-375  20-  County Highway 4, Elevator Road over Forker Creek with Willett, Hofmann and
             2001 Associates, Inc.
             9-   Professional services agreement for construction engineering for a bridge on
Res. 01-377  20-  County Highway 4, Elevator Road over tributary to Forked Creek with Willett,
             2001 Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             9-   Professional services agreement for construction engineering for a bridge on
Res. 01-379  20-  Ridge Road over Jackson Creek with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             2001
             9-   Professional services agreement for construction engineering for a bridge over
Res. 01-381  20-  80th Avenue with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             2001
             9-   Authorizing the execution of a settlement agreement with Waste Management of
Res. 01-391  20-  Illinois, Inc.
             2001
             10-  Correcting the bid award for telecommunications equipment maintenance, time and
Res. 01-398  18-  material service awarded to Tel Assist Communications.
             2001
             10-  Authorizing the execution of a hardware maintenance agreement extension with
Res. 01-405  18-  Sentinel Technologies.
             2001
             10-  Authorizing the execution of a memorandum of agreement by and between the county
Res. 01-409  18-  and Capista Investments, LLC in connection with the issuance of bonds and related
             2001 matters.
             10-
Res. 01-413  18-  Awarding contract to United Rentals Highway Tech for public highway improvements.
             2001
             10-  Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 01-414  18-  improvements.
             2001
             10-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-417  18-  improvement of County Highway 19 between County Highway 20 and County Highway 25
             2001 with Santacruz Associates, Ltd.
             10-  Professional services agreement for additional right-of-way acquisition services
Res. 01-419  18-  for the extension of 95th Street between Plainfield-Naperville Road and Boughton
             2001 Road with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             10-  Professional services agreement for design engineering for the improvement of
Res. 01-425  18-  Bell Road from 131st Street to Illinois Route 7 with Earth Tech, Inc.
             2001
             10-  Authorizing the execution of the first amendment to a professional services
Res. 01-427  18-  agreement between the county and Envirogen, Inc.
             2001
             10-  Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement between the county and
Res. 01-433  18-  AFSCME Local 1028 for executive branch and licensed practical nurses.
             2001
             10-  Amending Resolution 01-318, authorizing the County Executive to enter into an
Res. 01-439  18-  agreement with the Will County Local Development Company.
             2001
             10-  Authorizing the execution of a contract with the architectural firm of Edwards
Res. 01-440  18-  and Kelcy for the Laraway Road/Rout 52 Complex.
             2001
             11-  Awarding contract for annual audit to Filan, Pandolfi, Topolski & Weiss
Res. 01-451  15-  Consultants, Technology Advisors and CPS’s.
             2001
             11-  Awarding contract for the PBX upgrade and cell center for the Circuit Clerk’s
Res. 01-452  15-  office to WIT Enterprises.
             2001
             11-  Awarding contract for the cleaning of the State’s Attorney’s annex building to
Res. 01-453  15-  Imperial Service Systems, Inc.
             2001
             11-
Res. 01-454  15-  Awarding contract for bottled water service for the county to Hinckley Spring.
             2001
             11-
Res. 01-455  15-  Awarding contract for refuse service for county buildings to City Waste.
             2001
             11-  Awarding contract for unleaded gasoline for various locations to Petroleum
Res. 01-456  15-  Traders.
             2001
             11-  Renewing contract for security guard service at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center
Res. 01-463  15-  with Diamond Detective Agency, Inc.
             2001
             11-  Renewing contract for maintenance and cleaning of county office building and
Res. 01-464  15-  executive center with Imperial Cleaning Service.
             2001
             11-  Supplemental professional services agreement for design engineering for County
Res. 01-471  15-  Highway 56 at I-55 East and Frontage Road intersection with Hutchinson
             2001 Engineering, Inc.
             11-  Supplemental professional services agreement for design engineering fo
Res. 01-473  15-  improvement of County Highway 84 between Wolf Road and west U.S. Route 45 with
             2001 TranSystems Corporation.
             11-  Professional services agreement for design engineering services agreement with
Res. 01-477  15-  TranSystem Corporation.
             2001
             11-  Authorizing an agreement between the county and CenterPoint Intermodal, LLC for
Res. 01-479  15-  the CenterPoint Deer Run Intermodal and Industrial Park project as part of the
             2001 Joliet Arsenal development.
             11-  Authorizing the execution of a contract with Guardian Life Insurance Company
Res. 01-487  15-  based upon the terms of their proposal.
             2001
             11-  Authorizing the execution of a contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois
Res. 01-488  15-  based upon the terms of their proposal for the administration of the indemnity/
             2001 PPPO plan inclusive of prescription drug plan, managed mental health plan and
                  stop- loss coverage.
             11-
Res. 01-489  15-  Authorizing the execution of contracts for property and casualty insurance.
             2001
             11-  Authorizing the execution and delivery of an assignment of a real estate
Res. 01-490  15-  contract.
             2001
             12-
Res. 01-450  20-  Awarding bid for photography workstations to Xerox, Inc.
             2001
             12-  Authorizing the execution of a contract to prepare GIS needs assessment and
Res. 01-499  20-  implementation plan.
             2001
             12-
Res. 01-501  20-  Professional services agreement with the County Chamber/CED.
             2001
             12-  Awarding bid for records management facility at Nicholson Warehouse to Friscia
Res. 01-503  20-  Brothers.
             2001
             12-  Awarding bid for roof replacement for Sheriff’s garage at the Laraway facility to
Res. 01-504  20-  J.L Adler Roofing and Sheet Metal, Inc.
             2001
             12-  Professional services agreement for design engineering for the preparation of
Res. 01-517  20-  contract plans for County Highway 19 over Forked Creek with Willett, Hofmann and
             2001 Associates, Inc.
             12-  Professional services agreement for construction engineering for the improvement
Res. 01-521  20-  of County Highway 66 over DuPage River structure with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             2001
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-533  20-  improvement of County Highway 16 at the 151st Street intersection with Polach
             2001 Appraisal Group, Inc.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-535  20-  improvement of County Highway 16 at the 151st Street intersection with Mark D.
             2001 Mathewson.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-536  20-  improvement of County Highway 16 at the 151st Street intersection with Mark D.
             2001 Mathewson.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-537  20-  improvement of County Highway 66 from Illinois Route 59 to Plainfield-Naperville
             2001 Road with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-539  20-  improvement of County Highway 66 between Illinois Route 59 and Plainfield-
             2001 Naperville Road with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-541  20-  improvement of County Highway 66 between Illinois Route 59 and Plainfield-
             2001 Naperville Road with Thomas A. Brown.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-543  20-  improvement of County Highway 64 over Marley Creek with “T” Engineering Services,
             2001 Ltd.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-545  20-  improvement of County Highway 64 over Marley Creek with Polach Appraisal Group,
             2001 Inc.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-547  20-  improvement of County Highway 64 over Marley Creek with Mark D. Mathewson.
             2001
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-549  20-  improvement of County Highway 76 with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2001
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-550  20-  improvement of County Highway 76 between U.S. Route 30 to Illinois Route 59 with
             2001 Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             12-  Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for the
Res. 01-553  20-  improvement of County Highway 76 between U.S. Route 30 to Illinois Route 59 with
             2001 Thomas A. Brown.
             12-  Professional services agreement for preliminary design engineering (Phase I) for
Res. 01-555  20-  95th Street from Plainfield-Naperville Road to Boughton Road with Christopher B.
             2001 Burke Engineering.
             12-  Professional services agreement for design engineering for required engineering
Res. 01-557  20-  and environmental studies for Goodenow Road bridge over Plum Creek with Willett,
             2001 Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             12-  Authorizing the negotiation and execution of a two-year contract with Davis
Res. 01-568  20-  Vision, Inc.
             2001
             1-   Authorizing the execution of a contract for rural structural survey between the
Res. 02-01   17-  county and Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.
             2002
             1-   Authorizing the execution of a contract for GIS needs assessment and
Res. 02-04   17-  implementation plan with System Development Integration, Inc.
             2002
             1-   Awarding contract for printing of real estate property tax bills to J.J. Collins
Res. 02-07   17-  Printers.
             2002
             1-   Renewal agreement for third party administration of workers compensation and
Res. 02-30   17-  general liability claims with ITT Specialty Risk Services, Inc.
             2002
             1-   Amending administrative services agreement with United Healthcare for payment of
Res. 02-31   17-  run-out claims.
             2002
             2-   Awarding bid for self-contained breathing apparatuses to Vallen Safety Supply
Res. 02-50   21-  Company.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-51   21-  Awarding contracts for public highway improvements to various contractors.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-52   21-  Awarding contracts for public highway improvements to various contractors.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-53   21-  Awarding contracts for public highway improvements to various contractors.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-54   21-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to United Rentals, Inc.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-55   21-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements United Rentals, Inc.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-56   21-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Allied Tube and Conduit.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-57   21-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-58   21-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to St. Regis Culvert, Inc.
             2002
             2-
Res. 02-59   21-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie Group.
             2002
             2-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for entrance improvements
Res. 02-68   21-  at the new Caton Farm Road maintenance facility with Strand Associates, Inc.
             2002
             2-   Agreement between the county and Polk Properties for construction of Black Road
Res. 02-72   21-  and Wooded Creek Drive intersection.
             2002
             2-   Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services for two
Res. 02-73   21-  parcels of property north of the abandoned EJ&E Railway right-of- way along
             2002 County Highway 88 with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             2-   Professional services agreement between the county and Envirogen, Inc. for review
Res. 02-75   21-  of Prairie View Landfill IEPA development and operating permit applications.
             2002
             2-   Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an agreement with Tire Grinders
Res. 02-76   21-  Transporters, Inc. for the performance of tire collection and processing
             2002 services.
             2-   Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an agreement with Environmental
Res. 02-77   21-  Recycling for the performance of consumer electronics collection and processing
             2002 services.
             2-
Res. 02-83   21-  Contract settlement with AFSCME Council 31, Local 1028/Health Department.
             2002
             2-   Renewing contract for third party administrator for COBRA and retiree program
Res. 02-84   21-  with Highmark.
             2002
             2-   Authorizing the execution of an AIA agreement with an architect, Andrew R.
Res. 02-85   21-  Partak, Jr., for work performed at Nicholson Street warehouse.
             2002
             3-
Res. 02-90   21-  Authorizing the execution of State Historic Preservation Agency grant agreements.
             2002
             3-
Res. 02-99   21-  Awarding bid for Xerox lease purchase agreement.
             2002
             3-
Res. 02-100  21-  Awarding bid for leasing vehicles for Sheriff’s Department.
             2002
             3-
Res. 02-102  21-  Awarding contract to NCM/Prairie Group for public highway improvements.
             2002
             3-   Awarding contract to Vulcan Construction Materials for public highway
Res. 02-103  21-  improvements.
             2002
             3-
Res. 02-104  21-  Awarding contract to NCM/Prairie Group for public highway improvements.
             2002
             3-   Awarding contract to Vulcan Construction Materials for public highway
Res. 02-105  21-  improvements.
             2002
             3-   Awarding contract to Azzarelli Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-106  21-  improvements.
             2002
             3-   Professional services supplemental agreement for design engineering for the
Res. 02-110  21-  improvement of County Highway 66 with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             2002
             3-   Professional services agreement for Phase I preliminary engineering with Willett,
Res. 02-113  21-  Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             2002
             3-   Professional services agreement for Phase I preliminary engineering with Smith
Res. 02-117  21-  Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2002
             3-   Professional services agreement for Phase I preliminary engineering with Smith
Res. 02-119  21-  Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2002
             3-   Professional services agreement for Phase I preliminary engineering with Smith
Res. 02-121  21-  Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2002
             3-   Professional services agreement for design study services for the improvement of
Res. 02-131  21-  County Highway 49 at Illinois Route 1 with Konig, Lingren, O’Hara, Abcona, Inc.
             2002
             3-   Interim operating agreement with Consumers Illinois Water Company for Calumet
Res. 02-133  21-  Gardens sewage system.
             2002
             4-
Res. 02-140  18-  Correcting scrivener’s error in Resolution 02-01.
             2002
             4-   Authorizing New World Systems’ Systems’ software license agreement for additional
Res. 02-149  18-  graphical user interface.
             2002
             4-
Res. 02-154  18-  Awarding contract for two hot tack distributors to Finkbinder Equipment Company.
             2002
             4-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-155  18-  improvements.
             2002
             4-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-157  18-  improvements.
             2002
             4-
Res. 02-159  18-  Awarding contract to The Daltons, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2002
             4-
Res. 02-160  18-  Awarding contract to Grosso Construction for public highway improvements.
             2002
             4-
Res. 02-161  18-  Awarding contract to Grosso Construction for public highway improvements.
             2002
             4-
Res. 02-162  18-  Awarding contract to Grosso Construction for public highway improvements.
             2002
             4-   Awarding contract to Kankakee Valley Construction Company, Inc. for public
Res. 02-163  18-  highway improvements.
             2002
             4-   Awarding contract to Vulcan Construction Materials for public highway
Res. 02-164  18-  improvements.
             2002
             4-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for the improvement of
Res. 02-171  18-  County Highway 37 at Bell Road with Konig, Lingren, O’Hara, Abcona, Inc.
             2002
             4-   Authorizing the County Executive to enter into SDBG agreements with the County
Res. 02-189  18-  Center for Community Concerns and Crisis Line of Will County for continuum of
             2002 care technology initiative.
             4-   Authorizing the execution of EDACS FX agreement with M/A-COM Private Radio
Res. 02-191  18-  System, Inc.
             2002
             5-
Res. 02-197  16-  Awarding contract for the phone switch for adult probation to Schuld, Inc.
             2002
             5-   Awarding contract for asbestos removal project at Emco Building to Focus
Res. 02-198  16-  Environmental.
             2002
             5-   Awarding contract for project management at Emco Building to Midwest
Res. 02-199  16-  Environmental Consulting Services, Inc.
             2002
             5-
Res. 02-208  16-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction for public highway improvements.
             2002
             5-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 02-209  16-  improvements.
             2002
             5-   Supplemental professional services agreement for additional design engineering
Res. 02-212  16-  for County Highway 64 with Teng and Associates, Inc. Consulting Engineers.
             2002
             5-   Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an agreement with CenterPoint
Res. 02-217  16-  Properties.
             2002
             5-   Authorizing the execution of any documents necessary to receive the State
Res. 02-222  16-  Environmental Protection Agency Enforcement grant through the duration of the
             2002 delegation agreement.
             5-   Authorizing the negotiation and entrance into an agreement with Joliet City
Res. 02-228  16-  Center Partnership for the use of the County State’s Attorney’s parking lot at
             2002 121 N. Chicago Street during post-game parties.
             6-   Authorizing the negotiation and execution an agreement of intent to abate
Res. 02-230  20-  property taxes for Ryan Companies US, Inc. for the benefit of Goss International
             2002 Corporation.
             6-   Awarding contract for surveillance camera digital recording system for Sheriff’s
Res. 02-241  20-  Department to Videotech.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract for elevator maintenance at Emco Building to ACM Elevator
Res. 02-242  20-  Company.
             2002
             6-
Res. 02-249  20-  Awarding contract to Callaghan Paving, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-250  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-251  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-
Res. 02-252  20-  Awarding contract to Preform Traffic Control for public highway improvements.
             2002
             6-
Res. 02-254  20-  Awarding contract “D” Construction for public highway improvements.
             2002
             6-
Res. 02-255  20-  Awarding contract to Kimco USA, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2002
             6-
Res. 02-256  20-  Awarding contract to Lovewell Fencing, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to Burke Electrical Construction for public highway
Res. 02-257  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-258  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 02-259  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-260  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to Steve Krause Construction Company for public highway
Res. 02-262  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to J. Merle Jones and Sons, Inc. for public highway
Res. 02-268  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 02-269  20-  improvements.
             2002
             6-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for a bridge in the
Res. 02-271  20-  Manhattan Road District with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             2002
             6-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for a bridge in the
Res. 02-273  20-  Manhattan Road District with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
             2002
             6-   Agreement between the county and Towpath joint venture for the purchase of
Res. 02-280  20-  Wetland Banking site credits.
             2002
             6-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for a bridge in Crete Road
Res. 02-283  20-  District with Rice, Berry and Associates.
             2002
             6-   Professional services agreement for design engineering for a bridge in Will Road
Res. 02-285  20-  District with Rice, Berry and Associates.
             2002
             6-   Agreement between the county and Lemont Partners, LLC for installing and
Res. 02-288  20-  maintaining concrete sidewalk and retaining walls.
             2002
             6-
Res. 02-291  20-  Authorizing the execution of a linkage agreement with Aunt Martha’s.
             2002
             7-   Confirming award of contract to T.J. Lambrecht Construction for public highway
Res. 02-263  18-  improvements.
             2002
             7-   Awarding contract to Alpha Building Maintenance Service for the cleaning of five
Res. 02-308  18-  county office buildings.
             2002
             7-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction Inc. for public highway
Res. 02-314  18-  improvements.
             2002
             7-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction Inc. for public highway
Res. 02-317  18-  improvements.
             2002
             7-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction for public highway
Res. 02-319  18-  improvements.
             2002
             8-   Awarding bid for telecommunications equipment maintenance, time and material
Res. 02-355  15-  service to Schuld, Inc.
             2002
             8-   Awarding bid for county office building exterior facade restoration to JP
Res. 02-356  15-  Phillips.
             2002
             8-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for public highway
Res. 02-368  15-  improvements.
             2002
             8-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction Inc. for public highway
Res. 02-370  15-  improvements.
             2002
             9-
Res. 02-399  19-  Awarding bid for E-Pod modifications at Sheriff’s adult detention facility.
             2002
             9-   Confirming award of contract to J. Merle Jones & Sons, Inc. for public highway
Res. 02-402  19-  improvements.
             2002
             10-  Authorizing execution of contract for a rural structural survey between the
Res. 02-440  17-  county and Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.
             2002
             10-  Awarding bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 02-460  17-  Diamond Detective Agency, Inc.
             2002
             10-  Awarding contract for unleaded gasoline for various locations to Petroleum
Res. 02-461  17-  Traders.
             2002
             10-  Awarding contract for elevator maintenance for various locations to Valley
Res. 02-462  17-  Elevator Company.
             2002
             10-
Res. 02-463  17-  Authorizing execution of contract for Pitney Bowes mail machine.
             2002
             10-  Authorizing execution of contract for Emco Building improvements with Midwest
Res. 02-488  17-  Environmental Consulting Services, Inc.
             2002
             11-  Extending inmate medical services contract between Wexford Health Services and
Res. 02-511  21-  the county on a month-to-month basis.
             2002
             11-
Res. 02-512  21-  Extending Ameritech Local Service Contract for 90-day period.
             2002
             11-  Awarding contract for structural fireproofing at Emco Building to Kenny
Res. 02-513  21-  Industrial Services.
             2002
             11-  Confirming award of contract to Herlihy Mid- Continent Co. for public highway
Res. 02-518  21-  improvements.
             2002
             11-  Renewing contract to Willis of Illinois, Inc./HPP Group of broker/consultant for
Res. 02-547  21-  property and casualty.
             2002
             11-
Res. 02-548  21-  Authorizing execution of contracts for property and casualty insurance.
             2002
             11-  Authorizing execution of a contract for design services for an automatic fire
Res. 02-550  21-  suppression system at Emco with Andrew R. Partak, Jr., architect.
             2002
             11-
Res. 02-553  21-  Authorizing execution of contract for third airport consulting services.
             2002
             1-   Awarding contract for printing of real estate property tax bills to J.J. Collins
Res. 03-05   16-  Printers.
             2003
             1-   Awarding bid for computer printer remanufactured, new toner cartridges, and
Res. 03-07   16-  printer maintenance and yearly cleaning to Cardinal Cartridge.
             2003
             2-   Awarding bid for asbestos removal project at Emco Building, 57 North Ottawa
Res. 03-46   20-  Street, to Insulco.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-47   20-  Awarding bid for leasing vehicles for Sheriff’s Department to Leasing 2.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-52   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-53   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-54   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-55   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to United Rentals.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-56   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to United Rentals.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-57   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-58   20-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2003
             2-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Contech
Res. 03-59   20-  Construction Products.
             2003
             2-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Vulcan
Res. 03-60   20-  Construction Materials.
             2003
             2-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie
Res. 03-61   20-  Group.
             2003
             2-   Confirming award of purchases for equipment for the Department of Highways to
Res. 03-62   20-  Troxler Electronic Labs, Inc.
             2003
             2-   Confirming award of purchases for equipment for the Department of Highways to
Res. 03-63   20-  Humboldt Manufacturing Co.
             2003
             2-   Confirming award of purchases for equipment for the Department of Highways to
Res. 03-64   20-  Troxler Electronic Labs, Inc.
             2003
             2-   Awarding contract for professional services to First Environmental Laboratories,
Res. 03-79   20-  Inc. (Amending Resolution 04-460, adopted 10-21-2004).
             2003
             2-
Res. 03-84   20-  Renewing contract for Third Party Administrator for Cobra and retiree programs.
             2003
             2-   Authorizing execution of contract for design services for modifications and
Res. 03-86   20-  improvements to the Emco Building for Probation Department office space.
             2003
             2-   Transferring current youth and special populations subcontracts from the
Res. 03-89   20-  Workforce Development Council to the county and the County Workforce Investment
             2003 Board.
             3-   Confirming award of purchases of equipment for the Department of Highways to
Res. 03-103  20-  Standard Equipment Company.
             2003
             3-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie
Res. 03-104  20-  Group.
             2003
             3-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Gallagher
Res. 03-105  20-  Materials.
             2003
             3-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
Res. 03-106  20-  Construction Co.
             2003
             3-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Gallagher Asphalt
Res. 03-107  20-  Corporation.
             2003
             3-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to DeAngelo
Res. 03-108  20-  Brothers, Inc.
             2003
             3-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to “D” Construction,
Res. 03-109  20-  Inc.
             2003
             4-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Grosso
Res. 03-154  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             4-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Grosso
Res. 03-155  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             4-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Grosso
Res. 03-156  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             4-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Callaghan Paving,
Res. 03-157  17-  Inc.
             2003
             4-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to “D” Construction,
Res. 03-159  17-  Inc.
             2003
             4-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Kankakee Valley
Res. 03-161  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             4-   Authorizing execution of contract with Melanie Arthur of Greg Newton and
Res. 03-190  17-  Associates for training and technical assistance for the Workforce Investment
             2003 Board.
             4-   Authorizing execution of contract with Learning and Skills Center for adult
Res. 03-191  17-  education, GED, job search and placement for out-of-school youth.
             2003
             4-   Authorizing execution of contract with Community Works Foundation – Education
Res. 03-192  17-  Services Network for math/reading instruction, summer work experience,
             2003 occupational skill training, leadership development, GED, counseling, supportive
                  services, mentoring, and follow-up services for out-of-school youth.
             4-   Authorizing execution of amendment to the intergovernmental cooperation agreement
Res. 03-193  17-  with the Village of Homer Glen for land use services.
             2003
             5-
Res. 03-200  15-  Rejecting bids for inmate medical services contract and authorizing rebid.
             2003
             5-   Extending inmate services contract between Wexford Health Services and the county
Res. 03-201  15-  on month-to-month basis until 9-1-2003.
             2003
             5-
Res. 03-202  15-  Awarding contract for natural gas to Peoples Energy Service Corporation.
             2003
             6-
            19-   
             2003
             5-   Awarding bid for masonry restoration and painting at County Records Management
Res. 03-203  15-  Facility to Eugene Matthews.
             2003
             5-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
Res. 03-208  15-  Construction Co.
             2003
             5-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Preform Traffic
Res. 03-209  15-  Control Systems, LTD.
             2003
             5-
Res. 03-237  15-  Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contracts.
             2003
             5-   Authorizing execution of contract with Cushman Wakefield to conduct targeted
Res. 03-238  15-  industry and occupational analysis of the county.
             2003
             5-   Approving amendment to the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone
Res. 03-239a 15-  intergovernmental agreement.
             2003
             6-
Res. 03-254  19-  Awarding one-year contract for Nextel cellular phone service.
             2003
             6-
Res. 03-258  19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to FBI Buildings, Inc.
             2003
             6-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Gallagher Asphalt
Res. 03-259  19-  Corporation.
             2003
             6-
Res. 03-260  19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2003
             6-   Authorizing execution of an agreement for the extension of a box culvert with
Res. 03-266  19-  Remington Homes.
             2003
             6-   Authorizing expenditures for improvements to County Highway 64 (Francis Road)
Res. 03-272  19-  over Marley Creek (S.N. 099-3090), Count Board District #2, to Teng & Associates,
             2003 Inc.
             6-   Authorizing supplemental professional services agreement for additional design
Res. 03-273  19-  engineering for County Highway 64 (Francis Road) with Teng & Associates, Inc.
             2003
             6-   Authorizing second amendment to agreement for the provision of professional
Res. 03-277  19-  services between the county and Envirogen (EMCON/OWT, Inc.).
             2003
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contract with
Res. 03-285  19-  Joliet Junior College— Institute of Economic Technology.
             2003
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for persons with
Res. 03-286  19-  disabilities with Cornerstone Services.
             2003
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for persons with
Res. 03-287  19-  disabilities with Trinity Services.
             2003
             6-   Authorizing emergency purchase of necessary surveillance equipment, wiring, and
Res. 03-294  19-  labor for the adult detention facility from Video Master.
             2003
             7-   Extending inmate medical services contract with Wexford Health Services on a
Res. 03-307  17-  month-to-month basis.
             2003
             7-   Awarding bid for water supply section of fire suppression project at Emco
Res. 03-308  17-  Building.
             2003
             7-   Awarding bid for electrical improvements section of fire suppression project at
Res. 03-309  17-  Emco Building.
             2003
             7-   Awarding bid for new fire alarm system section of fire suppression project at
Res. 03-310  17-  Emco Building.
             2003
             7-   Awarding bid for new sprinkler system section of fire suppression project at Emco
Res. 03-311  17-  Building.
             2003
             7-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Gosso
Res. 03-313  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             7-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
Res. 03-314  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             7-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
Res. 03-316  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             7-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
Res. 03-318  17-  Construction Co.
             2003
             7-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Callaghan Paving,
Res. 03-320  17-  Inc.
             2003
             7-   Authorizing execution of agreement with Boughton Trucking and Material, Inc. to
Res. 03-323  17-  construct equipment tunnel.
             2003
             7-   Authorizing execution of contract with J.M. Industries, Inc. for demolition of
Res. 03-334  17-  103 Dellwood Avenue.
             2003
             7-   Authorizing execution of contract addendum for Corporation for a Skilled
Res. 03-337  17-  Workforce.
             2003
             8-
Res. 03-349  21-  Awarding bid for mainframe upgrade to Reliable Computer.
             2003
             8-   Awarding bid for disposable undergarment products for Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab
Res. 03-350  21-  Center to McKesson Extended.
             2003
             8-   Awarding bid for ATM machine and services for the Circuit Clerk’s office to
Res. 03-351  21-  Harris Bank.
             2003
             8-
Res. 03-362  21-  Confirming award of purchase of equipment from West Side Tractor Sales.
             2003
             8-
Res. 03-363  21-  Confirming award of purchase of equipment from J. Merle Jones & Sons, Inc.
             2003
             8-
Res. 03-364  21-  Confirming award of purchase of equipment from J. Merle Jones & Sons, Inc.
             2003
             8-   Authorizing execution of contract with J.M. Industries, Inc. for demolition of
Res. 03-374  21-  103 Dellwood Avenue.
             2003
             8-
Res. 03-383  21-  Authorizing execution of assessments employment agreement with Rhonda R. Novak.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing renewal of contract with Cardinal Cartridge, Inc. for toner
Res. 03-389  18-  cartridges and printer maintenance.
             2003
             9-
Res. 03-396  18-  Authorizing purchase of gas water heater at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center.
             2003
             9-   Awarding contract for rural historic structural survey to Wiss, Janney, Elstner
Res. 03-399  18-  Associates, Inc.
             2003
             9-   Awarding bid for inmate medical care for two facilities to Wexford Health
Res. 03-401  18-  Services.
             2003
             9-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Steve Krause
Res. 03-403  18-  Construction Co.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing execution of agreement with Unocal Pipeline Co. for pipeline
Res. 03-418  18-  alterations.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing execution of contract with J.M. Industries, Inc. for demolition of
Res. 03-420  18-  2141 Luther Avenue.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing execution of agreement with Land and Water Resources, Inc. for
Res. 03-422  18-  purchase of wetland banking site credits.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of contract for medical benefits for county
Res. 03-428  18-  employees with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing negotiation of CDBG and home agreements with the County Center for
Res. 03-430  18-  Community Concerns.
             2003
             9-   Authorizing execution of agreement for consulting services for data and map
Res. 03-432  18-  products with Maximus, Inc.
             2003
             9-
Res. 03-433  18-  Amending professional services agreement with the County Chamber/CED.
             2003
             10-
Res. 03-440  16-  Awarding bid for copiers to McGrath Office Equipment.
             2003
             10-
Res. 03-441  16-  Rejecting bid for EMA radio system.
             2003
             10-
Res. 03-442  16-  Awarding contract for unleaded and diesel fuel to Petroleum Traders.
             2003
             10-  Authorizing execution of contract with Aces Demolition for demolition of 132
Res. 03-461  16-  Independence.
             2003
             10-  Authorizing negotiation and execution of contract with Davis Vision for provision
Res. 03-469  16-  of vision benefits for county employees.
             2003
             10-  Authorizing negotiation and execution of contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield of
Res. 03-470  16-  Illinois for provision of dental benefits for county employees.
             2003
             10-  Renewing contract for broker/consultant for procurement of property and casualty
Res. 03-471  16-  insurance coverage with Willis of Illinois, Inc.
             2003
             10-  Authorizing purchase of computers and telephone system from Andromeda Computing
Res. 03-474  16-  Systems.
             2003
             10-  Authorizing execution of contract for consulting services for development of
Res. 03-475  16-  South Suburban Airport with Farnsworth Group, Inc.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing renewal of contract for security guard services for one year with
Res. 03-488  20-  Diamond Detective Agency, Inc.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing renewal of contract for maintenance and cleaning services with Alpha
Res. 03-489  20-  Building Maintenance Service, Inc.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing negotiation and execution of amended agreement of intent to abate
Res. 03-494  20-  property taxes for Michaels Stores Inc.
             2003
             11-  Awarding contract for optical scan voting equipment to Election Systems &
Res. 03-496  20-  Software.
             2003
             11-
Res. 03-503  20-  Awarding contract for refuse service for county buildings to CitiWaste.
             2003
             11-
Res. 03-504  20-  Awarding contract for therapy services to Genesis Rehab Services.
             2003
             11-
Res. 03-505  20-  Awarding contract for bottled water service to Nestle-Ice Mountain Water.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for intersection design
Res. 03-511  20-  with Kenig, Lingren, O’Hara, Aboona, Inc.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing execution of contract with J.M. Industries, Inc. for demolition of
Res. 03-524  20-  15414 139th Street.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing execution of contracts with various insurance companies for property
Res. 03-531  20-  and casualty insurance coverage.
             2003
             11-  Authorizing execution of contracts for third party administration of workers’
Res. 03-532  20-  compensation and general liability claims.
             2003
             12-
Res. 03-545  18-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
             2003
             12-
Res. 03-547  18-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Herlihy Mid-Continent Co.
             2003
             12-  Authorizing execution of agreement with Wetlands Mitigation of Illinois, LLC for
Res. 03-549  18-  purchase of wetland banking site credits.
             2003
             12-  Authorizing negotiation of financial consulting services agreement with Terri
Res. 03-581  18-  Smalinsky d/b/a Arlington Advisory Group.
             2003
             1-
Res. 04-03   15-  Awarding contract for procurement card services to Harris Bank.
             2004
             1-   Awarding contract for refinancing county-wide radio system with costs of system
Res. 04-04   15-  enhancement to Banc One Leasing Corp. (Amending Resolution 04-436, adopted 11-18-
             2004 2004).
             1-
Res. 04-10   15-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             1-   Authorizing execution of contract for financial consulting services with Terri
Res. 04-29   15-  Smalinsky d/b/a Arlington Advisory Group.
             2004
             1-
Res. 04-32   15-  Awarding contract for remodeling at Emco Building to Ron Stonitsch Construction.
             2004
             1-   Authorizing execution of contract for professional services for stormwater
Res. 04-33   15-  services with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2004
             1-
Res. 04-34   15-  Authorizing execution of Farnsworth Group, Inc. consultant agreement.
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-50   19-  Rejecting bid for dietary foods for Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center.
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-51   19-  Awarding bid for body armor for Sheriff’s Department to JCM Uniforms.
             2004
             2-   Awarding bid for electronic collection events to Chesapeake Electronics
Res. 04-53   19-  Recycling, Inc.
             2004
             2-   Awarding bid for household hazardous waste collection program to Onyx
Res. 04-54   19-  Environmental Services, LLC.
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-57   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie Group.
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-58   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie Group.
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-59   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to:
             2004
                H.P. Graham Construction Co., Inc.
                James D. Fiala Paving Co., Inc.
                Gallagher Materials Corp.
                P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
                K-Five Construction Corp.
             2-
Res. 04-60   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to:
             2004
                P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
                H.P. Graham Construction Co., Inc.
             2-
Res. 04-61   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to:
             2004
                Vulcan Construction Materials, L.P.
                Joliet Sand and Gravel Co.
                NCM/Prairie Group LLC.
             2-
Res. 04-62   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2004
             2-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Osburn Associates, Inc.
Res. 04-63   19-  (Rescinded by Resolution 04-278, passed 7-15-2004).
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-64   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Rocal, Inc.
             2004
             2-
Res. 04-65   19-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to DeAngelo Brothers, Inc.
             2004
             2-   Authorizing execution of amended marketing agreement for reproduction and resale
Res. 04-81   19-  of cadastral aerial tax parcel maps with Sidwell Co.
             2004
             2-   Authorizing execution of system purchase contract to construct radio system site
Res. 04-85   19-  enhancement with M/A-COM, Inc.
             2004
             3-
Res. 04-98   18-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Grosso Construction Co.
             2004
             3-
Res. 04-99   18-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie Group LLC.
             2004
             3-
Res. 04-100  18-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Alpha Construction Co.
             2004
             3-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Preform Traffic Control
Res. 04-101  18-  Systems, Ltd.
             2004
             3-   Authorizing execution of contract with J.M. Industries, Inc. for demolition of
Res. 04-111  18-  1031 E. Jackson Street.
             2004
             3-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of contract for construction of Arsenal
Res. 04-118  18-  Road bridge of BNSF with Burlington, Norther and Sante Fe Railroad.
             2004
             4-   Renewing contract for telecommunications equipment maintenance, time and material
Res. 04-133  15-  with Schuld, Inc.
             2004
             4-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Vulcan Construction
Res. 04-137  15-  Materials LP.
             2004
             4-
Res. 04-138  15-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Glenn McCann Co.
             2004
             4-
Res. 04-139  15-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Harry W. Kuhn, Inc.
             2004
             4-   Authorizing agreement for reimbursement of relocation of facilities at County
Res. 04-143  15-  Highway 16 and 151st Street with Northern Illinois Gas Co.
             2004
             4-   Authorizing agreement for maintenance of storm sewer system at Founder’s Crossing
Res. 04-158  15-  with Founder’s Crossing, LP.
             2004
             4-
Res. 04-166  15-  Authorizing execution of renewal of EDACS FX Agreement with M/A COM, Inc.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-173  20-  Awarding bid for retired surplus vehicles to Brian Lagiglia.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-174  20-  Rejecting bid for mobile training unit for Workforce Services Department.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-181  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Iroquois Paving Corp.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-183  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Bulk Storage, Inc.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-184  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Grosso Construction Co.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-185  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to NCM/Prairie Group LLC.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-186  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-187  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Aurora Blacktop, Inc.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-188  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-189  20-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
             2004
             5-   Authorizing execution of agreement for installation of temporary traffic signals
Res. 04-201  20-  with Indicom Electric Co.
             2004
             5-   Authorizing execution of agreement for maintenance of storm sewer system at
Res. 04-202  20-  Menards Development with Menard, Inc.
             2004
             5-   Authorizing execution of agreement for reimbursement of relocation of facilities
Res. 04-205  20-  crossing County Highway 5 with Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-214  20-  Award bid for fire alarm system to Commercial Electronic Systems, Inc.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-215  20-  Awarding bid for disposable undergarment products to McKesson Medical.
             2004
             5-
Res. 04-216  20-  Awarding bid for diabetic supplies to McKesson Medical.
             2004
             5-   Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement for Executive Branch and
Res. 04-217  20-  LPNs with AFSCME 31 Local 1028.
             2004
             5-   Authorizing execution of contract for architectural services for new animal
Res. 04-218  20-  control facility with Wight & Co.
             2004
             6-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements to Steve Krause Construction,
Res. 04-232  17-  Inc.
             2004
             6-
Res. 04-234  17-  Awarding contract for public highway improvements to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             6-   Authorizing execution of agreement for reimbursement of relocation of facilities
Res. 04-235  17-  on County Highway 84 with Wolverine Pipe Line Co.
             2004
             6-
Res. 04-246  17-  Awarding contract for bread products to Interstate Brands Corp.
             2004
             6-   Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement with the County Sheriff and
Res. 04-248  17-  Metropolitan Alliance of Police Will County Sheriff’s Police Management
             2004 Association Chapter 123.
             6-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of contract for expansion of the county
Res. 04-249  17-  adult detention facility with Teng & Associates.
             2004
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contract with
Res. 04-252  17-  Wilco Area Career Center.
             2004
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contract with
Res. 04-253  17-  Joliet Junior College - Institute of Economic Technology.
             2004
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contract with
Res. 04-254  17-  Education Service Network.
             2004
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contract with
Res. 04-255  17-  Center for Correctional Concerns.
             2004
             6-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth program contract with
Res. 04-256  17-  Learning and Skills Center.
             2004
             7-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements in Will Road district, County
Res. 04-268  15-  Road District #1, to Riber Construction, Inc.
             2004
             7-
Res. 04-269  15-  Authorizing improvements to bridge on Corning Road over ExLine Slough.
             2004
             7-   Awarding contract for design engineering services on County Highway 56 (Black
Res. 04-272  15-  Road), County Board District #5, to C.B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2004
             7-   Awarding contract for design engineering services on County Highway 14
Res. 04-274  15-  (Plainfield-Naperville Road), County Board District #3, to Hampton, Lenzini, and
             2004 Renwick, Inc.
             7-   Rescinding Resolution 04-63 which awarded contract for sheet aluminum sign panels
Res. 04-278  15-  (type one) to Osburn Associates, Inc.
             2004
             7-   Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements between the county
Res. 04-279  15-  and Hall Signs, Inc.
             2004
             7-   Confirming award of contract for the repair or joint Will-Kankakee County Line
Res. 04-280  15-  Bridge, County Board District #6, between the county and “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             7-   Authorizing contract for repairs to the Warner Bridge over the Kankakee River,
Res. 04-281  15-  County Board District #6.
             2004
             7-   Awarding contract for demolition of properties at 135 State Street in Lockport
Res. 04-284  15-  Township to Aces Demolition.
             2004
             7-   Authorizing successor collective bargaining agreement between the County Circuit
Res. 04-290  15-  Clerk 12th Circuit and AFSCME 31 Local 1028 AFL-CIO.
             2004
             7-   Authorizing execution of contract for renewal of the county community health
Res. 04-291  15-  center professional liability insurance.
             2004
             7-   Authorizing execution of contract for architectural services for courtroom
Res. 04-293  15-  renovations at the Emco Building with Andrew Partak.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for architectural and engineering services for expansion of the
Res. 04-302  19-  county adult detention facility with Teng & Associates.
             2004
             8-   Approving agreement for topographic survey and development of drainage
Res. 04-304  19-  alternatives for Saddlebrook Estates, County Board District #6 with C.B. Burke
             2004 Engineering, Ltd.
             8-
Res. 04-316  19-  Confirming award of bid for two trucks to J. Merle Jones & Sons International.
             2004
             8-
Res. 04-317  19-  Confirming award of bid for a front end loader to Patten Construction Products.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for public highway improvements in Plainfield Road District,
Res. 04-318  19-  County Board District #5, to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to County Highway 17 (Manhattan and Arsenal
Res. 04-319  19-  Road), County Board District #6, to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing improvements to County Highway 17 (Manhattan-Arsenal Road) by
Res. 04-320  19-  contract.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to County Highway (Francis Road), County Board
Res. 04-321  19-  District #2, to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             8-
Res. 04-322  19-  Authorizing improvements to County Highway 64 (Francis Road) by contract.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements County Highway 26 (Zelm Road), County Board
Res. 04-323  19-  District #6, to Kankakee Valley Construction Co, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to County Highway 62 (North Briggs Street),
Res. 04-324  19-  County Board District #8, to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to various county highways in various county
Res. 04-325  19-  board districts to G.F. Structures Corp.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to various county highways in various county
Res. 04-326  19-  board districts to Freehill Asphalt, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to County Highway 38 (Marley Road), County
Res. 04-327  19-  Board District #2, to Riber Construction, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing improvement to County Highway 38 (Marley Road) bridge over Marley
Res. 04-328  19-  Creek by contract.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to County Highway 58 (County Line Road),
Res. 04-329  19-  County Board District #1, to Steve Krause Construction Co.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing improvements to County Highway 58 (County Line Road) bridge over
Res. 04-330  19-  ExLine Slough by contract.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for improvements to County Highway 63 (Schoolhouse Road),
Res. 04-331  19-  County Board District #2, to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing improvements to County Highway 63 (Schoolhouse Road) bridge over
Res. 04-332  19-  Hickory Creek by contract.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing agreement for reimbursement of relocation of gas main facilities at
Res. 04-339  19-  County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) and County Highway 52 (Gougar Road), County
             2004 Board District #6, between the county and Northern Illinois Gas Company (doing
                  business as NICOR Gas Company).
             8-   Reimbursing Northern Illinois Gas Company (doing business as NICOR Gas Company)
Res. 04-340  19-  for relocation of gas main facilities at County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) and
             2004 County Highway 52 (Gougar Red.), County Board District #6.
             8-   Awarding contract for construction engineering services for improvements to
Res. 04-344  19-  County Highway 88 (Weber Road) from Division Street to Lily Cache Lane, County
             2004 Board Districts #3, #4, #7 and #9, to C.B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             8-   Authorizing constructions services for improvements to County Highway 88 (Weber
Res. 04-345  19-  Road) from Division Street to Lily Cache Lane, County Board Districts #3, #4, #7
             2004 and #9, by contract.
             8-   Awarding contract for preliminary engineering services for improvements to County
Res. 04-346  19-  Highway 70 (Drecksler Road) bridge over Black Walnut Creek, County Board
             2004 Districts #1 and #6, to Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             8-   Authorizing preliminary engineering services for improvements to County Highway
Res. 04-347  19-  70 (Drecksler Road) bridge over Black Walnut Creek, County Board Districts #1 and
             2004 #6, to Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             8-   Awarding contract for engineering services for improvements to County Highway 56
Res. 04-350  19-  (Black Road) over the DuPage River, County Board Districts #5 and #6, to Rice,
             2004 Berry, and Associates.
             8-   Authorizing engineering services for improvements to County Highway 56 (Black
Res. 04-351  19-  Road) over the DuPage River, County Board Districts #5 and #6, by contract.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for right-of-way acquisition services for improvements to
Res. 04-352  19-  County Highway 66 (111th Street) between Illinois Route 59 and Plainfield-
             2004 Napierville Road, County Board Districts #3 and #4, to “T” Engineering Services,
             8-   Awarding contract for medical products for Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 04-362  19-  McKesson Medical and Professional Medical companies.
             2004
             8-   Renewing contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 04-363  19-  Genesis Rehab Services.
             2004
             8-   Renewing contract for security guard services at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center
Res. 04-364  19-  with Diamond Detective Agency.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing successor collective bargaining agreement between the County Sheriff
Res. 04-365  19-  and State Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing successor collective bargaining agreement between the State’s
Res. 04-366  19-  Attorney and AFSCME 31 Local 1028 AFL-CIO.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing execution of telecommunications tower site access agreement with
Res. 04-368  19-  SATCOM, LLC.
             2004
             8-
Res. 04-372  19-  Renewing contract for cellular phone service with Nextel Communications.
             2004
             8-   Renewing contract for toner cartridges and printer maintenance with Cardinal
Res. 04-373  19-  Cartridge, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Renewing contract for maintenance and cleaning for various county office
Res. 04-374  19-  buildings with Alpha Building Maintenance Service, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Renewing contract for elevator maintenance for various county office buildings
Res. 04-375  19-  with Valley Elevator, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Renewing contract for pay phone service for various county office buildings with
Res. 04-377  19-  SBC Communications.
             2004
             8-
Res. 04-378  19-  Awarding contract for tire collection event to Tire Grinders Transporters, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of contract for communications and media
Res. 04-380  19-  relations consulting services with Mack Communications, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for vocational assessment, job search assistance, and job
Res. 04-383  19-  placement services for persons with disabilities with Cornerstone Services.
             2004
             8-   Awarding contract for vocational assessment, basic skills, job search assistance,
Res. 04-383  19-  and job placement services for persons with disabilities with Trinity Services.
             2004
             9-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of agreement of intent to abate property
Res. 04-387  16-  taxes for Chicago Tube and Iron Company.
             2004
             9-   Authorizing negotiating and execution of agreement of intent to abate property
Res. 04-388  16-  taxes for Advanced International.
             2004
             9-   Authorizing negotiating and execution of agreement of intent to abate property
Res. 04-389  16-  taxes for Pinnacle 6 LLC, for the benefit of Florstar Sales, Inc.
             2004
             9-   Authorizing negotiating and execution of contract designating La Salle Capital
Res. 04-398  16-  Markets (a division of ABN AMRO Financial Services) as the senior managing
             2004 underwriter for the expansion and renovation of the county adult detention
                  facility.
             9-   Awarding contract for preliminary engineering services for improvement of County
Res. 04-401  16-  Highway 4 (Cedar Road) bridge over Spring Creek, County Board #7, to Willett,
             2004 Hofmann, and Associates.
             9-   Authorizing contract for preliminary engineering services for improvement of
Res. 04-402  16-  County Highway 4 (Cedar Road) bridge over Spring Creek, County Board #7, to
             2004 Willett, Hofmann, and Associates.
             9-   Authorizing supplemental agreement for construction of Baseline Road from Arsenal
Res. 04-405  16-  Road to Drummond Road, County Board District #6 with Consoer Townsend Envirodyne
             2004 Engineering.
             9-   Awarding contract for right-of-way acquisition services for improvement to County
Res. 04-406  16-  Highway 11 (Veterans’ Parkway) from 115th Street to Illinois Route 53, County
             2004 Board District #3, to Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             9-   Authorizing right-of-way acquisition services for improvement to County Highway
Res. 04-407  16-  11 (Veterans’ Parkway) from 115th Street to Illinois Route 53, County Board
             2004 District #3, by contract.
             9-   Authorizing supplemental agreement for design engineering services for
Res. 04-408  16-  improvement to Veterans’ Parkway from Lily Cache Lane to Illinois Route 53,
             2004 County Board District #3, to Baxter and Woodman, Inc.
             9-   Authorizing design engineering services for improvement to Veterans’ Parkway from
Res. 04-409  16-  Lily Cache Lane to Illinois Route 53, County Board District #3, by supplemental
             2004 agreement.
             9-   Awarding contract for the administration of the county COBRA and retiree programs
Res. 04-416  16-  to Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
             2004
             9-   Renewing contract for property and casualty insurance broker/consultant with
Res. 04-418  16-  Willis of Illinois, Inc.
             2004
             10-  Authorizing execution of agreement regarding Special Use Condition (13(c) of Case
Res. 04-425  21-  No. 5233-MS2V) with the Port of Will County, LLC.
             2004
             10-  Awarding contract for nursing services at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 04-432  21-  various low bidders for different classification of employees.
             2004
             10-
Res. 04-433  21-  Awarding contract for unleaded and diesel fuel to Petroleum Traders.
             2004
             10-
Res. 04-434  21-  Awarding contract for annual county audit to PTW & Company.
             2004
             10-  Renewing contract for telecommunications equipment maintenance, time and material
Res. 04-435  21-  service to reflect after hours, weekends and holiday rates with Schuld, Inc.
             2004
             10-  Awarding contract for right-of-way acquisition services for improvement to County
Res. 04-450  21-  Highway (Cedar Road) bridge over Jackson Creek, County Board District #6, to
             2004 Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             10-  Authorizing right-of-way acquisition services for improvement to County Highway
Res. 04-451  21-  (Cedar Road) bridge over Jackson Creek, County Board District #6, by contract.
             2004
             10-  Awarding contract for Phase II preliminary engineering services for improvement
Res. 04-452  21-  to County Highway 24 (Indiana Avenue) bridge over Trim Creek, County Board
             2004 District #1, to Willet, Hofmann, & Associates.
             10-  Authorizing Phase II preliminary engineering services for improvement to County
Res. 04-453  21-  Highway 24 (Indiana Avenue) bridge over Trim Creek, County Board District #1, by
             2004 contract.
             10-  Awarding contract for construction engineering services for improvement to County
Res. 04-454  21-  Highway 64 (Francis Road) bridge over Marley Creek, County Board District #2, to
             2004 Teng & Associates, Inc.
             10-  Authorizing construction engineering services for improvement to County Highway
Res. 04-455  21-  64 (Francis Road) bridge over Marley Creek, County Board District #2, by
             2004 contract.
             10-  Authorizing additional supplemental design engineering services for improvement
Res. 04-457  21-  to County Highway 38 (Marley Road) bridge over Marley Creek by contract (with
             2004 Casler, Houser and Hutchinson, Inc.).
             10-  Authorizing additional right-of-way acquisition services for improvement to
Res. 04-458  21-  County Highway 66 (11th Street) from Illinois Route 59 to Plainfield- Napierville
             2004 Road (with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.).
             10-  Authorizing amendment to an agreement for professional services (Res. 03-79) with
Res. 04-460  21-  First Environmental Laboratories, Inc.
             2004
             10-  Authorizing execution of license agreement for placement of bronze sculpture from
Res. 04-472  21-  Friends of Community Public Art at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center with the City
             2004 of Joliet.
             10-  Authorizing negotiation of contract with Duncan & Associates to revise the County
Res. 04-477  21-  Subdivision Ordinance.
             2004
             10-  Requesting and authorizing the County Public Building Commission to enter into a
Res. 04-481  21-  professional services contract for master planning and continual services for the
             2004 Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center renovation project(s) with the Farnsworth Group.
             11-  Amending Resolution 04-04 regarding bid award for refinancing the original cost
Res. 04-436  18-  of the county’s radio system and enhancement to reflect accurately closing rates
             2004 and monies financed with Banc One Leasing Corp.
             11-
Res. 04-487  18-  Awarding contract for county building refuse service to Joliet Disposal.
             2004
             11-  Renewing professional services agreement with the County Chamber Center for
Res. 04-488  18-  Economic Development.
             2004
             11-  Authorizing execution of grant agreement for Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center with
Res. 04-509  18-  the Illinois Clean Energy Community Foundation.
             2004
             11-  Awarding contracts for property and casualty insurance to various entities
Res. 04-511  18-  determined by bid.
             2004
             11-  Awarding contracts for construction and engineering services for the new animal
Res. 04-513  18-  control facility to Wight & Co.
             2004
             11-  Authorization negotiation and execution of renewal contract for communications
Res. 04-516  18-  and media relations with Mack Communications, Inc.
             2004
             11-  Renewing contract for financial consulting services with Arlington Advisory
Res. 04-517  18-  Group.
             2004
             11-
Res. 04-518  18-  Renewing contract for consultant and lobbyist services with William F. Mahar.
             2004
             11-  Amending the agreement for consulting services during fiscal year 2004 with the
Res. 04-519  18-  Farnsworth Group, Inc.
             2004
             11-  Awarding contract for consulting services for fiscal year 2005 with the
Res. 04-520  18-  Farnsworth Group, Inc.
             2004
             12-  Authorizing agreement for cost sharing associated with improvement to the
Res. 04-538  16-  intersection of Weber Road and Renwick Road with Finders International, Inc.
             2004
             12-  Awarding supplemental design engineering services contract for improvement to
Res. 04-542  16-  County Highway 35 (135th Street) from New Avenue to Illinois Route 171, County
             2004 Board Districts #3 and #7 with C.B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             12-  Authorizing improvement to County Highway 35 (135th Street) from New Avenue to
Res. 04-543  16-  Illinois Route 171, County Board Districts #3 and #7, by contract.
             2004
             12-  Awarding engineering services contract for construction of Baseline Road from
Res. 04-544  16-  Arsenal Road to Drummond Road, County Board District #6, Consoer Townsend
             2004 Envirodyne Engineering.
             12-  Authorizing construction of Baseline Road from Arsenal Road to Drummond Road,
Res. 04-545  16-  County Board District #6, by contract.
             2004
             12-  Awarding contract for improvement to County Highway 84 (191st Street), County
Res. 04-546  16-  Board District #2, to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
             2004
             12-  Authorizing improvement to County Highway 84 (191st Street), County Board
Res. 04-547  16-  District #2, by contract.
             2004
             12-  Awarding contract for improvement to County Highway 19 (Center Road) bridge over
Res. 04-548  16-  Forked Creek, County Board District #1, to S. Krausse Construction Co.
             2004
             12-  Authorizing improvement to County Highway 19 (Center Road) bridge over Forked
Res. 04-5449 16-  Creek, County Board District #1, by contract.
             2004
             12-  Awarding contract for the demolition of property at 2145 California in Lockport
Res. 04-551  16-  Township to A.C. Excavating.
             2004
             12-  Authorizing demolition of property at 2145 California in Lockport Township by
Res. 04-552  16-  contract.
             2004
             12-  Authorizing execution of agreement for the use of IETP Brownfield grant monies
Res. 04-553  16-  for professional services between the county and Shaw Environmental, Inc.
             2004
             1-   Authorizing construction of new bridge over South Branch of Forked Creek on Bruns
Res. 05-09   20-  Road in Green Garden Township, County Board District #1, by contract.
             2005
             1-   Authorizing construction of new bridge over Cedar Creek on Brandon Road, County
Res. 05-10   20-  Board District #8, by contract.
             2005
             1-   Supplementing contract for the replacement of the structure carrying 111th Street
Res. 05-12   20-  over the DuPage River, urban roadway approach pavement with curbs and gutters,
             2005 storm sewer system, and other related work with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             1-   Awarding contract for Phase II design engineering services for roadway and
Res. 05-30   20-  appurtenant work thereto on County Highway 4 (Cedar Road) at 167th Street/
             2005 Division Street, County Board District #7, to Robinson Engineering, Ltd.
             1-   Authorizing improvement to County Highway 4 (Cedar Road) at 167th Street/Division
Res. 05-31   20-  Street, County Board District #7, by contract.
             2005
             1-   Awarding supplemental contract for Phase II design engineering services for the
Res. 05-32   20-  preparation of contract plans for improvements to County Highway 76 (Gin Mill
             2005 Road/143rd Street) between U.S. Route 30 and Illinois Route 59, County Board
                  District #5, to HNTB Corp.
             1-   Authorizing improvements to County Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road/143rd Street)
Res. 05-33   20-  between U.S. Route 30 and Illinois Route 59, County Board District #5, by
             2005 contract.
             1-   Awarding contract for Phase III construction engineering services for
Res. 05-34   20-  improvements to County Highway 84 (191st Street) between Harlem Avenue (Illinois
             2005 Route 43) and 80th Avenue, County Board District #2, to Robinson Engineering,
                  Ltd.
             1-   Authorizing improvements to County Highway 84 (191st Street) between Harlem
Res. 05-35   20-  Avenue (Illinois Route 43) and 80th Avenue, County Board District #2, by
             2005 contract.
             1-
Res. 05-36   20-  Authorizing improvements to the entire county highway system by contract.
             2005
             1-   Authorizing removal of existing structure and construction of a double barrel box
Res. 05-37   20-  culvert and surface approaches at School House Road over Prairie Creek, County
             2005 Board District #6.
             1-   Authorizing an agreement between Exxon Mobil Corporation and the county for
Res. 05-45   20-  repayment to the county of lost occupation and use tax revenues lost as a result
             2005 of adding corporate property to the Joliet Arsenal enterprise zone.
             2-
Res. 05-56   17-  Authorizing execution of a revised maintenance contract with Xerox Corp.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contract for improvements in Peotone Road District, County Board
Res. 05-60   17-  District #6, to NCM/Prairie Group, L.L.C.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contract for improvements in Washington Road District, County Board
Res. 05-61   17-  District #1, to Vulcan Construction Materials, L.P.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contract for improvements in Wilton Road District, County Board District
Res. 05-62   17-  #6, to NCM/Prairie Group, L.L.C.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contracts for bituminous patching mixture to Gallagher Materials Corp.,
Res. 05-63   17-  P.T. Ferro Construction Co. and Lincoln Paving Co.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contracts for bituminous material (prime coat) to P.T. Ferro
Res. 05-64   17-  Construction Co. and H.P. Graham Construction Co., Inc.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contracts for highway materials to Vulcan Construction Materials, L.P.,
Res. 05-65   17-  Joliet Sand and Gravel Co. and NCM/Prairie Group, L.L.C.
             2005
             2-
Res. 05-66   17-  Awarding contract for sign material to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2005
             2-
Res. 05-67   17-  Awarding contract for sheet aluminum sign panels to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2005
             2-
Res. 05-68   17-  Awarding contract for telescopic metal posts to Allied Municipal Supply.
             2005
             2-   Awarding contract for preformed retroreflective pavement markings (words and
Res. 05-69   17-  symbols) to United Rentals Highway Tech.
             2005
             2-
Res. 05-70   17-  Awarding contract for pipe culverts to Metal Culverts, Inc.
             2005
             2-
Res. 05-71   17-  Awarding contract for weed control to DeAngelo Brothers, Inc.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing weed control at specific sign posts and along guardrails at various
Res. 05-72   17-  locations on the county highway system by contract.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing improvement to County Highway 11 (Normantown Road) at the
Res. 05-77   17-  intersection of Illinois Route 53, County Board District #3, by contract.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing reimbursement by the county for extending existing encasement on
Res. 05-78   17-  pipeline facilities crossing 191st Street to Wood River Pipe Lines, L.L.C.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing payment of cost for pipeline encasement to Wood River Pipe Lines,
Res. 05-79   17-  L.L.C.
             2005
             2-   Awarding bid for lighting retrofit project at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 05-82   17-  All Tech Lighting.
             2005
             2-   Revoking original award of contract for bread products to Interstate Brands Corp.
Res. 05-83   17-  and re- awarding contract to Alpha Baking.
             2005
             2-   Awarding bid for lighting retrofit project at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to
Res. 05-84   17-  All Tech Lighting.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing successor collective bargaining agreement between the county and
Res. 05-85   17-  AFSCME Local 1028 AFL-CIO relating to the County Health department.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing negotiations with Gilbane/Harbour Contractors, Inc., for construction
Res. 05-86   17-  management services for the expansion of the adult detention facility.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing agreement with Cornerstone Services, Inc., in support of acquisition
Res. 05-88   17-  of property for group home construction in order to meet H.U.D. mandatory 15 set
             2005 aside of the HOME investment partnership grant program for a Community Housing
                  Development Organization.
             2-   Authorizing execution of contract for the demolition of property at 19752
Res. 05-90   17-  Manhattan Road in Jackson Township with Grosshening, Inc.
             2005
             3-   Awarding contract for paper products at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center to Gordon
Res. 05-98   17-  Food Service and Edward Don and contract for trash bags to Interboro Packaging on
             2005 a trial basis.
             3-   Authorizing execution of agreement of intent to abate property taxes for Southern
Res. 05-100  17-  Wine and Spirits of America, Inc.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of agreement of intent to abate property
Res. 05-101  17-  taxes for Wilmington, L.L.C/A.C.N. Chicago, L.L.C.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of agreement of intent to abate property
Res. 05-102  17-  taxes for Boyz, L.L.C./Dober Chemical Corp.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing execution of subgrant agreement between Kerber, Eck and Braeckel,
Res. 05-104  17-  L.L.P., and the Workforce Investment Board.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing agreement between the county and Hansen Development for the
Res. 05-109  17-  connection of a private drainage system to the stormwater drainage system along
             2005 County Highway 84 (191st Street), County Board District #2.
             3-   Awarding contract for improvements in New Lenox Road District, County Board
Res. 05-114  17-  District #2, to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
             2005
             3-   Awarding contract for improvements in Manhattan Road District, County Board
Res. 05-115  17-  District #6, to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2005
             3-   Awarding contract for improvements in Will Road District, County Board District
Res. 05-116  17-  #1, to Grosso Construction Co.
             2005
             3-   Awarding contract for improvements in Green Garden Road District, County Board
Res. 05-117  17-  District #1, to Grosso Construction Co.
             2005
             3-   Awarding contract for improvements to various county highways to Preform Traffic
Res. 05-118  17-  Control Systems, Ltd.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing improvements to various county highways in all county board districts
Res. 05-119  17-  by contract.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing supplemental agreement for design engineering services for structure
Res. 05-120  17-  inspection of County Highway 42 (Brandon Road) over the Des Plaines River, County
             2005 Board District #8, with Alfred Benesch and Co.
             3-   Authorizing additional design engineering services consisting of deck chloride
Res. 05-121  17-  testing as part of bridge inspection on County Highway 42 (Brandon Road) over the
             2005 Des Plaines River, County Board District #8 with Alfred Benesch and Co.
             3-   Authorizing extension of the term of contract for stormwater management services
Res. 05-130  17-  with C.B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2005
             4-
Res. 05-149  21-  Awarding bid for copiers to McGrath Office Equipment of Joliet.
             2005
             4-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for addition
Res. 05-150  21-  design engineering.
             2005
             4-   Authorizing additional design engineering services by the county under the State
Res. 05-151  21-  Highway Code.
             2005
             4-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-152  21-  (Phase II).
             2005
             4-
Res. 05-153  21-  Authorizing design services by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             4-   Supplemental amendment for design engineering services (Phase II) by the county
Res. 05-158  21-  under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             4-   Authorizing approval of a professional services supplemental agreement #1 for
Res. 05-160  21-  preliminary design engineering (Phase I).
             2005
             4-   Supplemental amendment for preliminary design engineering service (Phase I) by
Res. 05-161  21-  the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             4-   Authorizing an agreement with Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership for
Res. 05-164  21-  reimbursement for extending encasement on pipeline facilities crossing 191st
             2005 Street.
             4-   Authorizing approval of a professional services supplemental agreement #1 for
Res. 05-168  21-  design engineering (Phase II).
             2005
             4-   Supplemental amendment for design engineering services (Phase II) by the county
Res. 05-169  21-  under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             4-   Authorizing approval of a professional services supplemental agreement #1 for
Res. 05-170  21-  design engineering (Phase II).
             2005
             4-   Supplemental amendment for preliminary design engineering services (Phase I) by
Res. 05-172  21-  the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             4-   Supplemental amendment for preliminary design and design engineering service
Res. 05-174  21-  (Phase I and II) by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-198  19-  Awarding bid for textured asphalt paving at the county office building.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-212  19-  (Phase II).
             2005
             5-   Authorizing design engineering services (Phase II) by the county under the State
Res. 05-213  19-  Highway Code.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-214  19-  (Phase II).
             2005
             5-   Authorizing design engineering services (Phase II) by the county under the State
Res. 05-215  19-  Highway Code.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-216  19-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-217  19-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-218  19-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-219  19-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-220  19-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             5-
Res. 05-221  19-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 05-227  19-  Contract with Education Service Network (Community Works Foundation, NFP, Inc.).
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 05-228  19-  Contract with Learning and Skills Center.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 05-229  19-  Contract with Wilco Area Career Center.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 05-230  19-  Contract with Joliet Junior College Institute of Economic Technology.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board Work Certified
Res. 05-231  19-  Contract with Joliet Junior College Institute of Economic Technology.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board Contract with Melanie
Res. 05-232  19-  Arthur Consulting.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Department of
Res. 05-233  19-  Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board for the
             2005 county One-Stop System.
             5-   Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Department of
Res. 05-234  19-  Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board for local
             2005 Workforce Investment Board activities.
             5-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Weber Caton Farm, LLC regarding
Res. 05-235A 19-  road improvements to facilitate the development of Weber Farm crossings of Crest
             2005 Hill.
             5-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement between the county, Weber Caton, LLC
Res. 05-235B 19-  and Paul F. Siegel and Susan J. Siegel regarding road improvements to facilitate
             2005 the development of Weber Farm Crossings of Crest Hill.
             5-   Authorizing the execution of a contract with Duncan and Associates, the
Res. 05-236  19-  Subdivision Ordinance.
             2005
             6-   Awarding bid for mobile/modular general purpose building for the Sheriff’s
Res. 05-241  16-  Department.
             2005
             6-
Res. 05-242  16-  Awarding bid for transport van for the Sheriff’s Department.
             2005
             6-
Res. 05-250  16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             6-
Res. 05-251  16-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             6-
Res. 05-252  16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             6-
Res. 05-253  16-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             6-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board special populations
Res. 05-262  16-  program contract with Cornerstone Services.
             2005
             6-   Authorizing the execution of the Workforce Investment Board special populations
Res. 05-263  16-  program contract with Trinity Services.
             2005
             6-   Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Department of
Res. 05-265  16-  Commerce and Economic Opportunity for meeting federally mandated performance
             2005 measures.
             6-   Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Emergency
Res. 05-266  16-  Management Agency for state-local hazard mitigation grant program for planning.
             2005
             6-   Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Emergency
Res. 05-272  16-  Management Agency for IPRA Local Compensation.
             2005
             6-   Authorizing the execution of a contract for architectural services for
Res. 05-289  16-  modifications and improvements to 6th and 7th floors of Emco Building with Andrew
             2005 R. Partak, Jr. Architect.
             6-   Authorizing the execution of a Farnsworth Group, Inc. consultant agreement for
Res. 05-293  16-  ADA compliance.
             2005
             7-   Authorizing a professional service agreement with Consoer, Townsend Envirodyne
Res. 05-266  21-  Engineers, Inc. for the state - local hazard mitigation grant program for
             2005 planning.
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
Res. 05-326  21-  supervision (Phase III).
             2005
             7-   Authorizing construction supervision engineering services by the county under the
Res. 05-327  21-  State Highway Code.
             2005
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for design
Res. 05-328  21-  engineering.
             2005
             7-   Supplemental amendment for additional design engineering services by the county
Res. 05-329  21-  under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-333  21-  (Phase II).
             2005
             7-   Authorizing design engineering services by the county under the State Highway
Res. 05-334  21-  Code.
             2005
             7-   Authorizing the approval of a professional services agreement for design
Res. 05-336  21-  engineering (Phase II).
             2005
             7-   Authorizing design engineering services by the county under the State Highway
Res. 05-337  21-  Code.
             2005
             7-   Amending an agreement between CenterPoint Intermodal, LLC for the reconstruction
Res. 05-339  21-  of Arsenal Road.
             2005
             7-   Renewing the contract for telecommunications equipment maintenance, time and
Res. 05-346  21-  material service.
             2005
             7-
Res. 05-349  21-  Authorizing an acquisition agreement with David J. Nunez and Cheryl L. Nunez.
             2005
             7-   Authorizing the State Emergency Management Agency grant agreement for the state-
Res. 05-526  21-  local hazard mitigation grant program for planning.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-353  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-354  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-355  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-356  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-357  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-358  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-360  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-361  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-362  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-366  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-367  18-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-   Authorizing approval of a professional services supplemental agreement for design
Res. 05-372  18-  engineering services.
             2005
             8-   Supplemental amendment for design engineering services (Phase II) by the county
Res. 05-373  18-  under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-374  18-  services (Phase II).
             2005
             8-   Authorizing design engineering services (Phase II) by county under the State
Res. 05-375  18-  Highway Code.
             2005
             8-   Renewing contract of a broker/consultant for property and casualty, general
Res. 05-379  18-  liability and worker’s compensation.
             2005
             8-
Res. 05-383  18-  Awarding a contract for remodeling the court facility at the Emco Building.
             2005
             8-   Authorizing the execution of a contract with Dave Neal and Associates for Eastern
Res. 05-387  18-  Will County Development District Legislative Consulting Services.
             2005
             9-   Supplemental resolution for improvement by the county under the State Highway
Res. 05-400  15-  Code.
             2005
             9-   Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-401  15-  (Phase II).
             2005
             9-   Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for construction
Res. 05-402  15-  engineering (Phase III).
             2005
             9-
Res. 05-405  15-  Awarding a bid for tire collection event to Tire Grinders Transporters Inc.
             2005
             9-
Res. 05-407  15-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing the execution of a contract for rural structure survey with Wiss,
Res. 05-419  20-  Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. for Manhattan and Frankfort Townships.
             2005
             10-
Res. 05-421  20-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             10-  Rejecting a bid for computer printer remanufactured and new town cartridges,
Res. 05-427  20-  printer maintenance and yearly cleaning.
             2005
             10-
Res. 05-428  20-  Awarding a bid to Avaya S8700 Upgrade and Telephone Call Center.
             2005
             10-
Res. 05-434  20-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             10-
Res. 05-435  20-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement (#4) for
Res. 05-437  20-  right-of-way acquisition services.
             2005
             10-  Supplemental agreement (#4) for additional right- of-way acquisition services by
Res. 05-438  20-  the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Equimax Partners, LLC for the cost
Res. 05-439  20-  sharing associated with the county improvements to the intersection of Weber Road
             2005 and Renwick Road.
             10-
Res. 05-443  20-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2005
             10-
Res. 05-444  20-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for project
Res. 05-445  20-  administration services.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing project administration services (Phase II) by the county under the
Res. 05-446  20-  State Highway Code.
             2005
             10-
Res. 05-451  20-  Awarding a bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing the execute Workforce Boar Contract with Kerber, Eck and Braeckel,
Res. 05-461  20-  LLP.
             2005
             10-  Authorizing the execution of a software maintenance agreement with New World
Res. 05-463  20-  Systems.
             2005
             11-  Awarding a bid for duplex scanner for Circuit Clerk’s office to Lason Systems,
Res. 05-472  17-  Inc.
             2005
             11-  Awarding a bid for various county office buildings for elevator maintenance to
Res. 05-473  17-  Valley Elevator.
             2005
             11-  Awarding a bid for various county office buildings for cleaning maintenance to
Res. 05-474  17-  Judith’s Pride.
             2005
             11-  Awarding a bid for various county office buildings for bottled drinking water to
Res. 05-475  17-  Water and Accessories Outlets, Inc.
             2005
             11-  Awarding a bid for a computer printer remanufactured and new toner cartridges,
Res. 05-476  17-  printer maintenance and yearly cleaning to OfficeMax.
             2005
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
Res. 05-485  17-  supervision (Phase III).
             2005
             11-  Authorizing the construction supervision engineering services by the county under
Res. 05-486  17-  the State Highway Code.
             2005
             11-
Res. 05-492  17-  Renewing the contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center.
             2005
             11-  Authorizing the execution of a contract for professional consulting services to
Res. 05-493  17-  manage the 800 MHZ radio system rebanding process as mandated by the Federal
             2005 Communication Commission.
             11-
Res. 05-496  17-  Authorizing the execution of contracts for property and casualty insurance.
             2005
             12-
Res. 05-513  15-  Awarding a bid for millwork at Emco Court Facility to Interiors for Business.
             2005
             12-  Authorizing the approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
Res. 05-516  15-  right-of-way acquisition services.
             2005
             12-  Supplemental agreement for right-of-way acquisition services by the county under
Res. 05-517  15-  the State Highway Code.
             2005
             12-  Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 05-518  15-  service (Phase II).
             2005
             12-  Authorizing design engineering services (Phase II) by the county under the State
Res. 05-519  15-  Highway Code.
             2005
             12-  Authorizing an agreement with Wood River Pipe Lines, LLC for reimbursement for
Res. 05-520  15-  extending encasement on pipeline facilities crossing Exchange Street.
             2005
             12-  Renewing a contract for disposable undergarment products (medium and large) for
Res. 05-530  15-  Sunny Hill.
             2005
             12-  Renewing a contract for disposable undergarment products (X-Large undergarments
Res. 05-531  15-  and bed pads) for Sunny Hill.
             2005
             12-
Res. 05-532  15-  Renewing a contract for nursing services (CNA, LPN and RN) at Sunny Hill.
             2005
             12-  Authorizing an addendum to the Telecommunications Tower Site and Access Agreement
Res. 05-536  15-  with SATCOM, L.L.C.
             2005
             12-  Authorizing the execution of a renewal contract for Sprint/Nextel Cellular Phone
Res. 05-545  15-  Service.
             2005
             12-
Res. 05-547  15-  Authorizing the renewal of the Farnsworth Group, Inc. consultant agreement.
             2005
             12-
Res. 05-548  15-  Authorizing the renewal of the Arlington Advisory Group consultant agreement.
             2005
             12-
Res. 05-549  15-  Authorizing the renewal of the Mark Communications, Inc. consultant agreement.
             2005
             12-  Authorizing a professional service agreement for development of a traffic
Res. 05-552  15-  management center feasibility study and conceptual design.
             2005
             1-
Res. 06-04   19-  Awarding a contract for unleaded and diesel fuel to Petroleum Traders.
             2006
             1-   Authorizing the Workforce Investment Board Youth Program Contract modification
Res. 06-07   19-  with education service network.
             2006
             1-   Authorizing the extension of the term of the original contract for professional
Res. 06-25   19-  services with Christopher B. Burke Engineering for stormwater services.
             2006
             1-   Awarding a bid for reconfiguration of the Workforce Investment Board Skill Center
Res. 06-28   19-  located at the Westfield Mall to Giesler and Houdek.
             2006
             1-   Awarding a professional services contract to ACD Telecom for the county’s 800 MHZ
Res. 06-31   19-  radio system rebanding project.
             2006
             1-   Authorizing the negotiation and execution of professional services contract with
Res. 06-41   19-  the federal lobbyist firm of Smith, Dawson and Andrews.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-52   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-53   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-54   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-55   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-56   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-57   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-58   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-59   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-60   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-61   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-62   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-   Authorizing the execution of a professional services agreement with Patrick
Res. 06-76   16-  Engineering, Inc.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-77   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-78   16-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-79   16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             2-
Res. 06-80   16-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             2-   Awarding a bid for an adult detention facility inmate telephone system to Evercom
Res. 06-83   16-  Systems.
             2006
             2-   Awarding a bid for pharmaceutical and consulting services at Sunny Hill to
Res. 06-86   16-  Kindred Health Care.
             2006
             3-   Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 06-99   16-  (Phase II).
             2006
             3-   Authorizing design engineering services (Phase II) by the county under the State
Res. 06-100  16-  Highway Code.
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-104  16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-105  16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-106  16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-107  16-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-108  16-  Authorizing improvements by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
Res. 06-110  16-  engineering.
             2006
             3-   Authorizing approval of professional services for construction engineering
Res. 06-111  16-  services agreement.
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-113  16-  Awarding a bid for electronics recycling bid.
             2006
             3-   Authorizing the execution of a professional services agreement with Hogan and
Res. 06-120  16-  Associates (Exelon/ComEd contamination issue).
             2006
             3-
Res. 06-121  16-  Authorizing a professional services agreement with the University of Iowa.
             2006
             3-   Awarding a bid for local telephone access, private line and long distance
Res. 06-129  16-  service.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-156  20-  Agreement with Alfred Benesch & Co. for design engineering services.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-157  20-  Agreement with Alfred Benesch & Co. for design engineering services.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-159  20-  Confirming award of contract to Riber Construction, Inc.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-160  20-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-161  20-  Awarding contract to Glenn McCann Co.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-162  20-  Awarding contract to Van-Mack Electric.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-163  20-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             4-   Supplemental agreement with Hutchison Engineering for additional design
Res. 06-165  20-  engineering services.
             2006
             4-   Supplemental agreement with Hutchison Engineering for additional design
Res. 06-166  20-  engineering services.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-167  20-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             4-   Supplemental agreement with Civiltech Engineering, Inc. for additional right-of-
Res. 06-168  20-  way acquisition services.
             2006
             4-   Supplemental agreement with Civiltech Engineering, Inc. for additional right-of-
Res. 06-169  20-  way acquisition services.
             2006
             4-   Supplemental agreement with Willett, Hofman & Associates for additional design
Res. 06-170  20-  engineering services.
             2006
             4-   Supplemental agreement with Christopher B. Burke Engineering for additional
Res. 06-171  20-  construction engineering services.
             2006
             4-   Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services agreement with
Res. 06-174  20-  Jacqueline Moore & Associates.
             2006
             4-
Res. 06-178  20-  Re-awarding bid for cleaning services.
             2006
             4-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Kerber, Eck and
Res. 06-179  20-  Braeckel, LLP for strategic planning and plan implementation.
             2006
             4-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Caterpillar for
Res. 06-180  20-  machinist training.
             2006
             4-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Northfield
Res. 06-181  20-  Block Company for electrical, technical, computer, safety and blueprint training.
             2006
             4-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Provena St.
Res. 06-182  20-  Joseph Medical Center for RN training.
             2006
             4-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Ultimate
Res. 06-183  20-  Machining and Engineering for manufacturing software and machinery, blueprint and
             2006 quality inspection training.
             5-
Res. 06-193  18-  Awarding a bid for copiers.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-203  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-204  18-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-205  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-206  18-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-207  18-  Confirming the award of a contract for public highway improvements.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
Res. 06-208  18-  engineering.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-209  18-  Authorizing approval of construction engineering services.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-212  18-  Supplemental resolution for design engineering services.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-213  18-  Supplemental agreement for right-of-way acquisition services.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-214  18-  Supplemental agreement for right-of-way acquisition services.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-221  18-  Awarding bid for EMA & 9-1-1.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for dislocated
Res. 06-226  18-  worker services with Joliet Junior College-Institute for Economic Technology.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for local business
Res. 06-227  18-  grants for employee training with Toyal America, Inc.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for local business
Res. 06-228  18-  grants for employee training with A.J. Dralle, Inc.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for special
Res. 06-229  18-  populations program contract with Cornerstone Services.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board special populations program
Res. 06-230  18-  contract with Trinity Services.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract for work certified
Res. 06-231  18-  classes with Joliet Junior College-Institute for Economic Technology.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing agreement with Joliet for juror parking at the Ottawa Street parking
Res. 06-233  18-  deck and on- street parking around the courthouse.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute professional services contract with
Res. 06-236  18-  Lois Mayer.
             2006
             5-   Rescinding Resolution 06-28 awarding bid for reconfiguration of the Workforce
Res. 06-240  18-  Investment Board Skill Center located at the Westfield Mall.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-244  15-  Supplemental grant agreement for nuclear safety.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-246  15-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-247  15-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-251  15-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-252  15-  Awarding contract to Steve Krause Construction Co.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-253  15-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-254  15-  Awarding contract to Steve Krause Construction Co.
             2006
             6-
Res. 06-255  15-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             6-   Renewing contract with McKesson for diabetic supplies for Sunny Hill Nursing
Res. 06-260  15-  Home.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 06-272  15-  contract with Wilco Area Career Center.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 06-273  15-  contract with Learning and Skills Center.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 06-274  15-  contract with Education Service Network.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 06-275  15-  contract with Joliet Junior College-Institute of Economic Technology.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract
Res. 06-276  15-  modification No. 1 with Provena St. Joseph Medical Center for local business
             2006 grant for employee training - healthcare.
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract with
Res. 06-277  15-  R.R. Donnelley for local business grant for employee training - transportation/
             2006 logistics.
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract with
Res. 06-278  15-  Melanie Arthur Consulting.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract with
Res. 06-279  15-  Whittaker Associates.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract with
Res. 06-280  15-  American Government Services.
             2006
             7-   Supplemental agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc. for additional design
Res. 06-288  20-  services.
             2006
             7-   Supplemental agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc. for additional design
Res. 06-289  20-  services.
             2006
             7-   Second supplemental agreement for additional design engineering services with
Res. 06-290  20-  Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-291  20-  Additional design services by county under State Highway Code.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-308  20-  Confirming award of contract to Riber Construction, Inc.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-309  20-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-317  20-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2006
             7-   Agreement between the county and Metra for at- grade railroad crossing
Res. 06-319  20-  improvements on Laraway Road east of Cedar Road.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-321  20-  Awarding bid for judicial furniture for Circuit Court annex.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-322  20-  Awarding bid for duplex scanner for Circuit Clerk’s office.
             2006
             7-   Awarding bid for mechanical assist mobile filing system for Circuit Clerk’s
Res. 06-323  20-  office.
             2006
             7-   Designation of Aon Risk Services, Inc. as broker/consultant for property and
Res. 06-328  20-  casualty, general liability, workers’ compensation and professional services.
             2006
             7-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute planning funding agreement with
Res. 06-330  20-  Sprint Nextel.
             2006
             7-
Res. 06-331  20-  Awarding bid for hybrid SUV for waste services.
             2006
             8-   Supplemental agreement for final design engineering services by Hampton, Lenzini
Res. 06-337  17-  & Renwick, Inc.
             2006
             8-   Agreement with Midwestern Gas Transmission Co. for reimbursement for extending
Res. 06-338  17-  encasement on pipeline facilities crossing Arsenal Road.
             2006
             8-   Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisitions with Swanson &
Res. 06-339  17-  Brown, Ltd.
             2006
             8-   Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisitions with Swanson &
Res. 06-340  17-  Brown, Ltd.
             2006
             8-   Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisitions with Swanson &
Res. 06-341  17-  Brown, Ltd.
             2006
             8-   Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisitions with Swanson &
Res. 06-342  17-  Brown, Ltd.
             2006
             8-
Res. 06-343  17-  Supplemental agreement for additional design engineering services with HNTB Corp.
             2006
             8-   Supplemental expenditure for agreement for additional design engineering services
Res. 06-344  17-  with HNTB Corp.
             2006
             8-
Res. 06-345  17-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             8-   Agreement with New Lenox Investments, LLC for maintenance of storm sewer system
Res. 06-346  17-  at Heather Glen Subdivision.
             2006
             8-   Awarding bid to Schuld Inc. (SCI) for telecommunications equipment maintenance,
Res. 06-358  17-  time and material service.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd. for additional
Res. 06-369  21-  design engineering services.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd. for additional
Res. 06-370  21-  design engineering services.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement with McDonough Associates, Inc. for additional design
Res. 06-371  21-  engineering services.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement with McDonough Associates, Inc. for additional design
Res. 06-372  21-  engineering services.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-373  21-  Award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-374  21-  Authorizing improvement by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-375  21-  Design engineering services agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-376  21-  Design engineering services agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-377  21-  Design engineering services agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-378  21-  Design engineering services agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement for design engineering with Kenig, Lindgren, O’Hara,
Res. 06-379  21-  Aboona, Inc.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement for design engineering with Kenig, Lindgren, O’Hara,
Res. 06-380  21-  Aboona, Inc.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement for design engineering with Kenig, Lindgren, O’Hara,
Res. 06-381  21-  Aboona, Inc.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement for design engineering with Kenig, Lindgren, O’Hara,
Res. 06-382  21-  Aboona, Inc.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement for design engineering with Kenig, Lindgren, O’Hara,
Res. 06-383  21-  Aboona, Inc.
             2006
             9-   Supplemental agreement for design engineering with Kenig, Lindgren, O’Hara,
Res. 06-384  21-  Aboona, Inc.
             2006
             9-
Res. 06-385  21-  Agreement for County Engineer’s salary with county and IDOT.
             2006
             9-   Extending inmate medical services contract between Wexford Health Services and
Res. 06-388  21-  the county on month-to-month basis until 10-31-2006.
             2006
             9-   Awarding bid to Correct Care Solutions for adult and juvenile inmate medical
Res. 06-389  21-  services contract.
             2006
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute grant agreement with the State
Res. 06-397  21-  Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment
             2006 Board for Youth, Adult and Dislocated Worker.
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute grant agreement with the State
Res. 06-398  21-  Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment
             2006 Board for local board staffing.
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-413  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-414  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-415  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-416  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-417  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-418  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-419  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-420  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-421  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-422  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-423  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-424  19-  acquisition with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-425  19-  acquisition with Santacruz Associates.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-426  19-  acquisition with Santacruz Associates.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-427  19-  acquisition with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-428  19-  acquisition with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 06-429  19-  acquisition with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 06-430  19-  with V3 Companies, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 06-431  19-  with V3 Companies, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 06-432  19-  with V3 Companies, Ltd.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute release and hold harmless agreement with
Res. 06-443  19-  PACE Suburban Bus Division of the Regional Transportation Authority for emergency
             2006 situations/trainings.
             10-
Res. 06-444  19-  Renewing contract for nursing services at Sunny Hill.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute a contract with Blue
Res. 06-446  19-  Cross Blue Shield of Illinois for the administration of medical benefits.
             2006
             11-  Agreement between the county and Midwest Property Development for maintenance of
Res. 06-465  16-  the storm sewer system at Hanover Estates Subdivision.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county and
Res. 06-466  16-  City of Naperville for median replacement.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county and
Res. 06-467  16-  City of Naperville for median replacement.
             2006
             11-  Confirming award of contract for emergency bridge repairs with Albin Carlson &
Res. 06-474  16-  Company.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 06-475  16-  with Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.
             2006
             11-  Awarding bid for paper products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home to Gordon Food Service
Res. 06-479  16-  and Edward Don.
             2006
             11-  Awarding bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Nursing Home to Per Mar
Res. 06-480  16-  Security Services.
             2006
             11-  Renewing contract for medical products at Sunny Hill with McKesson Medical and
Res. 06-481  16-  Professional Medical.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to enter into IEMA grant agreement for hazardous
Res. 06-482  16-  materials emergency preparedness grant award.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to enter into IEMA grant agreement for EMA grant
Res. 06-483  16-  award.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contracts for property and casualty
Res. 06-484  16-  insurance with State Counties Risk Management Trust and Safety National Ins. Co.
             2006
             11-
Res. 06-488  16-  Awarding contract for unleaded and diesel fuel with Petroleum Traders.
             2006
             11-  Awarding bid for refuse and recycling collection service for county buildings
Res. 06-489  16-  with Joliet Disposal.
             2006
             11-  Awarding contract for Nextel cellular phone service or equal with Sprint Nextel
Res. 06-490  16-  Communications.
             2006
             11-  Renewing contract for elevator maintenance for various county office buildings
Res. 06-491  16-  with Valley Elevator, Inc.
             2006
             11-  Renewing contract for janitorial cleaning services for various county office
Res. 06-492  16-  buildings with Perfect Cleaning Service, Inc.
             2006
             11-  Renewing bid award for computer printer remanufactured and new toner cartridges,
Res. 06-493  16-  printer maintenance and yearly cleaning with OfficeMax.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Farnsworth Group, Inc. consultant
Res. 06-497  16-  agreement renewal.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Arlington Advisory Group consultant
Res. 06-498  16-  agreement renewal.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Mack Communications, Inc. consultant
Res. 06-499  16-  agreement renewal.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Dave Neal & Associates consultant
Res. 06-500  16-  agreement renewal.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to renew the professional services contract with
Res. 06-501  16-  federal lobbyist firm of Smith Dawson & Andrews.
             2006
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of professional services
Res. 06-502  16-  contract with Lois Mayer.
             2006
             12-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for Phase II design
Res. 06-513  21-  engineering with Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2006
             12-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental (#1) agreement for
Res. 06-520  21-  additional design engineering with Ruettiger, Tonelli and Associates, Inc.
             2006
             12-  Authorizing approval of agreement between the county and Wetlands Mitigation of
Res. 06-529  21-  Illinois, LLC for the purchase of wetlands banking site credits.
             2006
             12-
Res. 06-538  21-  Awarding contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2006
             12-  Authorizing renewal of “wrap around” professional liability insurance for the
Res. 06-541  21-  County Community Health Center.
             2006
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with Joliet/Will County Center
Res. 06-545  21-  for Economic Development (CED) and the County Chamber of Commerce.
             2006
             1-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Materials Corporation for public
Res. 07-10   18-  highway improvements.
             2007
             1-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. and H.P. Graham
Res. 07-11   18-  Construction Co., Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2007
             1-   Confirming award of contract with Vulcan Construction Materials L.P. for public
Res. 07-12   18-  highway improvements.
             2007
             1-
Res. 07-13   18-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2007
             1-
Res. 07-14   18-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2007
             1-
Res. 07-15   18-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2007
             1-
Res. 07-16   18-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2007
             1-   Confirming award of contract to Contech Construction Products, Inc. for public
Res. 07-17   18-  highway improvements.
             2007
             1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
Res. 07-21   18-  engineering (Phase III) with Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2007
             1-
Res. 07-35   18-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute frequency reconfiguration agreement.
             2007
             2-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a contract for rural structural
Res. 07-40   15-  survey of Frankfort Township.
             2007
             2-
Res. 07-55   15-  Awarding contract to NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2007
             2-
Res. 07-56   15-  Awarding contract to NCM/Prairie Group LLC for public highway improvements.
             2007
             2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 07-57   15-  acquisition services with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2007
             2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 07-58   15-  acquisition services with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2007
             2-   Re-awarding judicial furniture bid for Circuit Court annex to Interiors for
Res. 07-61   15-  Business.
             2007
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of “wrap around” professional
Res. 07-77   15-  liability insurance for the County Community Health Center.
             2007
             2-
Res. 07-81   15-  Awarding bid for electronic recycling to Vintage Tech Recyclers.
             2007
             2-   Awarding bid for household hazardous waste collection to Veolia Environmental
Res. 07-82   15-  Services.
             2007
             2-   Authorizing the County Executive to accept and execute IEPA Section 319
Res. 07-85   15-  Stormwater grant agreement.
             2007
             3-   Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate a contract with Farnsworth Group
Res. 07-88   15-  for professional services related to a USEPA state and tribal assistance grant
             2007 for an Eastern Will County sewer services study.
             3-
Res. 07-95   15-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2007
             3-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 07-96   15-  improvements.
             2007
             3-   Awarding contract to Preform Traffic Control Systems, Ltd. for public highway
Res. 07-97   15-  improvements.
             2007
             4-   Agreement between the county and Plainfield Community Consolidated School
Res. 07-137  19-  District 202 for maintenance of the storm sewer system at the Plainfield East
             2007 H.S. facility.
             4-   Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-147  19-  (Phase II) with Willett, Hofmann & Associates, Inc.
             2007
             4-   Confirming award of contract to Gray’s Material Services for public highway
Res. 07-151  19-  improvements.
             2007
             4-   Confirming award of contract with Grosso Construction Co. for public highway
Res. 07-152  19-  improvements.
             2007
             4-   Confirming award of contract with Grosso Construction Co. for public highway
Res. 07-153  19-  improvements.
             2007
             4-   Confirming award of contract with NCM/Prairie Group, LLC for public highway
Res. 07-154  19-  improvements.
             2007
             4-   Confirming award of contract with Vulcan Construction Materials, LP for public
Res. 07-155  19-  highway improvements.
             2007
             4-   Authorizing execution of joint agreement between the county and IDOT for County
Res. 07-156  19-  Engineer salary for FY 2007.
             2007
             4-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-157  19-  with Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.
             2007
             4-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of EDACS FX agreement with M/
Res. 07-173  19-  A- Com, Inc.
             2007
             4-   Awarding bid for records management system for the Recorder of Deed’s office to
Res. 07-188  19-  Document Technology Systems.
             2007
             4-   Awarding bid for electronics recycling drop-off services for waste services to
Res. 07-189  19-  Vintage Tech Recyclers.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county and
Res. 07-196  17-  Village of Romeoville for street lit signs along Weber Road.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county and
Res. 07-197  21-  Village of Romeoville for landscape median along Weber Road at the airport
             2007 intersection.
             5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county,
Res. 07-197  17-  Village of Romeoville and Rubloff Development Group for installation of traffic
             2007 signals at the intersection of Weber Road and Creekside Drive.
             5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county,
Res. 07-198  17-  Village of Romeoville and Air-Webb, LLC for installation of traffic signals at
             2007 the intersection of Weber Road and a retail road south of Airport Road.
             5-   Authorizing approval of professional services (Supplement 2) agreement with
Res. 07-202  17-  Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing approval of additional design services with Christopher B. Burke
Res. 07-203  17-  Engineering, Ltd.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplement agreement for additional
Res. 07-205  17-  design engineering with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing approval of additional design engineering services with Hampton,
Res. 07-206  17-  Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute an agreement between county and River Run
Res. 07-207  17-  Centre property owners association for maintenance of the storm sewer system at
             2007 River Run Centre.
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute amended contract with Animal Control
Res. 07-209  17-  Administrator.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to enter into State Emergency Management Agency
Res. 07-210  17-  grant agreement for IPRA local compensation.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 07-224  21-  program.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing contract with Clark Excavating for demolition of property at 810
Res. 07-226  21-  Harlow Avenue in Joliet Township.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to executive grant agreement with the State
Res. 07-227  21-  Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the waste services for energy
             2007 and recycling program.
             6-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for Laraway Road at
Res. 07-232  21-  Gougar Road.
             2007
             6-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for New Lenox Road
Res. 07-233  21-  District.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with McDonough
Res. 07-236  21-  Associates, Inc. for construction engineering.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing construction engineering services (Phase III) with McDonough
Res. 07-237  21-  Associates, Inc.
             2007
             6-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for Wilmington Road
Res. 07-238  21-  District.
             2007
             6-
Res. 07-239  21-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for Troy Road District.
             2007
             6-   Providing additional compensation to Wheatland Title Guaranty for title
Res. 07-241  21-  commitment reports.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute an agreement for juror parking at the
Res. 07-242  21-  Joliet Warehouse property.
             2007
             6-   Awarding contract for upgrade of electrical service for Sheriff’s Laraway
Res. 07-244  21-  facility to Nuline Technologies.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute traffic enforcement agreement between
Res. 07-247  21-  county and Gateway II Phase III.
             2007
             6-
Res. 07-248  21-  Renewing contract for pharmaceutical and consulting services at Sunny Hill.
             2007
             6-
Res. 07-249  21-  Renewing contract for disposable exam gloves for Sunny Hill.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to enter into State Emergency Management Agency
Res. 07-250  21-  grant application.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 07-263  21-  contract with Education Service Network.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 07-264  21-  contract with Joliet Junior College - Institute of Economic Technology.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 07-265  21-  contract with Learning Skills Center.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 07-266  21-  contract with WILCO Area Career Center.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Youth Program
Res. 07-267  21-  contract with Joliet Junior College - Institute of Economic Technology.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract with
Res. 07-268  21-  Melanie Arthur Consulting.
             2007
             7-   Confirming award of contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for Jackson Road
Res. 07-281  19-  District.
             2007
             7-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for Crete Road
Res. 07-283  19-  District.
             2007
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-286  19-  with Farnsworth Group, Inc.
             2007
             7-
Res. 07-287  19-  Authorizing design engineering services agreement with Farnsworth Group, Inc.
             2007
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
Res. 07-288  19-  Renwick, Inc.
             2007
             7-   Authorizing design engineering services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
Res. 07-289  19-  Renwick, Inc.
             2007
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hoffman &
Res. 07-290  19-  Associates, Inc.
             2007
             7-   Authorizing approval of Supervisor of Assessments agreement between GEOSPAN
Res. 07-301  19-  Corporation and MLSNI, Inc.
             2007
             8-
Res. 07-308  16-  Awarding contract for annual audit to McGladrey & Pullen.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services agreement between
Res. 07-315  16-  county and Patrick Engineering, Inc. for next phase of Laraway permit
             2007 application.
             8-   Establishing pilot pharmaceutical take-back program between county and Basinger’s
Res. 07-316  16-  Pharmacy.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement for right-
Res. 07-317  16-  of-way acquisition services with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing supplemental agreement for right-of- way acquisition services with
Res. 07-318  16-  “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 07-319  16-  acquisition services with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing agreement for right-of-way acquisition services with “T” Engineering
Res. 07-320  16-  Services, Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing construction supervision engineering services agreement with
Res. 07-321  16-  Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-324  16-  with Robinson Engineering, Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing agreement for design engineering services with Robinson Engineering,
Res. 07-325  16-  Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-326  16-  with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing agreement for design engineering services with McDonough Associates,
Res. 07-327  16-  Inc.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 07-328  16-  acquisition services with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing agreement for right-of-way acquisition services with Polach Appraisal
Res. 07-329  16-  Group, Inc.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
Res. 07-330  16-  additional design engineering with Robinson Engineering, Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing additional design engineering services with Robinson Engineering,
Res. 07-331  16-  Ltd.
             2007
             8-   Confirming award of contract to James D. Fiala Paving, Inc. for County Highway 56
Res. 07-332  16-  (Black Road).
             2007
             8-   Confirming award of contract to James D. Fiala Paving, Inc. for County Highway 37
Res. 07-334  16-  (143rd Street).
             2007
             8-   Renewing contract for telecommunications time and material service with SCI
Res. 07-348  16-  Schuld Communications.
             2007
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services agreement with
Res. 07-350  16-  Farnsworth Group for the Eastern Will County Wastewater Planning Study.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 07-360  20-  program.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement of intent to
Res. 07-362  20-  abate property taxes for IKEA Property, Inc.
             2007
             9-   Agreement between the county and Lockport Township Park District for maintenance
Res. 07-369  20-  of stormwater management system at the Prairie Bluff park site.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-376  20-  with Earth Tech, Inc.
             2007
             9-
Res. 07-377  20-  Authorizing agreement for design engineering services with Earth Tech, Inc.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to enter into State Emergency Management Agency
Res. 07-379  20-  Department grant agreement for the Citizen Corps Program.
             2007
             9-
Res. 07-380  20-  Renewing contract for security guard services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2007
             9-
Res. 07-381  20-  Awarding bid for nursing services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute a contract with Blue Cross
Res. 07-384  20-  Blue Shield of Illinois for administration of claims for medical benefits.
             2007
             9-   Awarding bid for Workforce Services and Workforce Investment Board to Glen Ellyn
Res. 07-387  20-  Storage for commercial moving services.
             2007
Res. 07-390- 9-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate a settlement agreement with Exelon
A            20-  Nuclear regarding tax assessments.
             2007
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute CLG grant application for rural historic
Res. 07-392  18-  structural survey project in Troy, Joliet, Channahon and Jackson Townships.
             2007
             10-  Directing County Executive to execute an agreement between county and James E.
Res. 07-403  18-  and Donna M. Harder for ditch enclosure along property at 1829 Brandon Road.
             2007
             10-
Res. 07-410  18-  Awarding bid for medical products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2007
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with RTW, Inc. for third party
Res. 07-416  18-  administration of worker’s compensation claims.
             2007
             10-
Res. 07-420  18-  Awarding bid for cleaning services for various county buildings.
             2007
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute grant agreement with State Department of
Res. 07-422  18-  Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board for
             2007 marketing and development of the Illinois WorkNet System.
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute grant agreement with State Department of
Res. 07-423  18-  Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board for board
             2007 administrative costs.
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute grant agreement with State Department of
Res. 07-424  18-  Commerce and Economic Opportunity for Workforce Investment Board for meeting/
             2007 exceeding performance measures.
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board special
Res. 07-425  18-  populations program contract with Cornerstone Services.
             2007
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute the lead hazard reduction
Res. 07-426  18-  grant from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to negotiate an agreement of intent to abate
Res. 07-430  15-  property taxes for Panduit.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 07-433  15-  program.
             2007
             11-  Directing County Executive to execute an agreement between county and Village of
Res. 07-440  15-  Peotone for appurtenance work within the village.
             2007
             11-  Agreement between county and First United Bank for maintenance of the storm sewer
Res. 07-441  15-  system.
             2007
             11-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for County Highway
Res. 07-445  15-  (Manhattan-Arsenal Road).
             2007
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for design
Res. 07-446  15-  services with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-447  15-  Authorizing additional design services with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing preliminary design engineering services agreement with TranSystems
Res. 07-450  15-  Corporation.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 07-451  15-  with TranSystems Corporation.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-452  15-  Authorizing design services agreement with TranSystems Corporation.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
Res. 07-453  15-  additional construction engineering with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing construction engineering services agreement with McDonough
Res. 07-454  15-  Associates, Inc.
             2007
             11-  Renewing contract with Gordon Food Service for paper products at Sunny Hill
Res. 07-465  15-  Nursing Home.
             2007
             11-  Renewing contract with Genesis Rehab Services for therapy services at Sunny Hill
Res. 07-466  15-  Nursing Home.
             2007
             11-  Awarding contract to Virchow, Krause & Company, LLP for operational audit at
Res. 07-467  15-  Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contracts for property and casualty
Res. 07-469  15-  insurance.
             2007
             11-  Designating AON Risk Services, Inc. as broker/consultant for property and
Res. 07-470  15-  casualty, general liability, workers’ compensation and professional services.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with Village of Frankfort for
Res. 07-475  15-  the collection of a special tax.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with Village of Manhattan for
Res. 07-476  15-  the collection of special taxes.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-480  15-  Awarding bid for recycling containers to MidPoint International.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-481  15-  Renewing contract with Valley Elevator for elevator maintenance.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-482  15-  Renewing contract for Nextel cellular phone service.
             2007
             11-  Awarding bid for duplex scanner for Circuit Clerk’s office to Lason/HOV Systems,
Res. 07-483  15-  Inc.
             2007
             11-  Awarding bid for computer printer, remanufactured and new toner cartridges and
Res. 07-484  15-  printer maintenance and yearly cleaning to United Business Solutions.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-485  15-  Awarding bid for bottled drinking water to Water & Accessories Outlets, Inc.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-486  15-  Awarding bid for unleaded and diesel fuel to Warren Oil Company.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute memorandum of understanding between
Res. 07-487  15-  Workforce Investment Board and Workforce System Partners.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute Farnsworth Group, Inc. consultant
Res. 07-490  15-  agreement renewal.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute Mack Communications, Inc. consultant
Res. 07-491  15-  agreement renewal.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute professional services
Res. 07-492  15-  renewal contract with federal lobbyist firm of Smith Dawson & Andrews.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of professional services contract
Res. 07-493  15-  with Lois Mayer.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute a professional services
Res. 07-494  15-  agreement between county and Shaw Environmental, Inc.
             2007
             12-  Amending Resolution 07-426 authorizing execution of lead hazard reduction grant
Res. 07-496  20-  to create new fund and authorize appropriations.
             2007
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with Joliet/Will County Center
Res. 07-502  20-  for Economic Development (CED) and the County Chamber of Commerce.
             2007
             12-  Authorizing approval of professional services (supplemental) agreement for design
Res. 07-503  20-  engineering with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2007
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute the adoption of the State Department of
Res. 07-505  20-  Transportation County Maintenance Resolution.
             2007
             12-  Authorizing re-allocation of justice assistance grant (JAG) award to fund
Res. 07-506  20-  purchase of laptop computers for Sheriff’s Department.
             2007
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to enter into State Emergency Management Agency
Res. 07-507  20-  Department, fiscal year 2007 homeland security grant, for Citizen Corps Program.
             2007
             1-   Rescinding Resolution 07-156 and re-authorizing execution of joint agreement
Res. 08-14   17-  between county and IDOT for County Engineer salary.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
Res. 08-15   17-  engineering with Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of an State Department of Transportation agreement for Phase
Res. 08-16   17-  III engineering and construction participation for improvement of County Highway
             2008 48 (Old Monroe Road) bridge over Thorn Creek.
             1-   Authorizing agreement between county and Villages of Bolingbrook and Romeoville
Res. 08-18   17-  for funding if feasibility study for improvements of Interstate 55/Weber Road
             2008 interchange.
             1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 08-19   17-  with V3 Companies, Ltd.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing additional design services for Project Development Report with V3
Res. 08-20   17-  Companies, Ltd.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Swanson and Brown,
Res. 08-21   17-  Ltd.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-22   17-  Authorizing right-of-way acquisition services with Swanson and Brown, Ltd.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for
Res. 08-23   17-  engineering with CH2M Hill.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-24   17-  Authorizing additional engineering services with CH2M Hill.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
Res. 08-25   17-  of-way acquisition services with Swanson and Brown, Ltd.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-26   17-  Authorizing right-of-way acquisition services with Swanson and Brown, Ltd.
             2008
             1-   Confirming award of contracts to “D” Construction, Inc., P.T. Ferro Construction
Res. 08-28   17-  Co., and Gallagher Materials Corporation for bituminous patching mixture.
             2008
             1-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for bituminous
Res. 08-29   17-  material (prime coat).
             2008
             1-   Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Construction Materials, L.P. for various
Res. 08-30   17-  aggregate for road improvements.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-31   17-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for sign material.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-32   17-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for sheet aluminum sign panels.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-33   17-  Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Signs for telescopic metal posts.
             2008
             1-   Confirming award of contract to Highway Technologies for raised reflective
Res. 08-34   17-  pavement marker replacement lenses.
             2008
             1-   Confirming award of contract to Home Towne Electric for County Highway 37 (143rd
Res. 08-35   17-  Street) improvements.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 08-37   17-  services with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             2008
             1-
Res. 08-38   17-  Authorizing design engineering services with McDonough Associates, Inc.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing County Executive to accept and execute the county warrant and
Res. 08-40   17-  protection technology project grant from the State Criminal Justice Information
             2008 Authority.
             1-   Authorizing County Executive to execute an emergency management assistance grant
Res. 08-41   17-  agreement with the State Emergency Management Agency.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute an agreement with USGS for digital
Res. 08-47   21-  orthophotography services.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 08-50   21-  program.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute documents appointing success trustee for
Res. 08-53   21-  Joliet Junior College Project Revenue Bonds, series 2002A.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing agreement between county and Village of Manhattan for appurtenance
Res. 08-63   21-  work within the village limits.
             2008
             2-
Res. 08-67   21-  Authorizing title commitment reports from Wheatland Title Guaranty Company.
             2008
             2-   Confirming award of contract to Preform Traffic Control Systems, Ltd. for various
Res. 08-68   21-  highway striping.
             2008
             2-   Confirming award of contract to NCM/Prairie Group LLC for aggregate for road
Res. 08-70   21-  improvement project.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing agreement between county and Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway
Res. 08-72   21-  Company for railroad at-grade crossing improvements on Caton Farm Road.
             2008
             2-
Res. 08-75   21-  Authorizing design engineering services with Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2008
             2-
Res. 08-76   21-  Authorizing title commitment reports from Republic Title Company.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 08-77   21-  acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2008
             2-
Res. 08-78   21-  Authorizing right-of-way acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing approval of professionals services supplemental agreement for right-
Res. 08-79   21-  of-way acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing supplement agreement for additional right-of-way acquisition services
Res. 08-80   21-  with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2008
             2-   Renewing contract for pharmaceutical and consulting services at Sunny Hill with
Res. 08-81   21-  Kindred Pharmacy Services.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to enter into IEMA grant agreement for hazardous
Res. 08-82   21-  materials emergency preparedness grant award.
             2008
             2-   Awarding bid for farm lease for agricultural purposes on 120 acres of county
Res. 08-86   21-  landfill property.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract for professional engineering
Res. 08-87   21-  services with Christopher B. Burke Engineering Ltd for stormwater management
             2008 services.
             2-
Res. 08-97   21-  Re-awarding bid for cleaning services to Alpha Building Maintenance Service.
             2008
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a real property tax assessment settlement
Res. 08-98   21-  agreement with Exelon Corporation.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to enter into State Historic Preservation Agency,
Res. 08-101  20-  Fiscal Year 2008 certified local government grant program for continuation of
             2008 county rural historic structural survey in Joliet and Troy Townships.
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement of intent to abate property
Res. 08-104  20-  taxes for Panduit Corp.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with M.E.P. Excavations for
Res. 08-107  20-  demolition of 1215 Pawnee Street.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with Grosshening, Inc. for
Res. 08-108  20-  demolition of 23100 Stripmine Road.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing entry into agreement for design services (Phase I) with State
Res. 08-110  20-  Department of Transportation for construction of County Highway 17 (Manhattan-
             2008 Arsenal Road).
             3-   Authorizing entry into agreement for design engineering services (Phase II) with
Res. 08-111  20-  Willett, Hofmann & Associates, Inc., for replacement of Dralle Road structure
             2008 over Branch of Forked Creek.
             3-   Authorizing design engineering services (Phase II) from Willett, Hofmann &
Res. 08-112  20-  Associates for Dralle Road Bridge project.
             2008
             3-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for Laraway Road
Res. 08-113  20-  improvements.
             2008
             3-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for Manhattan Road
Res. 08-115  20-  District improvements.
             2008
             3-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for Monee District
Res. 08-116  20-  improvements.
             2008
             3-   Confirming award of contract to Glenn McCann Co. for Florence Road District
Res. 08-117  20-  improvements.
             2008
             3-   Confirming award of contract to VCNA Prairie Aggregates Illinois, Inc. for Will
Res. 08-118  20-  Road District improvements.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing renewal of “wrap around” professional liability insurance for the
Res. 08-127  20-  County Community Health Center.
             2008
             3-   Adopting successor collective bargaining agreement with Metropolitan Alliance of
Res. 08-128  20-  Police Will County Sheriff’s Police Management Association #123.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute tax assessment settlement agreement with
Res. 03-133  20-  Exxon/Mobil.
             2008
             3-   Approving CDBG and home investment partnership grant program policies and funding
Res. 08-135  20-  for 2008 and 2009 program years.
             2008
             3-   Authorizing executing of amendments to agreements for reallocation of CDBG
Res. 08-136  20-  program funds to Joliet Township.
             2008
             4-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 08-146  17-  program.
             2008
             4-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement with Earth
Res. 08-161  17-  Tech, Inc. for engineering.
             2008
             4-   Authorizing design engineering services with Earth Tech, Inc. for Weber Road
Res. 08-162  17-  improvements.
             2008
             4-   Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corp. for Washington Road
Res. 08-163  17-  District improvements.
             2008
             4-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Land Construction L.L.C. for Frankfort Road
Res. 08-164  17-  District improvements.
             2008
             4-   Confirming award of contract to Gray’s Material Service for Green Garden Road
Res. 08-165  17-  District improvements.
             2008
             4-   Confirming award of contract to VCNA Prairie Aggregates ILL, Inc. for Wilton Road
Res. 08-166  17-  District improvements.
             2008
             4-   Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of EDACS FX Agreement with M/A-
Res. 08-172  17-  Com, Inc.
             2008
             4-
Res. 08-173  17-  Establishing pilot pharmaceutical take-back program with Doc’s Drugs Pharmacies.
             2008
             4-
Res. 08-175  17-  Awarding bid for flooring for EMA Department to AMD Interiors, Inc.
             2008
             4-   Awarding bid for light utility vehicles for Land Use Department to Tyson Chrysler
Res. 08-187  17-  Jeep Dodge.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 08-194  15-  program.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 08-203  15-  (Phase II).
             2008
             5-
Res. 08-204  15-  Authorizing additional design engineering services.
             2008
             5-   Confirming award of contract to Chicago International Trucks for snow removal
Res. 08-208  15-  equipment.
             2008
             5-   Confirming award of contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for Green Garden
Res. 08-209  15-  Road District improvements.
             2008
             5-   Awarding bid for Sheriff’s Department warrants and OP software system to
Res. 08-213  15-  Visionair.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing execution of supplemental grant agreement and appropriation of funds
Res. 08-216  15-  for nuclear safety preparedness.
             2008
             5-
Res. 08-217  15-  Authorizing execution of 2009 nuclear safety preparedness agreement with IEMA.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board youth program
Res. 08-223  15-  contract with Joliet Junior College.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board work certified
Res. 08-224  15-  program contract with Joliet Junior College.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board youth program
Res. 08-225  15-  contract with Education Service Network.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board youth program
Res. 08-226  15-  contract with Learning and Skills Center.
             2008
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute 2008 Preserve America grant application
Res. 08-231  19-  (Round 2).
             2008
             6-   Awarding bid to Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. for historic survey
Res. 08-232  19-  consultant contract.
             2008
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with A.C. Excavating for
Res. 08-240  19-  demolition of 1226 Pawnee Street.
             2008
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with M.E.P. Excavations for
Res. 08-241  19-  demolition of 134 Farimont.
             2008
             6-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for McDonough Street
Res. 08-243  19-  improvements.
             2008
             6-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for S. Briggs Street
Res. 08-245  19-  improvements.
             2008
             6-   Authorizing County Executive to execute annexation agreement with Village of
Res. 08-255  19-  Crete for Sheriff’s substation.
             2008
             6-
Res. 08-256  19-  Awarding bid to McGrath Office Equipment for purchase of digital copiers.
             2008
             6-
Res. 08-257  19-  Awarding bid to Xerox for purchase of network printers.
             2008
             7-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with Wiss, Janney, Elstner
Res. 08-260  17-  Associates, Inc. for rural structural survey for Channahon Township.
             2008
             7-
Res. 08-271  17-  Confirming award of purchases of equipment to Patten Industries.
             2008
             7-
Res. 08-272  17-  Confirming award of purchases of equipment to Vermeer Midwest.
             2008
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with “T” Engineering
Res. 08-273  17-  Services, Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
             2008
             7-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement with Polach
Res. 08-276  17-  Appraisal Group, Inc. for right-of-way services.
             2008
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann &
Res. 08-278  17-  Associates, Inc. for design engineering services.
             2008
             7-   Renewing contract for telecommunications time and material with SCI Schuld
Res. 08-287  17-  Communications.
             2008
             7-   Authorizing County Executive to execute employment agreement with County
Res. 08-294  17-  Engineer.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with the County Historical
Res. 08-298  21-  Society.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 08-300  21-  program.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with A.C. Excavating for
Res. 08-307  21-  demolition of 210 Grinton.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with A.C. Excavating for
Res. 08-308  21-  demolition of 223 Nobes.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Wiss, Janney,
Res. 08-309  21-  Elstner Associates, Inc. for construction engineering services.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement with Civiltech
Res. 08-314  21-  Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
Res. 08-316  21-  Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc. for additional design engineering services.
             2008
             8-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for Crete Road District
Res. 08-321  21-  improvements.
             2008
             8-   Confirming award of contract to Riber Construction, Inc. for Manhattan Road
Res. 08-323  21-  District improvements.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
Res. 08-326  21-  Renwick, Inc. for design engineering services (Phase II).
             2008
             8-   Confirming award of contract with Iroquois Paving Corp. for Peotone-Beecher Road
Res. 08-327  21-  improvements.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hutchison
Res. 08-330  21-  Engineering, Inc. for design engineering services (Phase II).
             2008
             8-
Res. 08-332  21-  Confirming purchases of equipment from Patten Industries, Inc.
             2008
             8-
Res. 08-333  21-  Confirming purchase of equipment from Finkbiner Equipment Co.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services contract with SEC
Res. 08-334  21-  Group, Inc. regarding proposed CN Railway acquisition of EJ&E Railway Co.
             2008
             8-   Adopting Emergency Management Countywide All-Hazards Mitigation Plan, July, 2008
Res. 08-335  21-  edition.
             2008
             8-   Adopting successor collective bargaining agreement with the County Sheriff and
Res. 08-340  21-  State FOP Labor Council.
             2008
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate/execute contract with Jim Paglia/In’s &
Res. 08-341  21-  Out’s, LLC for professional services to facilitate vision/mission statement.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute disclaimer of interest in eminent domain
Res. 08-345  11-  proceedings against 307 Brook Forest Drive.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 08-352  18-  program.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Baxter & Woodman
Res. 08-357  18-  Consulting Engineers for construction supervision (Phase III).
             2008
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with M.E.P. Excavations for
Res. 08-360  18-  demolition of 1215 W. Broadview.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with M.E.P. Excavations for
Res. 08-361  18-  demolition of 718 S. Prairie.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with A.C. Excavating for
Res. 08-362  18-  demolition of 514 Champlain Avenue.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hutchison
Res. 08-363  18-  Engineering, Inc. for design engineering services for County Highway 23
             2008 improvements.
             9-   Confirming award of contract to James D. Fiala Paving Co., Inc. for Veterans
Res. 08-365  18-  Parkway improvements.
             2008
             9-
Res. 08-379  18-  Confirming purchases of equipment from Trans Chicago Truck Group.
             2008
             9-
Res. 08-380  18-  Renewing contract for security guard services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2008
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute NACo managed pharmacy benefit services
Res. 08-382  18-  agreement for discount prescription drug card program for county residents.
             2008
             9-
Res. 08-383  18-  Establishing pilot pharmaceutical take-back program with Bolingbrook Pharmacy.
             2008
             9-
Res. 08-386  18-  Awarding bid for elevator modernization contract to Anderson Elevator.
             2008
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
Res. 08-391  16-  program.
             2008
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute master agreement for use of easement over
Res. 08-398  16-  lands of Commonwealth Edison Co.
             2008
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contract with M.E.P. Excavations for
Res. 08-399  16-  demolition of 235 Krakar Avenue.
             2008
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Applied Research
Res. 08-401  16-  Associates, Inc. for engineering services for County Highway 17 improvements.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-414  16-  Awarding bid for disposable products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-415  16-  Renewing contract for medical products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-416  16-  Renewing contract for nursing services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-417  16-  Awarding bid for standby generator sets for the county radio system.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-425  16-  Renewing contract for Nextel cellular phone service.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-426  16-  Renewing contract for janitorial cleaning services for county office buildings.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-427  16-  Renewing contracts for refuse and recycling collection for county buildings.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing a contract with the Government Payment Services Inc. d/b/a Government
Res. 08-431  20-  Payment EXP (GovPayEXP).
             2008
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute master agreement for use of easement over
Res. 08-445  20-  lands of Commonwealth Edison Co.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing agreement for the maintenance of the stormwater system at the
Res. 08-446  20-  Lincoln-Way West High School facility accepting drainage from Gougar Road.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement for design
Res. 08-450  20-  engineering (Phase I & Phase II).
             2008
             11-  Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement for design
Res. 08-451  20-  engineering (Phase I & Phase II).
             2008
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 08-454  20-  (Phase II).
             2008
             11-  Authorizing and agreement with the State Department of Transportation for funding
Res. 08-456  20-  of the design engineering services (Phase II).
             2008
             11-  Renewing contract with Gordon Food Service for paper products at Sunny Hill
Res. 08-458  20-  Nursing Home.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contracts for property and casualty
Res. 08-459  20-  insurance.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with Joliet/Will County Center
Res. 08-466  20-  for Economic Development (CED) and the County Chamber of Commerce.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Mack Communications, Inc. consultant
Res. 08-468  20-  agreement renewal.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Farnsworth Group, Inc. consultant
Res. 08-469  20-  agreement renewal.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute professional services renewal
Res. 08-470  20-  contract with Federal Lobbyist Firm of Smith Dawson & Andrews.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of professional services
Res. 08-471  20-  contract with Lois Mayer.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Dave Neal & Associates consultant
Res. 08-472  20-  agreement renewal.
             2008
             11-
Res. 08-475  20-  Awarding bid for cross-cut shredder for records management.
             2008
             11-
Res. 08-476  20-  Awarding bid for various county office buildings elevator maintenance.
             2008
             11-  Awarding bid and authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute a contract
Res. 08-477  20-  with Warren Oil Company for unleaded and diesel fuel.
             2008
             11-  Awarding bid from Garvey’s Office Products for computer printer remanufactured
Res. 08-478  20-  and new toner cartridges, printer maintenance and yearly cleaning.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute the first amendment to an agreement
Res. 08-479  20-  between the county and Veolia Environmental Services, LLC to provide household
             2008 hazardous waste collection services.
             12-
Res. 08-498  18-  Confirming award of contracts for public highway improvements.
             2008
             12-  Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
Res. 08-499  18-  improvements.
             2008
             12-
Res. 08-500  18-  Confirming award of contracts for public highway improvements.
             2008
             12-  Confirming award of contract with Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway
Res. 08-501  18-  improvements.
             2008
             12-  Confirming award of contract with Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway
Res. 08-502  18-  improvements.
             2008
             12-  Confirming award of contract with Allied Municipal Supply for public highway
Res. 08-503  18-  improvements.
             2008
             12-  Awarding bid to Aramark Correctional Services for food service at River Valley
Res. 08-507  18-  Juvenile Center.
             2008
             12-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute the fiscal year 2009 Citizen Corps
Res. 08-508  18-  grant agreement.
             2008
             12-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of contract with Christopher
Res. 08-510  18-  B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement with “T”
Res. 09-11   15-  Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2009
             1-   Authorizing supplemental agreement for right-of- way acquisition services by
Res. 09-12   15-  county with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd.
             2009
             1-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement with Earth
Res. 09-16   15-  Tech AECOM for engineering (Phase I).
             2009
             1-
Res. 09-19   15-  Awarding bid from United Scripts, Inc. for pharmaceutical services at Sunny Hill.
             2009
             2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Baxter & Woodman,
Res. 09-36   19-  Inc. for design engineering (Phase II).
             2009
             2-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute extension and modification to an
Res. 09-45   19-  agreement between the county and Vintage Tech, Recyclers, Inc. to provide
             2009 electronic collection services for permanent electronic drop-offs throughout the
                  county.
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to amend professional services and consulting
Res. 09-48   19-  contract with AON Risk Services.
             2009
             2-   Adoption of collective bargaining agreement between the county, the County
Res. 09-49   19-  Sheriff and State Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council for correctional
             2009 officer sergeants and lieutenants.
             2-   Awarding bid to Tyson Motor Corp. for light utility vehicle for Land Use
Res. 09-50   19-  Department.
             2009
             3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini &
Res. 09-60   19-  Renwick, Inc. for design engineering (Phase II).
             2009
             3-
Res. 09-61   19-  Confirming award of contract to Preform Traffic Control Systems, Ltd.
             2009
             3-
Res. 09-63   19-  Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Materials Company.
             2009
             3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with “T” Engineering
Res. 09-64   19-  Services, Ltd. for additional right-of-way acquisition services.
             2009
             3-   Agreement with “T” Engineering Services, Ltd. for additional right-of-way
Res. 09-65   19-  acquisition services.
             2009
             3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Smith Engineering
Res. 09-66   19-  Consultants Group, Inc. for Phase II consultant program coordinator.
             2009
             3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with V3 Companies, Ltd.
Res. 09-67   19-  for design engineering services (Phase I).
             2009
             3-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a financial consulting services
Res. 09-76   19-  agreement with Stern Brothers & Company.
             2009
             3-   Awarding bid to Northwest Ford Truck Center for refrigerated box truck for
Res. 09-77   19-  Sheriff’s Department.
             2009
             3-   Awarding contract for renewal of “wrap around” professional liability insurance
Res. 09-79   19-  for the County Community Health Center.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing bid to Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. for 2009 Historic
Res. 09-82   16-  Survey Consultant Contract for Wilmington and Jackson Townships.
             2009
             4-   Agreement for the maintenance of the stormwater system at the Cedar Road
Res. 09-91   16-  Elementary School in Homer Community Consolidated School District 33C.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing supplemental professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-94   16-  with Willett, Hofmann & Associates.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing supplemental professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-101  16-  (Phase II) with Smith Engineering Consultants, Inc.
             2009
             4-
Res. 09-105  16-  Confirming award of contract to VCNA Prairie Aggregates ILL.
             2009
             4-
Res. 09-106  16-  Confirming award of contract to VCNA Prairie Aggregates ILL.
             2009
             4-
Res. 09-107  16-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
             2009
             4-
Res. 09-108  16-  Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation.
             2009
             4-
Res. 09-110  16-  Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation.
             2009
             4-   Awarding bid for local telephone access, private line and long distance services,
Res. 09-125  16-  to AT&T Corp.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing renewal of EDACS FX agreement with M/A-COM, Inc. to provide software
Res. 09-126  16-  updates, documentation updates and other services for the county radio system.
             2009
             5-
Res. 09-136  21-  Agreement for the maintenance of the storm sewer system at Bronson Square.
             2009
             5-
Res. 09-137  21-  Right-of-way acquisition agreement with Panduit Corporation along 191st Street.
             2009
             5-
Res. 09-139  21-  Awarding contract to Gray’s Material Service for public highway improvements.
             2009
             5-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 09-140  21-  improvements.
             2009
             5-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 09-142  21-  improvements.
             2009
             5-   Awarding contract to Steve Krause Construction Co. for public highway
Res. 09-144  21-  improvements.
             2009
             5-
Res. 09-145  21-  Awarding contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
             2009
             5-
Res. 09-147  21-  Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2009
             5-
Res. 09-148  21-  Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
             2009
             6-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
Res. 09-176  18-  improvements.
             2009
             6-   Approval of professional services agreement with Strand Associates for
Res. 09-177  18-  construction engineering.
             2009
             6-   Approval of professional services agreement with Rogina & Associates for
Res. 09-178  18-  engineering services.
             2009
             6-
Res. 09-179  18-  Awarding contract for operational audit of the county adult detention facility.
             2009
             6-   Authorizing a workforce investment board youth program contract with learning and
Res. 09-188  18-  skills center.
             2009
             6-   Authorizing a workforce investment board youth program contract with Joliet
Res. 09-189  18-  Junior College.
             2009
             6-   Authorizing a workforce investment board youth program contract with Education
Res. 09-190  18-  Service Network.
             2009
             6-
Res. 09-191  18-  Authorizing a workforce investment board contract with R.R. Donnelley Logistics.
             2009
             6-   Authorizing a workforce investment board work certified program contract with
Res. 09-192  18-  Joliet Junior College.
             2009
             6-   Authorizing a professional services agreement for a facility needs analysis with
Res. 09-195  18-  Wight & Company.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing a grant agreement with the State Historic Preservation Agency for
Res. 09-198  16-  historic preservation educational programming.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing approval of an agreement between the county and Northern Illinois Gas
Res. 09-208  16-  Company for relocation of facilities for the installation of noise walls.
             2009
             7-
Res. 09-209  16-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for Gougar Road.
             2009
             7-
Res. 09-211  16-  Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corporation for Western Avenue.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-213  16-  aquisition services.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-214  16-  aquisition services.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for design
Res. 09-215  16-  engineering services.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for design
Res. 09-217  16-  engineering services.
             2009
             7-   Supplemental agreement with the State Department of Transportation for the
Res. 09-218  16-  improvement of County Highway 4.
             2009
             7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-220  16-  aquisition services.
             2009
             8-
Res. 09-234  20-  Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corporation for Pauling Road.
             2009
             8-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for road work on various
Res. 09-236  20-  county highways.
             2009
             8-   Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for design
Res. 09-239  20-  engineering services.
             2009
             8-
Res. 09-243  20-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction for Laraway Road.
             2009
             8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute contract for Avaya Direct Phone
Res. 09-248  20-  System hardware maintenance with AT&T.
             2009
             8-
Res. 09-249  20-  Authorizing one month contract extension for telecommunications maintenance.
             2009
             8-   Confirming award of emergency contract to Poulos, Inc. for Sunny Hill backup
Res. 09-251  20-  generator project.
             2009
             8-
Res. 09-255  20-  Authorizing a contract with CDM for EECBG.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-270  17-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-271  17-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-272  17-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
             2009
             9-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-280  17-  acquisition services.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-281  17-  Awarding contract to GFS Fence for guardrails.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-286  17-  Authorizing supplemental agreement with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
             2009
             9-   Renewing contract for elevator maintenance for various county office buildings
Res. 09-296  17-  with Advanced Elevator Company.
             2009
             9-   Renewing contract for janitorial cleaning services for various county office
Res. 09-297  17-  buildings with Alpha Building Maintenance Service, Inc.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-299  17-  Authorizing renegotiation of the county host agreement with Waste Management.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement of intent
Res. 09-303  15-  to abate property taxes for RTC Industries, Inc.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement for right-
Res. 09-322  15-  of-way acquisition services.
             2009
             10-  Resolution for supplemental agreement for right-of-way acquisition services by
Res. 09-323  15-  county under the State Highway Code.
             2009
             10-  Resolution authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-
Res. 09-324  15-  way acquisition services.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-325  15-  acquisition services for parcels along County Highway 14 at 119th Street.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-326  15-  acquisition services for property along County Highway 14 at 119th Street.
             2009
             10-
Res. 09-327  15-  Resolution confirming award of contract for “D” Construction, Inc.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-328  15-  services with Patrick Engineering, Inc.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-329  15-  services with Wight and Company.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-330  15-  services with RJN Group, Inc.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-331  15-  services with Rogina & Associates, Ltd.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
Res. 09-341  15-  services with Willett, Hofmann & Associates.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with the State Department of
Res. 09-352  15-  Healthcare and Family Services for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2009
             10-  Awarding bid for security guard service at Sunny Hill Nursing Home to Per Mar
Res. 09-353  15-  Security Services.
             2009
             10-
Res. 09-354  15-  Renewing contract for nursing services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2009
             10-
Res. 09-355  15-  Renewing contract for medical products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2009
             10-
Res. 09-358  15-  Contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois for medical benefits.
             2009
             10-
Res. 09-359  15-  Awarding contract for Nextel Cellular phone service.
             2009
             10-  Awarding bid to SCI Communications for telecommunications time and material
Res. 09-361  15-  service.
             2009
             10-  Extending inmate medical services contract for River Valley Juvenile Detention
Res. 09-362  15-  Center and the county adult detention facility.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute CLG grant application for continuance of
Res. 09-365  19-  rural historic structures survey in Florence, Reed, Custer and Wesley townships.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for design
Res. 09-377  19-  engineering services with Robinson Engineering, Ltd.
             2009
             11-  For additional design engineering services with Robinson Engineering, Ltd. (Phase
Res. 09-378  19-  II) by the county under the State Highway Code.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
Res. 09-379  19-  construction engineering with AECOM.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services for construction engineering
Res. 09-380  19-  services supplemental agreement with AECOM.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of additional professional engineering services agreement
Res. 09-381  19-  for engineering with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2009
             11-  Additional design engineering services by county under the State Highway Code
Res. 09-382  19-  with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of additional professional engineer services agreement for
Res. 09-383  19-  engineering with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2009
             11-  Additional design engineering services by county under the State Highway Code
Res. 09-384  19-  with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-385  19-  acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
Res. 09-386  19-  acquisition services with Swanson and Brown, Ltd.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-387  19-  Confirming award of purchase of road widener.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-395  19-  Awarding bid for exam gloves for Sunny Hill.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-396  19-  Awarding bid for disposable pads, briefs and pull-ups for Sunny Hill.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-397  19-  Awarding bid for disposable wash cloths for Sunny Hill.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contract for property and casualty
Res. 09-399  19-  insurance.
             2009
             11-  Designating AON Risk Services as broker/consultant for property and casualty,
Res. 09-400  19-  general liability, worker’s compensation and professional services.
             2009
             11-  Authorizing county executive to execute agreement with Joliet/Will County Center
Res. 09-404  19-  for Economic Development (CED) and the County Chamber of Commerce.
             2009
             11-  Executing workforce investment board contract with Economic Modeling Specialists,
Res. 09-405  19-  Inc. for a workforce analysis of targeted industries.
             2009
             11-  Executing workforce investment board contract with Our Lady of Angels retirement
Res. 09-406  19-  home for employee training in health care.
             2009
             11-  Executing workforce investment board contract with IBEW 176 and Joliet Junior
Res. 09-407  19-  College for renewable energy resources training.
             2009
             11-  Renewing computer printer remanufactured and new toner cartridges, printer
Res. 09-408  19-  maintenance and yearly cleaning contract with Garvey’s Office Products.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-409  19-  Awarding bid for digital color copier.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-410  19-  Awarding bid for cutter.
             2009
             11-
Res. 09-411  19-  Awarding bid for unleaded and diesel fuel.
             2009
             11-  Awarding bid for refuse and recycling collection to Joliet Disposal, Inc. for
Res. 09-412  19-  county buildings.
             2009
             12-
Res. 09-432  17-  Confirming award of contract to the following for public highway improvements:
             2009
                “D” Construction, Inc.
                P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
                Gallagher Materials Corp.
                Iroquois Paving Corp.
                Austin Tyler Construction.
             12-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
Res. 09-433  17-  Construction Co.
             2009
             12-
Res. 09-434  17-  Confirming award of contract to the following for public highway improvements:
             2009
                VCNA Prairie
                Vulcan Materials, Co.
             12-
Res. 09-435  17-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2009
             12-
Res. 09-436  17-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
             2009
             12-  Confirming award of contract for public highway improvements to Contech
Res. 09-437  17-  Construction Products, Inc.
             2009
             12-
Res. 09-440  17-  Awarding contract for paper products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2009
             12-
Res. 09-441  17-  Awarding contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
             2009
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute Mack Communications, Inc., contract
Res. 09-444  17-  agreement renewal.
             2009
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute supplemental agreement to professional
Res. 09-445  17-  services contract with legislative lobbyist William F. Mahar.
             2009
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services renewal contact
Res. 09-446  17-  with federal lobbyist firm of Smith, Dawson & Andrews.
             2009
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services renewal contact
Res. 09-447  17-  with Lois Mayer to provide grant writing and research services.
             2009
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute professional services renewal contact
Res. 09-448  17-  with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd. for stormwater management services.
             2009
             12-  Modification to WIB Work certified program contract number 2009-2010 with Joliet
Res. 09-449  17-  Junior College.
             2009
             12-  Re-awarding bid for refuse and recycling collection services for three outlying
Res. 09-455  17-  sites to Allied Waste.
             2009
             12-  Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement for water management and
Res. 09-456  17-  planing consulting services with Robert E. Hamilton Consulting Engineers, PC.
             2009
 
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/
Res./ Date Description
Ord.
Res.  1-
10-13 21-  Additional design services by county under the State Highway Code.
      2010
Res.  1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
10-16 21-  services (Phase II) with H.W. Lochner, Inc.
      2010
Res.  1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
10-17 21-  services (Phase II) with Ciorba Group, Inc.
      2010
Res.  1-   Modification Number 1 to WIB Career Seekers Youth Program contract number 2009-
10-23 21-  2000 with Education Service Network.
      2010
Res.  1-   Modification Number 1 to WIB Career Seekers Youth Program contract number 2009-
10-24 21-  3000 with Learning and Skills Center.
      2010
Res.  1-   Modification Number 1 to WIB Career Seekers Youth Program contract number 2009-
10-25 21-  3000 with Joliet Junior College.
      2010
Res.  1-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a contract modification to the Teng &
10-27 21-  Associates Architectural/Engineering services contract for expansion of the ADF.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute the third amendment to the landfill
10-29 18-  agreement between the county and Waste Management Renewable Energy, L.L.C. and
      2010 Waste Management of Illinois, Inc.
Res.  2-   Amending condition #15 of Siting Ordinance 99-72 for the Prairie View recycling
10-30 18-  and disposal facility.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-36 18-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
      2010
Res.  2-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 28 (Essex Road)
10-37 18-  from Illinois Route 113 to the county line.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-38 18-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
      2010
Res.  2-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 48 (Old Monee
10-39 18-  Road) from Exchange Street to Crete-Monee Road.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-40 18-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
      2010
Res.  2-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 55 (Cherry Hill
10-41 18-  Road) from Route 30 to Washington Street.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-42 18-  Confirming award of contract to Homer Tree Service, Inc.
      2010
Res.  2-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code for county-wide tree removal at
10-43 18-  various locations in the county.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-44 18-  Confirming award of contract to Herlihy Mid- Continent Co.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-45 18-  Confirming award of contract to Van Mack Electric.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-46 18-  Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Materials Company.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
10-50 18-  services (Phase II) with Willett, Hofmann & Associates.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for structural
10-51 18-  engineering services with Bowman, Barrett & Associates, Inc.
      2010
Res.  2-   For structural engineering services by county under the State Highway Code for a
10-52 18-  regional transportation corridor.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
10-53 18-  services (Phase II) with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
10-57 18-  supervision (Phase II) with Baxter & Woodman Consulting Engineers.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
10-58 18-  engineering (Phase III) with Thomas Engineer Group.
      2010
Res.  2-   Renewing contract for food service at River Valley Juvenile Center with Aramark
10-61 18-  Correctional Services.
      2010
Res.  2-
10-63 18-  Renewing contract for pharmaceutical services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
      2010
Res.  2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute an agreement between the county and Wyn
10-67 18-  A. Hyzer to provide environmental educator services to the County Land Use
      2010 Department, Waste Services Division.
Res.  2-   Renewal of wraparound professional liability insurance for the county community
10-69 18-  health center.
      2010
Res.  3-   Supplemental resolution for improvements by the county under the State Highway
10-77 18-  Code.
      2010
Res.  3-   Authorizing an agreement between the county and Exxon Mobil Oil Corporation for
10-78 18-  reimbursement for extending encasement on pipeline facilities County Highway 35.
      2010
Res.  3-
10-79 18-  Confirming the award of a contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
      2010
Res.  3-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 88 (Weber Road)
10-80 18-  from the north edge of the I-55 interchange to Lily Cache Lane.
      2010
Res.  3-
10-82 18-  Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation.
      2010
Res.  3-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 42 (Brandon
10-83 18-  Road) from the Laraway Road to U.S. Route 6.
      2010
Res.  3-
10-84 18-  Confirming award of contract to Roadsafe Traffic Systems, Inc.
      2010
Res.  3-
10-85 18-  Improvements by county under State Highway Code to various county highways.
      2010
Res.  3-
10-86 18-  Confirming award of contract to Glenn McCann Co.
      2010
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
10-88 18-  (Phase I) with Willett, Hofmann & Associates, Inc.
      2010
Res.  4-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Van-Mack Electric Co.
103   2010
Res.  4-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Van-Mack Electric Co.
104   2010
Res.  4-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
105   2010
Res.  4-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Bulk Storage, Inc.
108   2010
Res.  4-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to Joliet Maintenance Garage Salt
10-   15-  Dome.
109   2010
Res.  4-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
110   2010
Res.  4-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 25 (Wilmington-
10-   15-  Peotone Road) from Martin Long Road to Drecksler Road.
111   2010
Res.  4-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
112   2010
Res.  4-   Awarding bid to Pollution Control Industries, Inc. for household hazardous waste
10-   15-  collection.
121   2010
Res.  4-   Authorizing contract with Provena St. Joseph Medical Center for incumbent work
10-   15-  training for nurses.
124   2010
Res.  5-   Construction by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 42 (Brandon
10-   20-  Road) over the Des Plaines River structure, County Section 04-00090-07 BR, County
140   2010 Board District #8.
Res.  5-
10-   20-  Confirming award of contract to James D. Fiala Paving.
142   2010
Res.  5-
10-   20-  Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp.
145   2010
Res.  5-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 49 (Exchange
10-   20-  Street) from IL Route 1 to abandoned railroad crossing (about one mile to the
146   2010 east).
Res.  5-
10-   20-  Confirming award of contract to Finkbiner Equipment Co., Inc.
147   2010
Res.  5-
10-   20-  Awarding bid to Streicher’s for body armor for the Sheriff’s Department.
150   2010
Res.  5-
10-   20-  Renewing contract with Garvey’s Office Products for office supplies.
155   2010
Res.  5-   Awarding bid to Anderson Elevator for elevator modernization project at Court
10-   20-  Annex.
156   2010
Res.  5-   Awarding bid to North Central Electric for electrical improvements at the Highway
10-   20-  Department.
157   2010
Res.  5-   Awarding bid to Johansen & Anderson for HVAC improvements at Court Annex and the
10-   20-  Highway Department.
158   2010
Res.  6-
10-   17-  Confirming award of contract to Alexander Equipment Co.
176   2010
Res.  6-
10-   17-  Confirming award of contract to Austin Tyler Construction, LLC.
177   2010
Res.  6-
10-   17-  Confirming award of contract to Jim George & Sons, LLC.
178   2010
Res.  6-   Rescinding Res. 10-44 awarding bid for construction of noise walls along CH 14
10-   17-  (Plainfield-Naperville Road) between 104th Street and 95th Street in the City of
180   2010 Napierville.
Res.  6-   Awarding bid to C.R. Leonard for plumbing improvements at Sunny Hill Nursing
10-   17-  Home.
208   2010
Res.  6-   Awarding bid to Replacement Window Systems for window replacement at Sunny Hill
10-   17-  Nursing Home.
209   2010
Res.  6-   Renewing work certified contract with Joliet Junior College for workforce
10-   17-  services.
211   2010
Res.  6-   Renewing career seeker youth program contract with Joliet Junior College for
10-   17-  workforce services.
212   2010
Res.  6-   Renewing career seeker youth program contract with Education Service Network for
10-   17-  workforce services.
213   2010
Res.  6-   Awarding bid to Bennett & Brosseau Roofing, Inc. for green roof project at Will
10-   17-  County Office Building.
214   2010
Res.  6-   Awarding bid to Knickerbocker Roofing & Paving Co. for roof replacement project
10-   17-  at Will County Court Annex Building.
215   2010
Res.  6-   Correcting scrivener’s error in Res. 10-150 awarding bid for body armor for the
10-   17-  Sheriff’s Department.
216   2010
Res.  6-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate contract with AON Consulting Inc. for
10-   17-  benefits consultant.
223   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to James D. Fiala Paving Co., Inc.
236   2010
Res.  7-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)
10-   15-  North from IL Route 7 to north of U.S. Route 6.
237   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Austin Tyler Construction, LLC.
238   2010
Res.  7-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)
10-   15-  South from Spencer Road to U.S. Route 52.
239   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
240   2010
Res.  7-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to County Highway 4 (Elevator
10-   15-  Road) from U.S. Route 52 to U.S. Route 52.
241   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc.
242   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Materials Company.
243   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Materials Company.
244   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to Lorig Construction Company.
248   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
249   2010
Res.  7-
10-   15-  Confirming award of purchases to Power Equipment Leasing Co., Inc.
273   2010
Res.  8-
10-   19-  Confirming award of purchases to Power Equipment Leasing Co., Inc.
274   2010
Res.  8-   Improvements by county under State Highway Code to Dralle Road over unnamed
10-   19-  tributary of Forked Creek.
275   2010
Res.  8-   Correct scrivener’s error on Res. 10-241 for improvement by county under State
10-   19-  Highway Code.
276   2010
Res.  8-
10-   19-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction.
277   2010
Res.  8-   Renewing contract with Professional Medical & Surgical Supply, Inc. for diabetic
10-   19-  supplies for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
284   2010
Res.  8-   Renewing contract with Per Mar Security Services for security guard service at
10-   19-  Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
285   2010
Res.  8-   Renewing contract with Professional Medical for disposable washcloths for Sunny
10-   19-  Hill Nursing Home.
286   2010
Res.  8-   Renewing contract with Professional Medical for exam gloves for Sunny Hill
10-   19-  Nursing Home.
287   2010
Res.  8-   Renewing contract with Professional Medical for disposable undergarments for
10-   19-  Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
288   2010
Res.  9-
10-   16-  Awarding contract to Baker, Tilly, Virchow, Krause, LLP for annual audit.
297   2010
Res.  9-
10-   16-  Confirming award of contract to TAPCO.
305   2010
Res.  9-
10-   16-  Awarding bid for nursing services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
308   2010
Res.  9-   Renewing contracts Gordon Food Services, Edward Don, Tri-K Supplies and Laport,
10-   16-  Inc. for miscellaneous paper products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
309   2010
Res.  9-   Renewing contract with SCI Communications for telecommunications time and
10-   16-  material.
314   2010
Res.  9-   Awarding bid to Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. for rural historic
10-   16-  structure consultant.
315   2010
Res.  9-
10-   16-  Awarding bid to McGrath/Savin Office Equipment for digital copiers.
316   2010
Res.  9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute an addendum to the original contract with
10-   16-  Nelson Nygaard for the coordinated paratransit study.
323   2010
Res.  10-  Awarding bid to Medline, Moor Medical, Gulf South Medical Supply and Professional
10-   21-  Medical for medical projects at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
349   2010
Res.  10-  Renewing contract with Garvey’s Office Products for computer printer
10-   21-  remanufactured and new toner cartridges, printer maintenance and yearly cleaning
357   2010
Res.  10-  Awarding bid to Alpha Building Maintenance for office cleaning at various county
10-   21-  office buildings.
358   2010
Res.  10-  Awarding bid to Anderson Elevator for elevator maintenance at various county
10-   21-  office buildings.
359   2010
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contracts for property and casualty,
10-   21-  general liability, workers compensation insurance and other tort liability
363   2010 insurance related services.
Res.  10-
10-   21-  Adjusting premiums for employee, retiree and COBRA insurance.
365   2010
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute contracts with Blue Cross Blue Shield of
10-   21-  Illinois, HMO Illinois, Davis Vision, Dearborn National, Ceridian Lifeworks,
366   2010 Ceridan Benefits for group benefits.
Res.  11-  Reconsidering and modifying Res. 10-359 awarding bid for elevator maintenance at
10-   18-  various county office buildings.
398   2010
Res.  11-
10-   18-  Renewing contract for Nextel Cellular Phone Service.
399   2010
Res.  11-
10-   18-  Awarding bid to Elburn Coop for unleaded and diesel fuel
401   2010
Res.  11-
10-   18-  Renewal of contract with Lois Mayer for grant wiring and research services.
403   2010
Res.  12-  Authorizing execution of contract with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd. for
10-   16-  stormwater management services.
426   2010
Res.  1-   Confirming award of contracts for highway improvements to “D” Construction, Inc.;
11-07 20-  P.T. Ferro Construction Co.; Gallagher Materials Corporation; Iroquois Paving
      2011 Corp.; and Austin Tyler Construction.
Res.  1-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for highway
11-08 20-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  1-   Confirming award of contract with VCNA Prairie and Vulcan Materials Co. for
11-09 20-  highway improvements.
      2011
Res.  1-
11-10 20-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for highway improvements.
      2011
Res.  1-
11-11 20-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for highway improvements.
      2011
Res.  1-
11-12 20-  Confirming award of contract to Metal Culverts, Inc. for highway improvements.
      2011
Res.  1-
11-13 20-  Authorizing improvement of County Highway 37 Project (143rd Street).
      2011
Res.  1-
11-14 20-  Authorizing improvement of County Highway 49 (Exchange Street) Project.
      2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with College of Lake
11-37 20-  County through Health Profession Opportunity Grant.
      2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with McHenry County
11-38 20-  College through Health Professional Opportunity Grant.
      2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Jewish
11-39 20-  Vocational Services through Health Profession Opportunity Grant.
      2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Instituto Del
11-40 20-  Progreso Lationo through Health Profession Opportunity Grant.
      2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Joliet Junior
11-41 20-  College through Health Profession Opportunity Grant.
      2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board contract with Central States
11-42 20-  Ser-Jobs for Progress, Inc. through Health Profession Opportunity Grant.
      2011
Res.  2-   Confirming award of contract to VCNA Prairie Aggregates for public highway
11-46 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  2-   Confirming award of contract to VCNA Prairie Aggregates for public highway
11-57 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  2-   Confirming award of contract to Preform Traffic Control Systems, Ltd. for public
11-58 17-  highway improvements.
      2011
Res.  2-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
11-60 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hoffmann
11-61 17-  and Associates for design engineering (Phase II).
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Santacruz
11-62 17-  Associates, Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Polach Appraisal
11-63 17-  Group, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
11-64 17-  Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-65 17-  engineering services with A. Epstein and Sons International, Inc.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-66 17-  engineering services with Baxter and Woodman, Inc.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing and directing execution of agreement for construction engineering
11-69 17-  services with Entran, LLC.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing execution of professional services agreement with McKibben Group,
11-77 17-  Inc.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing renewal of “wrap around” professional liability insurance for the
11-78 17-  County Community Health Center.
      2011
Res.  2-   Authorizing the execution of a professional services renewal contract with the
11-82 17-  federal lobbyist firm of Smith Dawson and Andrews.
      2011
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
11-93 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to K-Five Construction Corp. for public highway
11-94 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
11-95 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corporation for public highway
11-96 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
11-97 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
11-98 17-  improvements.
      2011
Res.  3-
11-99 17-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Huff and Huff, Inc.
      2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
11-   17-  Renwick, Inc. for design engineering (Phase II).
100   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with “T” Engineering,
11-   17-  Ltd. for right- of-way acquisition services.
101   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
11-   17-  Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
102   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Swanson and Brown,
11-   17-  Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
103   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
11-   17-  Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
104   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Santacruz
11-   17-  Associates, Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
105   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of agreement with Towpath Joint Venture for the purchase of
11-   17-  wetland banking site credits.
106   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing an agreement with Northern Illinois Gas Company d/b/a Nicor Gas for
11-   17-  reimbursement for relocating facilities along County Highway 6.
107   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing an agreement with BP Pipelines (North America), Inc. for
11-   17-  reimbursement for relocating facilities along County Highway 49.
108   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing an agreement with Wolverine Pipe Line Company for reimbursement for
11-   17-  relocating facilities along County Highway 49.
109   2011
Res.  3-   Authorizing execution of an agreement with the City of Crest Hill for
11-   17-  appurtenance work within the city limits.
110   2011
Res.  3-
11-   17-  Renewing contract for pharmaceutical services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
113   2011
Res.  4-   Authorizing County Executive to enter into Illinois Historic Preservation Agency,
11-   21-  fiscal year 2011 certified local government grant program to continue county
123   2011 rural historic structures survey project.
Res.  4-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Polach Appraisal
11-   21-  Group, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
132   2011
Res.  4-   Authorizing an agreement with Northern Illinois Gas Company d/b/a Nicor Gas for
11-   21-  reimbursement for relocating facilities along County Highway 5.
133   2011
Res.  4-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Collins Engineers,
11-   21-  Inc. for design engineering (Phase II).
135   2011
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
11-   21-  improvements.
136   2011
Res.  4-
11-   21-  Confirming award of contract to Denler, Inc. for public highway improvements.
137   2011
Res.  4-   Renewing contract for food service at River Valley Juvenile Center with Aramark
11-   21-  Correctional Services.
140   2011
Res.  4-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate a professional services contract with
11-   21-  administrative adjudication hearing officer candidate Stanley W. Pagorek.
141   2011
Res.  4-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate a professional services contract with
11-   21-  administrative adjudication hearing officer candidate Stephanie A. Posey.
142   2011
Res.  4-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate a contract for administrative
11-   21-  adjudication software with Sustain Technologies, Inc. under cost scenario #1.
143   2011
Res.  4-
11-   21-  Renewing contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
148   2011
Res.  4-
11-   21-  Renewing contract for office supplies.
152   2011
Res.  4-   Awarding bid for maintenance agreement for chiller unit at Sunny Hill Nursing
11-   21-  Home.
153   2011
Res.  5-
11-   19-  Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Materials for public highway improvements.
167   2011
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corp. for public highway
11-   19-  improvements.
168   2011
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp. for public highway
11-   19-  improvements.
169   2011
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Marking Specialists for public highway
11-   19-  improvements.
170   2011
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corp. for public highway
11-   19-  improvements.
172   2011
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
11-   19-  improvements.
173   2011
Res.  5-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   19-  engineering services with Hutchinson Engineering, Inc.
175   2011
Res.  5-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   19-  engineering services with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
176   2011
Res.  5-   Authorizing and directing execution of agreement for construction engineering
11-   19-  services with Teng and Associates, Inc.
177   2011
Res.  5-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   19-  engineering services with McKibben Group, Inc.
185   2011
Res.  5-   Correcting scrivener’s error in Res. 11-153, awarding bid for maintenance
11-   19-  agreement for chiller unit at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
189   2011
Res.  5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board contract with
11-   19-  Chicago Jobs Council through health profession opportunity grant.
191   2011
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the Manhattan
11-   16-  Road District.
201   2011
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for the New Lenox
11-   16-  Road District.
202   2011
Res.  6-
11-   16-  Confirming award of contract to Emulsicoat, Inc. for the Will Road District.
203   2011
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving Corporation for the Monee
11-   16-  Facility (storage bins).
204   2011
Res.  6-   Authorizing a Workforce Investment Board Youth Program Contract with education
11-   16-  service network.
223   2011
Res.  6-   Authorizing a Workforce Investment Board Work Readiness Program Contract with
11-   16-  Joliet Junior College.
224   2011
Res.  6-   Authorizing a Workforce Investment Board Youth Program Contract with Joliet
11-   16-  Junior College.
225   2011
Res.  7-
11-   21-  Awarding bid for soft goods for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
233   2011
Res.  7-
11-   21-  Awarding bid for diabetic supplies for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
234   2011
Res.  7-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for the Old Chicago/
11-   21-  Stripmine/ Tulley.
237   2011
Res.  7-
11-   21-  Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corp for Renwick Road.
238   2011
Res.  7-   Confirming award of contract to Davis Concrete Construction Co. for Briggs
11-   21-  Street.
239   2011
Res.  7-   Approving improvements by the county under the Illinois Highway Code for County
11-   21-  Highway 54/62 (Briggs Street).
240   2011
Res.  7-   Confirming award of contract to Kankakee Valley Const. Co., Inc. for the County
11-   21-  Line Road over Bull Creek.
241   2011
Res.  7-
11-   21-  Authorizing the approval of expenditure fo County Motor Fuel Tax Funds.
243   2011
Res.  7-
11-   21-  Intent to abate certain property taxes for Therafin Manufacturing.
244   2011
Res.  7-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for Delinquent Tax
11-   21-  Program.
245   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing the award bid to Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. for 2011-58
11-   18-  Historic Survey Consultant Contract for Custer and Wesley Townships.
259   2011
Res.  8-
11-   18-  Intent to abate certain property taxes for Elevance Renewable Sciences, Inc.
261   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent
11-   18-  tax program.
263   2011
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for Homer Road
11-   18-  District.
264   2011
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for Washington Road
11-   18-  District.
265   2011
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract to Iroquois Paving corporation for Will-Center Road
11-   18-  and County Line Road.
266   2011
Res.  8-
11-   18-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for Center Road.
267   2011
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for Channahon-Minooka
11-   18-  Road.
268   2011
Res.  8-
11-   18-  Confirming award of contract to Iroqois Paving Corporation for Exchange Street.
269   2011
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract to G.A. Blocker Grading for Arsenal Maintenance
11-   18-  Facility.
270   2011
Res.  8-   Approval of improvements by county under the Illinois Highway Code for the
11-   18-  Arsenal Maintenance Facility.
271   2011
Res.  8-
11-   18-  Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for Monee Garage Repairs.
272   2011
Res.  8-   Approval of improvements by county under the Illinois Highway Code for Monee
11-   18-  Maintenance Facility.
273   2011
Res.  8-   Approving construction engineering services by county under the Illinois Highway
11-   18-  Code for County Highway 52 (Gougar Road) at the US Route 30 intersection.
280   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
11-   18-  services (Phase II).
281   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
11-   18-  services (Phase II).
282   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
11-   18-  services (Phase II).
283   2011
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract of Len Cox and Sons Excavating for Lockport Township
11-   18-  Drainage.
284   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute professional services contract with
11-   18-  administrative adjudication hearing officer candidate Stephanie A. Posey.
288   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute professional services contract with
11-   18-  administrative adjudication hearing officer candidate Stanley W. Pagorek.
289   2011
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute contract for Administrative
11-   18-  Adjudication Software with Sustain Technologies, Inc.
290   2011
Res.  8-
11-   18-  Designating Heartland Bank and Trust Company as county depository.
325   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
11-   15-  program.
330   2011
Res.  9-   Declaring intent and entering into a contractual agreement to abate certain
11-   15-  property taxes for Archer Wire International Corp.
331   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County joint
11-   15-  agreement in order to facilitate the free flow of traffic and insure safety.
334   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing an agreement for construction engineering services by the county
11-   15-  described as County Highway 49 (Exchange Street) at Illinois Rout 394.
335   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing an agreement for construction engineering services by the county
11-   15-  described as County Highway 58 (County Line Road) over Bull Creek.
336   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing an agreement for construction engineering services by the county
11-   15-  described as County Highway 5 (Canton Farm Road) between County Line Road and
337   2011 Drauden Road.
Res.  9-   Authorizing the approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   15-  right-of-way acquisition services for several parcels of property along County
338   2011 Highway 88 and the intersection of County Highway 36.
Res.  9-   Authorizing an agreement for construction engineering services by the county
11-   15-  described as County Highway 24 (Indiana Avenue) over Trim Creek.
339   2011
Res.  9-   Confirming the award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for work on
11-   15-  Laraway Road.
342   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing approval of agreement between the county of Will and Towpath Joint
11-   15-  Venture for the purchase of Wetland Banking Site Credits.
343   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   15-  engineering services with Hutchison Engineering, Inc.
347   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing a contract for Administrative Adjudication software with sustain
11-   15-  technologies, Inc. with correct contract attached reflecting mutually agreed upon
348   2011 venue.
Res.  9-   Renewing contract for nursing services (CNA, LPN and RN) at Sunny Hill Nursing
11-   15-  Home).
353   2011
Res.  9-
11-   15-  Awarding bid for procurement card services to BMO/Harris Bank.
355   2011
Res.  9-
11-   15-  Renewing a contract for Annual Audit with Baker, Tilly, Virchow, Krause, LLP.
356   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing the county executive to renew workforce Investment Board Contract
11-   15-  with McHenry County College through Health Profession Opportunity Grant.
357   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew workforce investment board contract
11-   15-  with Central States SER-Jobs for Progress Inc. through a health profession
358   2011 opportunity grant.
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew Workforce Investment Board contract
11-   15-  with Instituto Del Progreso Latino through a health profession opportunity grant.
359   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew Workforce Investment Board contract
11-   15-  with Joliet Junior College through a health profession opportunity grant.
360   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew Workforce Investment Board contract
11-   15-  with the College of Lake County through a health profession opportunity grant.
361   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew workforce investment board contract
11-   15-  with Jewish Vocational Service and Employment Center through a health profession
362   2011 opportunity grant.
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of EDACS FX Agreement with
11-   15-  Harris Corporation with corrected contract attached.
364   2011
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute a professional services
11-   15-  contract with CDM and Wilbur Smith Associates for an Inland Port Infrastructure
366   2011 Analysis.
Res.  10-  Resolution authorizing the County Executive to execute certified local government
11-   20-  grant application for Historic Preservation Educational Programming.
369   2011
Res.  10-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent
11-   20-  tax program.
370   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Intent to abate certain property taxes for Alro Steel Corporation.
371   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Intent to abate certain property taxes for Pactiv Corporation.
372   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Designating NuMark Credit Union as county depository.
373   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Designating Canals and Trails Credit Union as county depository.
374   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Designating Joliet Municipal Employees Credit Union as county depository.
375   2011
Res.  10-  Providing title commitment reports for the improvement of County Highway 3
11-   20-  (McDonough Street) between Houbolt Road and Infantry Drive, County Board District
380   2011 #8.
Res.  10-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
11-   20-  of-way acquisition services.
381   2011
Res.  10-  Authorizing an agreement between the county and BP pipelines (North America) Inc.
11-   20-  for reimbursement for relocating facilities along County Highway 25.
382   2011
Res.  10-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
11-   20-  of-way acquisition services.
383   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Authorizing approval of an agreement between Openlands, Inc. and the county.
387   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Authorizing approval of the expenditure of county motor fuel tax funds.
388   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Renewing contract for disposable washcloths for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
391   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Renewing contract for exam gloves for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
392   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Renewing contract for disposable undergarments for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
393   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Renewing contract for security guard service at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
394   2011
Res.  10-  Renewing contract for telecommunications time and material with SCI
11-   20-  Communications, Inc.
398   2011
Res.  10-  Renewing contract for Janitorial Cleaning Services with Alpha Building
11-   20-  Maintenance Service, Inc. for various office buildings.
399   2011
Res.  10-  Renewing contract for elevator maintenance with Anderson Elevator Company for
11-   20-  various office buildings.
400   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Awarding bid for unleaded and diesel fuel to Elburn Coop.
402   2011
Res.  10-  Awarding bid for computer printer remanufactured and new toner cartridges,
11-   20-  printer maintenance and yearly cleaning to New Day Toner.
403   2011
Res.  10-
11-   20-  Renewing contract for Nextel Cellular Phone Service.
404   2011
Res.  10-  Establishing a pharmaceutical take-back program between the county and City of
11-   20-  Crest Hill.
405   2011
Res.  10-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute Intergovernmental Agreement for
11-   20-  Ombudsman Services second renewal.
406   2011
Res.  10-  Correcting scrivener’s error in Res. 11-364, authorizing county executive to
11-   20-  execute the renewal of EDACS FX Agreement with Harris Corporation.
407   2011
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to Bind Insurance Coverage and execute contracts for
11-   20-  property and casualty, general liability, workers’ compensation, loss control and
413   2011 other risk management-related services.
Res.  10-  Authorizing the County Executive to bind coverage and execute contracts with
11-   20-  designated carriers for the renewal of the Comprehensive Group Benefits Plan.
414   2011
Res.  10-  Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement between the county, the
11-   20-  Sheriff and metropolitan alliance of Police Will County Sheriff’s Police
416   2011 Management Association Chapter #123.
Res.  11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
11-   17-  program.
424   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Intent to abate certain property taxes for Illinois Transport, Inc.
425   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Designating providence bank as county depository.
426   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Designating UBS as county depository.
427   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Designating New Century Federal Credit Union as County Depository.
428   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Establishing the salary of County Engineer.
433   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
434   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   17-  engineering services.
435   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of agreement between the county and Towpath Joint Venture
11-   17-  for the purchase of Wetland Banking site credits.
436   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for design
11-   17-  engineering with STV Incorporated.
437   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement for design
11-   17-  engineering with AECOM.
438   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
11-   17-  engineering services with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
440   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Renewing contracts for medical products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
441   2011
Res.  11-
11-   17-  Renewing contracts for miscellaneous paper products at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
442   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute standard software maintenance agreement
11-   17-  with new world systems.
448   2011
Res.  11-  Renewing contracts for refuse and recycling collection for various county
11-   17-  buildings.
450   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
11-   17-  program.
455   2011
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of professional services extension of existing agreement for
11-   15-  Phase II Consultant Program Coordinator.
462   2011
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for engineering services
11-   15-  with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc.
463   2011
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of additional professional engineering services agreement
11-   15-  for design engineering services with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd.
464   2011
Res.  12-  Authorizing an agreement between the county and BP Pipelines (North America) Inc.
11-   15-  for Reimbursement for relocating facilities along County Highway 7.
465   2011
Res.  12-  Construction engineering services by county under the Illinois Highway Code for
11-   15-  County Highway 8 (DeSelm Road) from Illinois Route 102 to Old Chicago Road.
466   2011
Res.  12-  Construction engineering services by county under the Illinois Highway Code for
11-   15-  County Highway 25 (Wilmington Peotone Road) and CH 7 (Old Chicago Road)
467   2011
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of additional professional engineering services agreement
11-   15-  for right-of-way acquisition services along County Highway 49 (Exchange Street)
468   2011 between Crete Road and Cottage Grove Avenue.
Res.  12-  Confirming award of a contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
11-   15-  improvements.
469   2011
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract with various companies for public highway
11-   15-  improvements.
470   2011
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. and “D”
11-   15-  Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
471   2011
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract with various companies for public highway
11-   15-  improvements.
472   2011
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract with Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway
11-   15-  improvements.
473   2011
Res.  12-
11-   15-  Confirming award of contract with TAPCO, Inc. for public highway improvements.
474   2011
Res.  12-
11-   15-  Confirming award of contract with TAPCO, Inc. for public highway improvements.
475   2011
Res.  12-  Executing a professional services agreement with Wight and Company for a physical
11-   15-  building assessment of the Pioneer Building.
479   2011
Res.  12-  Executing an agreement with Joliet/Will County Center for Economic Development
11-   15-  (CED) and Will County Chamber of Commerce.
480   2011
Res.  12-
11-   15-  Executing a renewal of a Consultant Agreement with Mack Communications, Inc.
481   2011
Res.  12-  Executing a professional services renewal contract with Federal Lobbyist Firm of
11-   15-  Smith Dawson and Andrews.
482   2011
Res.  12-  Executing renewal of professional services contract with Lois Mayer to provide
11-   15-  grant writing and research services.
483   2011
Res.  12-  Executing a supplemental agreement to a professional services agreement with the
11-   15-  McKibbin Group, Inc.
484   2011
Res.  12-
11-   15-  Executing an Intergovernmental Agreement with the City of Joliet.
487   2011
Res.  12-  Awarding bid to accept credit card, debit card and ACH payments for real estate
11-   15-  property taxes by the treasurer’s office.
490   2011
Res.  12-
11-   15-  Awarding a bid for sale of surplus seized vehicles.
491   2011
Res.  12-  Executing an agreement with Maximus, Inc. to provide professional consulting
11-   15-  services.
492   2011
Res.  12-  Support of CDBG Disaster Recovery “Ike” Grant Program application through the Il.
11-   15-  Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity.
493   2011
Res.  12-  Meeting urgent need for national objective for CDBG Disaster Recovery “Ike”
11-   15-  Program Property Buyout Program.
494   2011
Res.  12-  Meeting urgent need for national objective for CDBG Disaster Recovery “Ike”
11-   15-  Program Property Buyout Program.
495   2011
Res.  1-   Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
12-09 19-  agreement.
      2012
Res.  1-   Agreement for use of easement over lands of Commonwealth Edison Company in the
12-13 19-  county.
      2012
Res.  1-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for engineering services
12-14 19-  with Strand Associates, Inc.
      2012
Res.  1-   Confirming award of contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
12-15 19-  improvements.
      2012
Res.  1-   Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
12-16 19-  agreement.
      2012
Res.  1-   Agreement between the county and the Village of Crete for maintenance of the
12-17 19-  storm sewer system at the Township Hall Public Alley in Crete, Illinois.
      2012
Res.  1-   Renewing contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Alliance
12-18 19-  Rehab, Inc.
      2012
Res.  1-   Awarding the contract for pharmaceutical services for Sunny Hill Nursing Home to
12-19 19-  United RX, Inc.
      2012
Res.  1-   Ratifying the execution of a contract with AON Consulting, Inc. for benefits
12-21 19-  consultant.
      2012
Res.  1-   Authorizing six month extension of food service contract with Aramark Food
12-27 19-  Service for River Valley Juvenile Detention Center.
      2012
Res.  1-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a professional services contract with
12-29 19-  Independent Energy Consultants.
      2012
Res.  2-   Authorizing the County Executive to enter into an agreement with the Illinois
12-30 16-  Historic Preservation Agency, Fiscal Year 2012 Certified Local Government Grant
      2012 Program for the Will County Educational Projects.
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
12-37 16-  Hutchison Engineering, Inc. for engineering services.
      2012
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
12-38 16-  Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2012
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Swanson and Brown,
12-39 16-  Ltd. for right- of-way acquisition services.
      2012
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Wight & Company for
12-40 16-  engineering services.
      2012
Res.  2-   Authorizing the County Executive and County Clerk to execute an agreement with
12-41 16-  Primera Engineers, Ltd. for construction engineering services.
      2012
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of agreement between Will County and Towpath Joint Venture
12-42 16-  for the purchase of wetland banking site credits.
      2012
Res.  2-   Confirming award of contract with Vulcan Construction Materials for public
12-43 16-  highway improvements.
      2012
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to J. Russ & Company for the Moonlight Estates
12-58 15-  Subdivision Completion Project.
      2012
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to Precision Excavating, Inc. for the Steeplechase
12-59 15-  Planned Unit Development Subdivision Completion Project.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a professional services agreement with
12-62 15-  Speer Financial, Inc.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing the County Executive and the County Clerk to execute an agreement
12-72 15-  with Hutchison Engineering for county highway construction.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing the County Executive and the County Clerk to execute an agreement
12-74 15-  with Ciorba Group, Inc. for additional engineering services.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
12-75 15-  Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc. for engineering services.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with A. Epstein and Sons
12-76 15-  International for engineering services.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
12-77 15-  Renwick, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Swanson and Brown,
12-78 15-  Ltd. for right- of-way acquisition services.
      2012
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract with Prairie Materials for public highway
12-81 15-  improvements.
      2012
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-82 15-  improvements.
      2012
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract with “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway
12-83 15-  improvements.
      2012
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract with Preform Traffic Control Systems, Ltd. for
12-84 15-  public highway improvements.
      2012
Res.  3-   Renewing contract with McQuay Factory Service for chiller maintenance at Sunny
12-87 15-  Hill Nursing Home.
      2012
Res.  3-
12-88 15-  Awarding bid for soft goods for Sunny Hill's Fifth Avenue to Medallion Services.
      2012
Res.  3-   Authorizing the County Execute to execute a contract for the renewal of “wrap
12-93 15-  around” professional liability insurance for the Will County Community Health
      2012 Center.
Res.  3-   Adopting successor collective bargaining agreement between Will County and AFSCME
12-95 15-  31 Local 1028 for executive branch and licensed practical nurses at Sunny Hill.
      2012
Res.  4-   Awarding bid to accept credit card, debit card and ACH payment for real estate
12-96 19-  taxes by the Treasurer's Office to Banc of America Merchant Services.
      2012
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-   19-  improvements.
105   2012
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract with Superior Road Striping Inc. for public highway
12-   19-  improvements.
106   2012
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract with Iroquois Paving Corporation for public highway
12-   19-  improvements.
107   2012
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract with Iroquois Paving Corporation for public highway
12-   19-  improvements.
108   2012
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract with Austin Tyler Construction, LLC for public
12-   19-  highway improvements.
109   2012
Res.  4-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-   19-  improvements.
110   2012
Res.  4-   Engineering services agreement with TranSystems for reconstruction and
12-   19-  appurtenant work.
114   2012
Res.  4-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
12-   19-  acquisition services with Polach Appraisal Group, Inc.
115   2012
Res.  4-
12-   19-  Construction engineering services agreement with Stanley Consultants, Inc.
116   2012
Res.  4-
12-   19-  Construction engineering services agreement with Omega & Associates, Inc.
117   2012
Res.  4-   Authorizing an agreement between the county and Northern Illinois Gas Company d/
12-   19-  b/a Nicor Gas Company for reimbursement for relocating facilities along County
118   2012 Highway 88.
Res.  4-   Supplemental agreement for construction engineering services with TENG and
12-   19-  Associates, Inc.
119   2012
Res.  4-   Awarding bid for local telephone access, private line & long distance services to
12-   19-  AT&T Corp.
131   2012
Res.  4-   Awarding bid for the preparation of the updated Will County analysis of
12-   19-  impediments of Fair Housing Choice to Northeast & Bucks Co. T/A DBA: Mullin &
134   2012 Lonergan Associated, Inc.
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Bulk Storage, Inc. for public highway
12-   17-  improvements.
145   2012
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Northern Contracting, Inc. for public highway
12-   17-  improvements.
147   2012
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
12-   17-  improvements.
148   2012
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Lakes & Rivers Contracting, Inc. for public
12-   17-  highway improvements.
149   2012
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-   17-  improvements.
150   2012
Res.  5-   Confirming award of contract to Grosso Construction Co. for public highway
12-   17-  improvements.
151   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for value engineering
12-   17-  with Bloom Companies, LLC for roadway and appurtenant work.
157   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for value engineering
12-   17-  with Bloom Companies, LLC for roadway and appurtenant work.
158   2012
Res.  5-   Construction engineering services agreement with T.Y. Lin International Great
12-   17-  Lakes, Inc.
160   2012
Res.  5-   Approval of professional services supplemental agreement for engineering services
12-   17-  with Willett, Hofmann & Associates, Inc.
161   2012
Res.  5-   Approving professional services supplemental agreement for right-of-way
12-   17-  acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
162   2012
Res.  5-   Approving agreement between the county and Banco Joint Venture for the purchase
12-   17-  of Wetland Banking Site Credits.
163   2012
Res.  5-   Construction engineering services agreement with Burns & McDonnell Engineering
12-   17-  Company, Inc.
164   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
12-   17-  of-way acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
165   2012
Res.  5-
12-   17-  Construction engineering services agreement with Thomas Engineering Group, LLC.
166   2012
Res.  5-
12-   17-  Awarding bid for office supplies with Warehouse Direct.
180   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of Christopher B. Burke
12-   17-  Engineering, Ltd. stormwater management consultant agreement.
181   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board Work
12-   17-  Readiness Program contract with Joliet Junior College.
182   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing County Executive to execute Workforce Investment Board GED/Academic
12-   17-  Skill Improvement Youth Program contract with Joliet Junior College.
183   2012
Res.  5-   Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute a professional services
12-   17-  contract with Sirius Computer Solutions/PIR Group for a conversion/replacement of
185   2012 the real estate system.
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-   21-  improvements.
196   2012
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-   21-  improvements.
197   2012
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract with Van-Mack Electric Co. for public highway
12-   21-  improvements.
198   2012
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract with "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
12-   21-  improvements.
199   2012
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract with "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
12-   21-  improvements.
200   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering
12-   21-  services (Phase II) with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc.
201   2012
Res.  6-
12-   21-  Agreement for use of easement over lands of Commonwealth Edison Company.
202   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
12-   21-  of-way acquisition services with Civiltech Engineering, Inc.
205   2012
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract with Steve Krause Construction Co. for public
12-   21-  highway improvements.
206   2012
Res.  6-
12-   21-  Awarding bid for sale of surplus vehicles to Speedway Auto Parts, Ltd.
211   2012
Res.  6-   Awarding bid for IL Route 53 Corridor Plan - Consulting Services to Ginkgo
12-   21-  Planning and Design, with HVS, KLOA, S.B. Friedman and RTKL.
212   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute the agreement to reinstate and amend
12-   21-  sublease for Will County Regional Office of Education.
216   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute lobbying services agreement with
12-   21-  Curry & Associates, LLC.
218   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute technical services agreement with the
12-   21-  Regional Transportation Authority for Contract No. JARC- 2011-01.
219   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute technical services agreement with the
12-   21-  Regional Transportation Authority for Contract No. NF- 2011-01.
220   2012
Res.  6-   Authorizing the County Executive to accept, execute and administer grant
12-   21-  agreement with DCEO Disaster Recovery "IKE" Program.
223   2012
Res.  7-   Awarding bid for food service at River Valley Juvenile Center to Aramark
12-   19-  Correctional Services.
233   2012
Res.  7-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of EDACS FX agreement with
12-   19-  Harris Corporation.
239   2012
Res.  7-
12-   19-  Awarding contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
242   2012
Res.  7-
12-   19-  Awarding contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
243   2012
Res.  7-
12-   19-  Awarding contract to Tri-State Enterprises, Inc. for public highway improvements.
244   2012
Res.  7-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for post construction
12-   19-  wetland monitoring and inspection services.
247   2012
Res.  7-   Authorizing an agreement between the county and Northern Illinois Gas Company d/
12-   19-  b/a Nicor Gas Company.
248   2012
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract to Austin Tyler Construction for public highway
12-   16-  improvements.
259   2012
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract with "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
12-   16-  improvements.
260   2012
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract with Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public
12-   16-  highway improvements.
261   2012
Res.  8-   Confirming award of contract with R.W. Dunteman Company for public highway
12-   16-  improvements.
262   2012
Res.  8-   Extending inmate medical services contract between Correct Care Solutions (CCS)
12-   16-  and Will County.
267   2012
Res.  8-   Authorizing execution of a professional services agreement with Wight & Company
12-   16-  for a physical building assessment of the First Midwest Bank Building.
269   2012
Res.  8-   Renewing contract for diabetic supplies for Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Gulf
12-   16-  South Medical Supply, Inc.
272   2012
Res.  8-
12-   16-  Renewing contract for nursing services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
273   2012
Res.  8-   Awarding bid for tire collection event to Treadstone Tire Recycling, Joliet,
12-   16-  Illinois.
275   2012
Res.  9-   Professional services supplemental agreement with URS Corporation for engineering
12-   20-  services.
285   2012
Res.  9-   Professional services agreement with Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd. for
12-   20-  post construction wetland monitoring and inspection services.
286   2012
Res.  9-   Agreement between the county and BP Pipelines (North America) Inc. for
12-   20-  reimbursement for relocating facilities along County Highway 6.
287   2012
Res.  9-
12-   20-  Agreement with Baxter & Woodman, Inc. for construction engineering services.
288   2012
Res.  9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a professional services agreement with
12-   20-  Illinois Program Managers Group (IPMG) for Workers’ Compensation Third Party
300   2012 Administrator Services.
Res.  9-   Awarding bid to R Berti Building Solutions for records expansion and maintenance
12-   20-  area.
303   2012
Res.  9-
12-   20-  Renewing contract with Baker, Tilly, Virchow, Krause, LLP for annual audit.
305   2012
Res.  9-   Renewing contract with Anderson Elevator Company for elevator maintenance for
12-   20-  various county office buildings.
306   2012
Res.  9-   Renewing contract with Alpha Building Maintenance Service, Inc. for janitorial
12-   20-  cleaning services for various county office buildings.
307   2012
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute contracts with designated carriers
12-   20-  for the renewal of the Will County Comprehensive Group Benefits Plan.
308   2012
Res.  10-  Renewing contracts with various vendors for medical products at Sunny Hill
12-   18-  Nursing Home.
328   2012
Res.  10-  Renewal of contract with Aon Hewitt Consulting for benefits consultant, broker
12-   18-  and professional services.
331   2012
Res.  10-  Adopting successor collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME
12-   18-  31 Local 1028 for registered nurses (Sunny Hill Nursing Home).
332   2012
Res.  10-
12-   18-  Awarding bid to Classic Fence for re-fence of sheriff’s Laraway Road impound lot.
337   2012
Res.  10-
12-   18-  Awarding bid to Red Hawk for sheriff CCTV system upgrades.
338   2012
Res.  10-  Awarding bid to G3 Technology Partners for telecommunications time and material
12-   18-  service.
339   2012
Res.  10-  Authorizing the Will County Public Building Commission to execute professional
12-   18-  services agreement with DLR Group for the Laraway Road Complex Site Analysis,
340   2012 Programming & Concept Planning.
Res.  11-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
12-   15-  Hutchison Engineering, Inc. for engineering services.
348   2012
Res.  11-  Awarding bid to Professional Medical, Inc. for exam gloves for Sunny Hill Nursing
12-   15-  Home.
357   2012
Res.  11-  Awarding bid to McKesson Medical Surgical for disposable washcloths for Sunny
12-   15-  Hill Nursing Home.
359   2012
Res.  11-  Awarding bid to Per Mar Security Services for security guard service at Sunny
12-   15-  Hill Nursing Home.
360   2012
Res.  11-
12-   15-  Awarding bid to Heritage FS for gasoline and diesel fuel.
363   2012
Res.  11-
12-   15-  Renewing contract with Next Day Toner Supplies, Inc.
365   2012
Res.  11-  Awarding bid to Homewood/NuWay Disposal for refuse and recycling collection
12-   15-  services for county buildings.
366   2012
Res.  11-  Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement between the county, County
12-   15-  Board of Health and AFSCME 1028 for Will County Health Department.
367   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute agreements with carriers and
12-   15-  providers for insurance services.
368   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute joint funding agreement with United
12-   15-  States Geological Survey for inundation mapping along DuPage River.
369   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute agreement with Will County Center for
12-   15-  Economic Development.
370   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of consultant agreement with
12-   15-  Mack Communications, Inc.
371   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of consultant agreement with
12-   15-  Farnsworth Group, Inc.
372   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of professional services
12-   15-  contract with Smith Dawson & Andrews.
373   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of professional services
12-   15-  contract with Lois Mayer.
374   2012
Res.  11-  Authorizing the County Executive to enter into an agreement with the City of
12-   15-  Joliet extending the term of the temporary license to use county parking
377   2012 facilities.
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with James J. Benes and
12-   20-  Associates, Inc. for design engineering services.
383   2012
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Globetrotters
12-   20-  Engineering Corp. for engineering services.
384   2012
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement with
12-   20-  Willett, Hofmann & Associates for design engineering services.
385   2012
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann &
12-   20-  Associates, Inc. for engineering services.
386   2012
Res.  12-  Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
12-   20-  Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick, Inc. for engineering services.
387   2012
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
12-   20-  improvements.
390   2012
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contracts to “D” Construction, Inc.; P.T. Ferro Construction
12-   20-  Co.; Gallagher Materials Corporation; Joliet Asphalt for public highway
391   2012 improvements.
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
12-   20-  improvements.
392   2012
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contracts to Prairie Material - Joliet and Vulcan Materials
12-   20-  Co. for public highway improvements.
393   2012
Res.  12-
12-   20-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
394   2012
Res.  12-
12-   20-  Confirming award of contract to Hall Signs, Inc. for public highway improvements.
395   2012
Res.  12-  Confirming award of contract to Metal Culverts, Inc. for public highway
12-   20-  improvements.
396   2012
Res.  12-  Awarding bid to Alliance Rehab Inc. for therapy services at Sunny Hill Nursing
12-   20-  Home.
397   2012
Res.  1-   Authorizing an agreement with Pictometry International Corp. for regular aerial
13-02 17-  and oblique imagery.
      2013
Res.  1-   Confirming award of contract with P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway
13-08 17-  improvements.
      2013
Res.  1-   Confirming award of contract with Herlihy Mid-Continent Co. for public highway
13-09 17-  improvements.
      2013
Res.  1-   Awarding bid to McKesson Medical Surgical and Medline Industries for disposable
13-12 17-  incontinence supplies for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
      2013
Res.  2-   Confirming award of contract to Vulcan Construction Materials for public highway
13-24 21-  improvements.
      2013
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann and
13-26 21-  Associates, Inc. for design engineering (Phase II).
      2013
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hutchison
13-27 21-  Engineering, Inc. for design engineering services (Phase II).
      2013
Res.  2-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
13-28 21-  Renwick, Inc. for design engineering services (Phase II).
      2013
Res.  2-   Awarding contract to Air One-Police One Equipment for body armor for the
13-29 21-  Sheriff’s Department.
      2013
Res.  2-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew professional services contract with
13-30 21-  Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer Stephanie A. Posey.
      2013
Res.  2-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute the ExxonMobil Refinery Real Estate
13-37 21-  Tax Assessment Agreement.
      2013
Res.  2-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute Amendment No. 1 to the New Freedom
13-38 21-  Technical Services Agreement between the Regional Transportation Authority and
      2013 Will County for Contract No.: NF-2011-01.
Res.  2-   Authorizing the County Execute to enter into an agreement with the City of Joliet
13-41 21-  extending the term of the temporary license to use county parking facilities.
      2013
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
13-55 21-  improvements.
      2013
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to Prairie Materials for public highway
13-56 21-  improvements.
      2013
Res.  3-   Confirming award of contract to Preform Traffic Control Systems, Ltd. for public
13-57 21-  highway improvements.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann &
13-59 21-  Associates, Inc. for engineering services.
      2013
Res.  3-
13-60 21-  Agreement with Collins Engineers, Inc. for construction engineering services.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County Joliet
13-61 21-  Agreement.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Reynolds, Smith and
13-62 21-  Hills, Inc. for design engineering services (Phase I).
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
13-63 21-  Civiltech Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
13-64 21-  Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and
13-65 21-  Renwick, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Swanson and Brown,
13-66 21-  Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
      2013
Res.  3-   Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with A.
13-67 21-  Epstein and Sons International, Inc. for engineering services.
      2013
Res.  3-   Awarding bid to Gordon Food Service for dietary and nursing products for Sunny
13-69 21-  Hill Nursing Home.
      2013
Res.  3-   Awarding bid to Tri-K Supplies; Gordon Food Service; Professional Medical; and
13-70 21-  Central Poly for housekeeping supplies for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
      2013
Res.  3-   Renewing contract with United Rx LLC, formerly known as United Scripts, Inc., for
13-71 21-  pharmaceutical and consulting services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
      2013
Res.  4-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
13-88 18-  improvements.
      2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing supplemental construction engineering services with Patrick
13-92 18-  Engineering, Inc.
      2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing supplemental construction engineering services with AECOM Technical
13-93 18-  Services, Inc.
      2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing professional services supplemental agreement with A. Epstein and Sons
13-94 18-  International, Inc. for engineering services.
      2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Parsons Brinckerhoff for
13-95 18-  engineering services.
      2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Parsons Brinckerhoff for
13-96 18-  engineering services.
      2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew and modify Workforce Investment Board
13-   18-  contract with the College of Lake County through HPOG.
101   2013
Res.  4-   Authorizing the County Executive to renew and modify Workforce Investment Board
13-   18-  contract with Central States SER - Jobs for Progress, Inc., through HPOG.
102   2013
Res.  4-   Awarding bid to Tradebe Treatment & Recycling for household hazardous waste
13-   18-  collection.
107   2013
Res.  5-
13-   16-  Awarding contract to Iroquois Paving Corporation for public highway improvements.
118   2013
Res.  5-
13-   16-  Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
119   2013
Res.  5-   Awarding contract to Gallagher Asphalt Corporation for public highway
13-   16-  improvements.
120   2013
Res.  5-
13-   16-  Awarding contract to Grosso Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
121   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with ESI Consultants, Ltd. for design
13-   16-  engineering services.
128   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick,
13-   16-  Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
129   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Civiltech Engineering, Inc. for
13-   16-  right-of-way acquisition services.
130   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Swanson and Brown, Ltd. for
13-   16-  right-of-way acquisition services.
131   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Civiltech Engineering, Inc. for
13-   16-  right-of-way acquisition services.
132   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Hampton, Lenzini and Renwick,
13-   16-  Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
133   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing professional services agreement with Santacruz Associates, Ltd. for
13-   16-  right-of-way acquisition services.
134   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement for payment of rent and
13-   16-  indemnification for Will County Regional Office of Education.
140   2013
Res.  5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement between the county and
13-   16-  the Illinois Department of Transportation for the construction of a sidewalk in
141   2013 the Fairmont Neighborhood.
Res.  5-   Authorizing renewal of EDACS FX agreement with Harris Corporation for county’s
13-   16-  radio system.
143   2013
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to Austin Tyler Construction, LLC for public highway
13-   20-  improvements.
148   2013
Res.  6-
13-   20-  Confirming award of contract to Meade, Inc. for public highway improvements.
150   2013
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
13-   20-  improvements.
151   2013
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
13-   20-  improvements.
152   2013
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
13-   20-  improvements.
153   2013
Res.  6-   Confirming award of contract to "D" Construction, Inc. for public highway
13-   20-  improvements.
154   2013
Res.  6-   Approving professional services agreement with Ciorba Group, Inc. for design
13-   20-  engineering services (Phase II).
155   2013
Res.  6-   Renewing contract for food service at River Valley Juvenile Center with Aramark
13-   20-  Correctional Services.
156   2013
Res.  6-   Renewing professional services agreement with Animal Control Administrator Leroy
13-   20-  P. Schild, DVM.
157   2013
Res.  6-   Professional services agreement with Deputy Animal Control Administrator Michelle
13-   20-  Roessler-Dendrinos, DVM.
158   2013
Res.  6-   Renewal of contract with Aon Hewitt Consulting for benefits consultant, broker
13-   20-  and other professional services.
159   2013
Res.  6-   Professional services contract with Joliet Junior College - Workforce
13-   20-  Development.
165   2013
Res.  6-   Professional services contract with Joliet Junior College - Workforce
13-   20-  Development.
166   2013
Res.  6-
13-   20-  Awarding bid to Austin-Tyler for the Sunnyland Drainage Improvements Project.
167   2013
Res.  6-
13-   20-  Renewing contract for office supplies with Warehouse Direct, Inc.
168   2013
Res.  7-
13-   18-  Awarding contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co. for public highway improvements.
178   2013
Res.  7-
13-   18-  Awarding contract to Emulsicoat, Inc. for public highway improvements.
179   2013
Res.  7-
13-   18-  Awarding contract to Emulsicoat, Inc. for public highway improvements.
180   2013
Res.  7-
13-   18-  Awarding contract to Emulsicoat, Inc. for public highway improvements.
181   2013
Res.  7-   Professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition services with Land
13-   18-  Acquisitions, Inc.
184   2013
Res.  7-   Professional services agreement for engineering services with Baxter & Woodman,
13-   18-  Inc.
185   2013
Res.  8-
13-   15-  Renewing contract for diabetic supplies with Gulf South Medical Supply, Inc.
204   2013
Res.  8-
13-   15-  Awarding bid for nursing services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
205   2013
Res.  8-   Amendment of contract with Aon Hewitt Consulting for online enrollment benefits
13-   15-  administration.
207   2013
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Execute to negotiate a contract for architectural services
13-   15-  with Cordogan Clark & Associates for Social Security Building.
209   2013
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a contract with architect Andrew R.
13-   15-  Patrick, Jr. for design services for modifications and improvement to the 4th and
210   2013 5th floors of the Emco Building.
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute joint funding agreement with United
13-   15-  States Geological Survey for rain gage network expansion.
218   2013
Res.  8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute agreements for and to purchase and
13-   15-  sell foreclosed properties under the Foreclosure Settlement Program (FSP) from
219   2013 the National Foreclosure Settlement Program.
Res.  9-   Awarding bid for Rural Historic Structural Survey Consultant to Wiss, Janney,
13-   19-  Elstner Associates, Inc.
223   2013
Res.  9-
13-   19-  Awarding contract for annual audit with Baker, Tilly, Virchow, Krause, LLP.
231   2013
Res.  9-
13-   19-  Awarding a contract to “D” Construction, Inc. for public highway improvements.
232   2013
Res.  9-   Renewing contract for security guard services at Sunny Hill Nursing Home with Per
13-   19-  Mar Security Services.
242   2013
Res.  9-   Authorizing the County Executive to bind coverage and execute contracts with
13-   19-  designated carrier for the renewal of the Will County Comprehensive Group
244   2013 Benefits Plan.
Res.  9-   Renewing computer printer remanufactured and new toner cartridges, printer
13-   19-  maintenance and yearly cleaning contract with Next Day Toner Supplies, Inc.
256   2013
Res.  9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a contract for architectural services
13-   19-  with Cordogan Clark & Associates for Social Security Building.
258   2013
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute CLG grant application for continuance of
13-   17-  rural historic structures survey in Peotone Township.
262   2013
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for delinquent tax
13-   17-  program.
267   2013
Res.  10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right of way
13-   17-  acquisition services.
278   2013
Res.  10-  Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right of way
13-   17-  acquisition services.
279   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Construction engineering services by county under the Illinois Highway Code.
280   2013
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute a professional services contract with
13-   17-  second administrative adjudication hearing officer candidate James W. Fessler.
281   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Renewing contract for exam gloves for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
282   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Awarding bid for medical products for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
283   2013
Res.  10-  Renewing contract for telecommunications time and material with G3 Partners
13-   17-  Company.
286   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Awarding bid for sale of surplus vehicles to Pick-N-Pull Auto Dismantlers.
287   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Awarding bid for digital copiers to McGrath Office Equipment.
288   2013
Res.  10-  Awarding bid for elevator maintenance at various Will County office buildings to
13-   17-  Anderson Elevator.
289   2013
Res.  10-  Awarding bid for office cleaning at various Will County office buildings to
13-   17-  Crystal Maintenance SVC, Corp.
290   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Replacement hires for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
291   2013
Res.  10-
13-   17-  Replacement hire for ICT Department.
292   2013
Res.  10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute Amendment No. 2 to the New Freedom
13-   17-  Technical Services Agreement between the Regional Transportation Authority and
295   2013 Will County for Contract No. NF-2011-01.
 
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/
Res./  Date   Description
Ord.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to execute necessary documents for
13-301 2013   delinquent tax program.
Res.   11-21- Establishing salary of County Engineer.
13-303 2013
Res.   11-21- Authorizing the adoption of Illinois Department of
13-304 2013   Transportation County maintenance resolution.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-305 2013   right of way acquisition services.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-306 2013   right of way acquisition services.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-307 2013   right of way acquisition services.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing approval of additional professional engineering
13-308 2013   services agreement for design engineering services.
Res.   11-21- Granting temporary access permit for the Leigh Creek South
13-309 2013   Subdivision on Laraway Road.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing renewal of professional services contract with
13-311 2013   administrative adjudication hearing officer.
Res.   11-21- Renewing contracts for disposable washcloths for Sunny Hill
13-313 2013   Nursing Home.
              Authorizing County Executive to bind insurance coverage and
Res.   11-21- execute contracts for property and casualty, general liability,
13-314 2013   workers’ compensation, loss control and other risk management-
              related services.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to negotiate a professional service
13-315 2013   agreement for a County-wide radio system consultant.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of state
13-316 2013   lobbying services agreement with Curry & Associates, LLC.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of professional
13-317 2013   services contract with federal lobbyist firm of Smith Dawson &
              Andrews.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with Will
13-318 2013   County Center for Economic Development (CED).
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of professional
13-319 2013   services contract.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of consultant
13-320 2013   agreement with Mack Communications, Inc.
Res.   11-21- Authorizing execution of professional services agreement with
13-321 2013   Weaver Boos Consultants for due diligence on First Midwest Bank
              Properties acquisition.
Res.   11-21- Awarding bid for gasoline and diesel fuel.
13-323 2013
Res.   11-21- Declaring DEA/GSU vehicles surplus and authorizing disposal.
13-324 2013
Res.   11-21- Proposing substantial amendment to Will County Five-Year
13-325 2013   Consolidated Plan (2010-2014) for the reallocation of program
              funds for the program year beginning October 1, 2013.
Res.   11-21- Extension of term of Board of Review to January 31, 2014.
13-326 2013
Res.   12-19- Replacement hires for Sunny Hill Nursing Home.
13-327 2013
Res.   12-19- Replacement hire for Supervisor of Assessments Office.
13-328 2013
Res.   12-19- Replacement hire for the County Executive parking lot.
13-329 2013
Res.   12-19- Renewing contract for security guard services at the Will County
13-330 2013   Office Building.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing County Executive to apply for a Safe Routes to
13-331 2013   School grant (Fairmont Neighborhood).
Res.   12-19- Approving and authorizing execution of a second amended and
13-332 2013   restated declaration of trust regarding the Illinois
              Metropolitan Investment Fund.
Res.   12-19- Awarding bid for various public highway improvements to five
13-334 2013   companies.
Res.   12-19- Awarding bid for public highway improvements to P.T. Ferro
13-335 2013   Construction Co. and Iroquois Paving Corp.
Res.   12-19- Awarding bid for public highway improvements to Prairie Material
13-336 2013   - Joliet and Vulcan Materials Co.
Res.   12-19- Awarding bid for highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
13-337 2013
Res.   12-19- Awarding bid for highway improvements to Hall Signs, Inc.
13-338 2013
Res.   12-19- Awarding bid for highway improvements to Contech Engineering
13-339 2013   Solutions.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-340 2013   engineering services.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-341 2013   design engineering services (Phase (II).
Res.   12-19- Authorizing design engineering services by County under the
13-342 2013   Illinois Highway Code.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-343 2013   design engineering services (Phase II).
Res.   12-19- Authorizing design engineering services by County under the
13-344 2013   Illinois Highway Code.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for
13-345 2013   engineering.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing engineering services by County under the Illinois
13-346 2013   Highway Code.
Res.   12-19- Authorizing supplemental construction engineering services by
13-348 2013   County under the Illinois Highway Code.
Res.   12-19- Renewing contract for therapy services at Sunny Hill Nursing
13-350 2013   Home.
              Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreements between
Res.   12-19- County and AFSCME Council 31 Local 1028 for executive branch,
13-351 2013   licensed practical nurses, registered nurses, and Health
              Department.
              Adoption of revised and amended comprehensive group health
Res.   12-19- benefit plan and establishment of benefit plan premium
13-352 2013   contributions for union employees, managerial employees, non-
              bargaining unit employees, elected officials and retirees.
Res.   12-19- Settlement agreement with Boughton Materials, Inc.
13-356 2013
Res.   12-8-  Awarding contract for disposable washcloths for Sunny Hill to
18-327 2018   Medline Industries, Mundelein, IL, December 1, 2018 through
              November 30, 2019.
Res.   11-16- Awarding a contract to Bulk Storage, Inc. for Caton Farm
23-382 2023   Maintenance Facility Salt Dome, County Board District #5.
Res.   11-16- Renewing a professional engineering service agreement with
23-387 2023   Baxter and Woodmann for consulting engineering on an as-needed
              basis for the Land Use Department.
             
 
TABLE IV: DEDICATIONS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./Ord.                  Date       Description
1948, p. 172 (Sup. Rec. k. 224, - -        Dedication of land for road right-
p. 385)                                    of-way.
1961, p. 210 (Sup. Rec. k. 233, - -        Dedication of land for public
p. 539)                                    highway.
                                           Dedication of land for highway
Hwy. Res. 2                     6-25-1980  right-of-way across an already
                                           existing Commonwealth Edison
                                           easement.
                                           Acceptance of ownership of the
Res. 81-231                     12-17-1981 property at 27 South Chicago
                                           Street, Joliet.
                                           Dedication of land for street and
-                               7-22-1982  highway right-of- way in the
                                           northeast quarter of Section 31.
                                           Dedication of a site for a
                                           juvenile detention center to be
Res. 96-101                     5-16-1996  owned by the County Public
                                           Building Commission and leased to
                                           the county and Kankakee County.
                                           Dedication of right-of-way for
                                           public road purposes and/or
Res. 05-389                     8-18-2005  temporary easement for parcels
                                           0009DED, 0012DED and 0012TE along
                                           Veterans Parkway.
                                           Dedication of right-of-way along
                                           Commonwealth Edison Company
Res. 06-200                     5-18-2006  property associated with the
                                           proposed Metra/Calistoga
                                           improvements to Laraway Road.
                                          
 
TABLE V: EASEMENTS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Grantee Description
Book/Res./Ord. Date       Grantee                           Description
1875, p. 17               Joliet Street R.R. & Car          Single horse
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Manufacturing Co.                 railway track.
H, p. 348)
1894, p. 216              American Telephone & Telegraph    Poles and wires
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Co.                               along roads.
142, p. 88)
1899, p. 48                                                 Poles and wires
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Peoples Telephone Co.             outside
173, p. 135)
1899, p. 210              Chicago & Joliet Rapid Transit    Right to extend
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Co.                               tracks.
173, p. 266)
1899, p. 216
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Joliet R.R. Co.                   Railroad tracks.
173, p. 270)
1901, p. 67
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Graves & Hayes Telephone Co.      Poles and wires.
173, p. 594)
1901, p. 81                                                 Right to lay
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Joliet R.R. Co.                   tracks revoked.
173, p. 605)
1916, p. 310
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        A.T.&T.                           Poles and wires.
207, p. 540)
1916, p. 416                                                Pipelines, poles
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        H.F. Sinclair                     and wires.
207, p. 622)
1918, p. 252              Metropolitan Telephone &
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Telegraph                         Poles and wires.
208, p. 391)
1920, p. 326
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Momence Utilities Co.             Poles and wires.
209, p. 312)
1921, p. 359
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Western United Gas & Electric Co. Gas pipeline.
210, p. 35)
1922, p. 353              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
210, p. 277)
1926, p. 183              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
212, p. 169)
1927, p. 169              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Gas line.
212, p. 478)
1927, p. 223              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Gas line.
212, p. 516)
1927, p. 382              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
212, p. 621)
1928, p. 74               Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
213, p. 46)
1928, p. 75               Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
213, p. 47)
1928, p. 158              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
213, p. 104)
1928, p. 532              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
213, p. 333)
1929, p. 64
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Prairie Pipe Line Co.             Pipelines.
213, p. 401)
1929, p. 141              Public Service Co. of Northern    Manholes and
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              cables.
213, p. 448)
1929, p. 207              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
213, p. 491)
1929, p. 209              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
213, p. 492)
1929, p. 220
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Empire Pipe Line Co.        Pipelines.
213, p. 499)
1929, p. 221
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Prairie Pipe Line Co.             Pipelines.
213, p. 500)
1929, p. 237              Chicago & Joliet Electric Railway Single track
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Co.                               electric railway.
213, p. 511)
1929, p. 368              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
214, p. 73)
1929, p. 450              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Poles and wires.
214, p. 127)
1930, p. 95
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Western United Gas & Electric Co. Gas pipeline.
214, p. 213)
1931, p. 150
(Sup.Rec. Bk.  - -        Continental Construction Corp.    Gas pipeline.
215, p. 18)
1931, p. 151
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Will-Cook Construction Co.        Gas pipeline.
215, p. 19)
1931, p. 225
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Prairie Pipe Line Co.             Gas pipeline.
215, p. 63)
1931, p. 270              Public Service Co. of Northern
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              Pipelines.
215, p. 92)
1932, p. 42
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Calumet City Public Service Co.   Poles and wires.
215, p. 226)
1933, p. 47
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Calumet City Public Service Co.   Poles and wires.
215, p. 507)
1936, p. 460
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Natural Gas Pipeline Co.          Pipelines.
218, p. 108)
1937, p. 250
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Sinclair Refining Co.             Pipeline.
218, p. 466)
1942, p. 70
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Empire Pipe Line Co.        Pipeline.
221, p. 96)
1946, p. 249
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Standard Oil Co.                  Pipeline.
223, p. 239)
1946, p. 252
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Stanolind Pipe Line Co.           Pipeline.
223, p. 242)
1946, p. 255
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Shell Oil Co.                     Pipeline.
223, p. 244)
1947, p. 65
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Natural Gas Pipeline Co.          Pipeline.
223, p. 393)
1948, p. 309                                                Water mains and
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        City of Joliet                    sewers.
224, p. 480)
1949, p. 71
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Michigan-Wisconsin Pipeline Co.   Pipeline.
225, p. 126)
1949, p. 77               Public Service Co. of Northern    Poles, wires and
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ill.                              pipes.
225, p. 132)
1949, p. 143
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Empire Pipe Line Co.        Pipeline.
225, p. 206)
1949, p. 371
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        City of Joliet                    Pipeline.
225, p. 495)
1950, p. 120
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Empire Pipe Line Co.        Pipeline.
225, p. 592)
1950, p. 221
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Globe Pipe Line Co.               Pipeline.
226, p. 75)
1951, p. 37
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Ill. Gas Pipeline Co.       Pipeline.
226, p. 254)
1951, p. 96
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Chicago District Pipeline Co.     Pipeline.
226, p. 288)
1951, p. 98
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Park Forest Homes                 Storm sewers.
226, p. 289)
1951, p. 131
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Chicago Pipeline Co.              Gas lines.
226, p. 309)
1951, p. 168
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Ill. Gas Pipeline Co.       Pipeline.
226, p. 329)
1951, p. 199
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Park Forest Homes                 Highway.
226, p. 348)
1951, p. 463
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Phillips Pipeline Co.             Pipeline.
227, p. 3)
1952, p. 63
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Empire Pipe Line Co.        Pipeline.
227, p. 108)
1952, p. 115
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Shell Oil Co.                     Pipeline.
227, p. 136)
1952, p. 391
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Sinclair Pipe Line Co.            Pipeline.
227, p. 323)
1954, p. 14
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Sinclair Pipe Line Co.            Pipeline.
228, p. 240)
1954, p. 220
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Sinclair Pipe Line Co.            Pipeline.
228, p. 348)
1954, p. 220
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Standard Oil Co.                  Pipeline.
228, p. 348)
1954, p. 225
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Badger Pipeline Co.               Pipeline.
228, p. 350)
1955, p. 13
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Pure Transportation Co.           Pipeline.
228, p. 556)
1955, p. 316
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Natural Gas Storage Co. of Ill.   Pipeline.
229, p. 156)
1956, p. 200
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Texas-Eastern Transmission Corp.  Pipeline.
230, p. 113)
1956, p. 508              Texaco Cities Service Pipeline
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Co.                               Pipeline.
230, p. 298)
1958, p. 312
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Ohio Oil Co.                      Pipeline.
231, p. 506)
1958, p. 357
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        City of Joliet                    Sewer line.
232, p. 18)
1959, p. 142
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Chicago District Pipeline Co.     Pipeline.
232, p. 228)
1959, p. 231                                                Sewer and water
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Thornton Utility Co.              lines.
232, p. 272)
1959, p. 234
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Sunny Hill Sanitorium             Pipeline.
232, p. 273)
1959, p. 238
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Midwestern Gas Transmission Co.   Pipeline.
232, p. 275)
1959, p. 577                                                Sanitary sewer
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Frankfort              line.
233, p. 52)
1959, p. 580
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Monee                  Water mains.
233, p. 54)
1960, p. 79               Oscar M. Ehrenberg and Miriam     Water and sewer
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Klafter                           lines.
233, p. 101)
1960, p. 144
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Illinois Bell Telephone Co.       Poles and wires.
233, p. 136)
1960, p. 149
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Michigan-Wisconsin Pipeline Co.   Pipeline.
233, p. 139)
1961, p. 101
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        West Shore Pipeline Co.           Pipeline.
233, p. 478)
1961, p. 150                                                Water and sewer
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Alexander Construction Co.        lines.
233, p. 506)
1961, p. 249
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Wood Hill Enterprises, Inc.       Storm sewer.
233, p. 558)
1961, p. 621
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        City of Joliet                    Sewer line.
234, p. 198)
1962, p. 366              Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        America                           Pipeline.
234, p. 455)
1962, p. 642
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Plainfield             Water line.
235, p. 35)
1963, p. 334              Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        America                           Pipeline.
235, p. 242)
1963, p. 509
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Park Forest            Water line.
235, p. 341)
1963, p. 691
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Peotone                Sewer line.
235, p. 435)
1964, p. 60
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Wood Hill Utilities Co.           Pipeline.
235, p. 483)
1964, p. 300              First National Bank of Joliet,
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        trustee                           Pipeline.
236, p. 94)
1964, p. 554
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Plainfield             Water line.
236, p. 222)
1964, p. 641
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Park Forest            Water line.
236, p. 270)
1965, p. 166
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        City of Joliet                    Sewer line.
236, p. 383)
1965, p. 792              Oak Highlands-Ingalls Park
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Sanitary District                 Sewer line.
237, p. 59)
1966, p. 65
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Plainfield             Sewer line.
237, p. 106)
1966, p. 68
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Village of Park Forest            Pipeline.
237, p. 107)
1966, p. 377
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        City of Joliet                    Water main.
237, p. 167)
1966, p. 381              National Gas Pipeline Co. of
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        America                           Pipeline.
237, p. 168)
1966, p. 386
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Northern Gas Products Co.         Pipeline.
237, p. 168)
1966, p. 674
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Standard Oil Co.                  Pipeline.
237, p. 219)
1966, p. 676
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Peoples Gas, Light & Coke Co.     Pipeline.
237, p. 219)
1966, p. 780
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Service Pipeline Co.              Pipeline.
237, p. 241)
1968, p. 186
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Lakehead Pipeline Co.             Pipeline.
237, p. 454)
1968, p. 191
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Chicap Pipeline Co.               Pipeline.
237, p. 454)
1969, p. 241
(Sup. Rec. Bk. - -        Northern Illinois Gas Co.         Gas main.
238, p. 121)
1969, p. 426   - -        Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of       Pipeline.
                          America
1969, p. 497   - -        Wolverine Pipeline Co.            Pipeline.
1969, p. 563   - -        City of Joliet                    Water main.
1969, p. 567   - -        Dwight W. Egle                    Sewer line.
1969, p. 569   - -        Northern Illinois Gas Co.         Gas main.
1969, p. 583   - -        R.J.G. Inc. and Troy Consolidated Water main.
                          School District No. 30-C
1969, p. 681   - -        Citizens Utilities Co. of         Sewer line.
                          Illinois
1969, p. 727   - -        Northern Illinois Gas Co.         Gas main.
1969, p. 802   - -        Chicap Pipeline Co.               Corrosion test
                                                            lead cable.
1969, p. 806   - -        Park Forest South Developers      Water mains.
1970, p. 1274  - -        Northern Illinois Gas Co.         Pipeline.
1970, p. 1277  - -        Commonwealth Edison Co.           Electric wires
                                                            and poles.
1970, p. 1625  - -        Hydrocarbon Transportation Inc.   Pipeline.
1970, p. 1860  - -        Centex-Winston Corp.              Pipeline.
1970, p. 1864  - -        Texas Eastern Transmission Corp.  Pipeline.
1970, p. 1927  - -        Alessio & Sons                    Sewer and water
                                                            lines.
1970, p. 1931  - -        Will County Water Co.             Sanitary sewer
                                                            and water main.
1970, p. 2218  - -        Village of Frankfort              Sewer and water
                                                            lines.
1971, p. 40    - -        Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Sewer line.
1971, p. 197   - -        Bolingbrook Service Co.           Sewer and water
                                                            lines.
1971, p. 290   - -        Explorer Pipeline Company         Pipeline
                                                            Community
1971, p. 323   - -        Community Electronics Systems     antennae TV
                          Inc.                              system wires,
                                                            cables and poles.
1971, p. 325   - -        Centex-Winston Corp.              Storm sewer and
                                                            water main.
1971, p. 327   - -        Wolverine Pipeline Co.            Pipeline.
1971, p. 366   - -        Trans-Ohio Pipeline Co.           Pipeline.
1971, p. 369   - -        City of Wilmington                Sanitary sewer.
239, p. 405    - -        Village of Frankfort              Water mains.
239, p. 459    - -        Village of Lenox                  Water mains.
239, p. 460    - -        Eberhardt Construction Co.        Water mains and
                                                            sewers.
239, p. 460    - -        Checker Oil Co.                   Water line and
                                                            sewer.
239, p. 461    - -        Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Water mains.
239, p. 502    - -        Denis Wolny                       Sewer and water.
240, p. 94     - -        Centex-Winston Corp.              Water and storm
                                                            sewer.
240, p. 134    - -        Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Water mains
240, p. 171    - -        Charles Vavrus                    Water mains.
240, p. 194    - -        Mobil Pipe Line Co.               Oil pipeline.
240, p. 197    - -        Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of       Natural gas
                          America                           pipeline.
240, pp. 253,  - -        Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Water main.
257
240, p. 259    - -        Will County Well and Pump Co.     Water line.
240, p. 262    - -        West Shore Pipeline Company       Oil pipeline.
240, p. 306    - -        Peoples Gas, Light & Coke Co.     Natural gas
                                                            pipeline.
240, p. 351    - -        Mobil Joliet Refining Corp.       Oil pipeline.
240, p. 353    - -        Village of Frankfort              Water mains.
240, p. 426    - -        Village of Bolingbrook            Water and
                                                            pipeline.
240, pp. 466,  - -        Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Water main.
469
240, p. 471    - -        Natural Gas Pipeline Co.          Wires.
240, p. 473    - -        Village of Plainfield             Sewer.
240, p. 495    - -        Department of the Army            Right-of-way.
                                                            Sanitary sewer
241, p. 51     - -        Yale Development Co. Inc.         and water main
                                                            services.
241, p. 87     - -        Jewel Food Stores, Inc.           Sewers.
241, p. 90     - -        A.T. McIntosh & Co.               Sanitary sewers
                                                            and water mains.
241, p. 91     - -        Cor-Plex Corp.                    Cable.
241, p. 123    - -        Centex Homes Corp.                Pipelines.
241, p. 135    - -        Village of Mokena                 Sanitary sewer
                                                            service.
                                                            Water
241, p. 138    - -        Village of New Lenox              distribution
                                                            mains.
241, p. 199    - -        The Peoples Gas, Light & Coke Co. Lemont pipeline.
241, p. 201    - -        A.T. McIntosh & Co.               Sanitary sewers.
241, p. 206    - -        Village of Peotone                Sewers.
241, p. 208    - -        Drills Properties FNC             Sewer.
241, p. 252    - -        Fred W. Tibbetts                  Water main.
241, p. 252    - -        Village of Frankfort              Sanitary sewers.
                                                            Underground
241, p. 255    - -        Bolingbrook Medical & Dental      facilities for
                          Center                            transporting
                                                            water and sewer.
241, p. 297    - -        Kaufman & Broad Development Corp. Sewer.
241, p. 325    - -        Kaufman & Broad Development Corp. Sewer.
241, p. 328    - -        Borkon & Assoc. Inc.              Water line.
241, p. 338    - -        Peotone Manor Partnership         Storm sewer.
241, p. 540    - -        Advance Construction Co., Inc.    Sanitary sewers.
241, p. 543    - -        Advance Construction Co., Inc.    Sanitary sewer.
1975, p. 76    - -        D’Andrea Construction Co.       Sanitary sewer.
1975, p. 78    - -        D’Andrea Construction Co.       Water mains
1975, p. 214   - -        City of Lockport                  Water mains.
1975, p. 320   - -                                         Utility
                                                            installations.
1975, p. 322   - -        Kaufman & Broad Homes, Inc.       Water mains.
                                                            Pipeline to
1975, p. 395   - -        City of Naperville                remove waste
                                                            water.
                                                            Pipeline to
1975, p. 397   - -        Peoples Gas, Light & Coke Company transport liquid
                                                            hydrocarbon.
                          Michigan-Wisconsin Pipeline       Pipeline to
1975, p. 399   - -        Company                           transport natural
                                                            gas.
                                                            Pipeline to
1975, p. 401   - -        Badger Pipeline Company           transport
                                                            petroleum
                                                            products.
                                                            Pipeline to
1975, p. 456   - -        Wolverine Pipe Line Company       transport liquid
                                                            petroleum
                                                            products.
1975, p. 550   - -        Village of Frankfort              Easement.
1976, p. 18    - -        Trans-Ohio Pipeline Co.           Easement.
1976, p. 137   - -        Co. Hwy. 42 (Brandon Rd.)         Easement at
                                                            quarry site.
1976, p. 353   - -        City of Naperville                Easement.
                                                            Electric cables
1976, p. 356   - -        City of Naperville                in Co. Hwy. 14,
                                                            Plainfield-
                                                            Naperville Rd.
1976, p. 357   - -        City of Naperville                Easement.
                                                            Electric cables
1976, p. 359   - -        City of Naperville                in Co. Hwy. 14,
                                                            Plainfield-
                                                            Naperville Rd.
1976, p. 443   - -        Co. Hwy. 64 (Francis Rd.)         Water main.
1976, p. 452   - -        Co. Hwy. 37 (143 St.)             Sewer and water
                                                            lines.
1976, p. 536   - -        Co. Hwys. 48 and 53 (Monee-Park   Natural gas
                          Forest Rd. and Western Ave.)      pipeline.
1976, p. 539   - -        Co. Hwy. 58, Co. Hwy. 24, Co.     Pipeline.
                          Hwy. 23 and Co. Hwy. 21
1976, p. 583   - -        Co. Hwy. 84 at 191 St., Village   Water main
                          of Mokena                         extension.
k.   , p. 642-23-1977  Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Sanitary sewer
                                                            and water line.
k.   , pp.  3-30-1977  Hydrocarbon Transportation, Inc.  Gas pipeline.
112—114
                                                            Pipeline to
k.   , pp.  5-18-1977  Amoco Pipeline Co.                transport
191—193                                                   petroleum
                                                            products.
k.   , pp.  5-18-1977  Migliore Construction Corp.       Water main and
194—196                                                   sanitary sewer.
k.   , pp.  5-18-1977  Joliet Park Dist.                 Public road
197—199                                                   purposes.
k.   , pp.  5-18-1977  Bruns Sewer Construction, Inc.    Sanitary force
200—202                                                   main.
k.   , pp.  6-13-1977  Medema Builders, Inc.             Potable water
232—254                                                   main.
k.   , pp.  6-13-1977  Charles Vavrus                    Water main.
255—257
k.   , pp.  7-13-1977  City of Naperville                Water main.
327—329
                                                            Public roadway
k.   , pp.  8-17-1977  To city                           easement from
397—398                                                   Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Co.
k.   , pp.                                               Roadway easement
399—401      8-17-1977  To city                           from Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Co.
k.   , pp.             Loitz Bros. Construction Co.,     Water lines
406—409      8-17-1977  Inc.                              easement from
                                                            city.
k.   , pp.  8-17-1977  W.L. Haakinson                    Sanitary sewer.
409—411
k.   , pp.  8-17-1977  Abbott Contractors, Inc.          Pipelines.
412—414
k.   , pp.  10-19-1977 Midwest Utility Co., Inc.         Sanitary sewers.
537—539
k.   , p. 5711-16-1977 Commonwealth Edison Co.           Electrical lines.
k.   , pp.  11-16-1977 Loitz Bros. Construction Co.,     Water main.
586—588                 Inc.
k.   , pp.  11-16-1977 Paul Borg Construction Co.        Water main and
589—591                                                   sanitary sewer.
k.   , pp.  11-16-1977 Adolph DeBoer                     Water main.
592—594
                                                            Sewer and water
Hwy. Res. 3    1-18-1978  Park Forest South Utilities Co.   line, Co. Hwy. 49
                                                            (Exchange St.).
                                                            Sanitary sewer
Hwy. Res. 4    1-18-1978  Park Forest South Utilities Co.   line, Co. Hwy. 53
                                                            (Western Ave.).
                                                            Sewer line, Co.
Hwy. Res. 5    1-18-1978  Webb Construction Co., Inc.       Hwy. 51 (Mills
                                                            Rd.).
                                                            Water main and
Hwy. Res. 3    2-15-1978  DuPage Financial Corp.            sanitary sewer
                                                            line, Co. Hwy. 69
                                                            (Boughton Rd.).
                          Park Forest South Utilities Co.   Sewer line,
Hwy. Res. 5    3-23-1978  Rd.).                             Co.Hwy. 6 (Monee-
                                                            Manhattan
                          Loitz Bros. Construction Co.,     Water main, Co.
Hwy. Res. 6    4-21-1978  Inc.                              Hwy. 56 (Black
                                                            Rd.).
                                                            Water main and
Hwy. Res. 7    4-21-1978  Hoffman Group, Inc.               storm sewer, Co.
                                                            Hwy. 67 (Boughton
                                                            Rd.).
                                                            Storm sewer, Co.
Hwy. Res. 4    7-20-1978  Donald Berg                       Hwy. 37 (143
                                                            St.).
                                                            Natural gas pipe
                                                            line, Co. Hwys.
Hwy. Res. 5    7-20-1978  Michigan-Wisconsin Pipeline Co.   48 and 53 (Monee-
                                                            Park Forest Rd.
                                                            and Western
                                                            Ave.).
                                                            Water main and
Hwy. Res. 9    10-26-1978 Homer Community Consolidated      sewer, Co. Hwy.
                          School                            Dist. 33C 37
                                                            (Homer Twp.).
                                                            Sewer line, Co.
Hwy. Res. 3    11-30-1978 Romeoville                        Hwy. 35 (135
                                                            St.).
                                                            Water main, Co.
                                                            Hwy. 56 (Black
Hwy. Res. 1    5-23-1979  Lavezzi Plumbing, Inc.            Rd.) and Timber
                                                            Estates
                                                            Subdivision.
                                                            Water main and
                                                            sewer, Co. Hwy.
Hwy. Res. 2    5-23-1979  Kenneth Cecil                     37 (143 St.) and
                                                            Old Oak
                                                            Subdivision.
                                                            Storm sewer
Res. 79-137    7-25-1979  City of Joliet                    improvement,
                                                            southeast side of
                                                            City of Joliet.
                                                            Water main and
                                                            sewer, Co. Hwy.
Hwy. Res. 6    9-26-1979  Willowbrook Utility Co.           49 (Exchange St.)
                                                            and Ridgefield
                                                            Subdivision.
                                                            Water main and
                                                            sewer, Co. Hwy.
Hwy. Res. 1    11-14-1979 Ridgefield Development Co.        49 (Exchange St.)
                                                            and Ridgefield
                                                            Subdivision.
                                                            Water main, Co.
Hwy. Res. 2    11-14-1979 Village of Mokena                 Hwy. 84 (191 St.)
                                                            and Well No. 3.
                                                            Water main, Co.
Hwy. Res. 4    11-30-1979 Village of Frankfort              Hwy. 74 (Laraway
                                                            Rd.).
                                                            Water main and
Hwy. Res. 4    1-23-1980  Village of Peotone                sewer, Co. Hwy.
                                                            25 (Wilmington-
                                                            Peotone Rd.).
                                                            Storm sewer, Co.
                                                            Hwy. 51 (Mills
Hwy. Res. 2    2-20-1980  City of Joliet                    Rd.), and
                                                            Chippewa St. and
                                                            Mills Rd.
                                                            Flowage easement,
Res. 80-25     2-20-1980  Forest Preserve                   District of Will
                                                            County Hickory
                                                            Creek Preserve.
                                                            Water main and
Hwy. Res. 3    5-21-1980  Homer Community Consolidated      sanitary sewer
                          School District                   line; Bell Rd.
                                                            (Co. Hwy. 16).
                                                            Water main Co.
Hwy. Res. 5    7-23-1980  Mobil Chemical Co.                Hwy. 19 (Center
                                                            Rd.).
                                                            Underground CATV
                                                            cables along
Hwy. Res. 3    9-24-1980  Village Communications, Inc.      Boughton Rd., Co.
                                                            Hwy. 67; Joliet-
                                                            Naperville Rd.
                                                            (Co. Hwy. 11).
                                                            Water main;
Hwy. Res. 4    9-24-1980  J.S. Alberico Construction Co.    Joliet-Naperville
                                                            Rd. (Co. Hwy.
                                                            11).
                                                            Water main;
Hwy. Res. 7    10-29-1980 Marathon Gas Rd.Station           Joliet-Naperville
                                                            (Co. Hwy. 11).
                                                            Sanitary sewer;
                                                            Joliet-Naperville
Hwy. Res. 8    10-29-1980 Village of Romeoville             Rd. (Co. Hwy. 11)
                                                            between Rt. 53
                                                            and Schmith Rd.
                                                            Extension of
                                                            existing casing
                                                            for pipeline
                                                            protection;
Hwy. Res. 9    10-29-1980 Hydrocarbon Transportation        Plainfield-
                                                            Naperville Rd.
                                                            (Co. Hwy. 14) at
                                                            119th St.
                                                            intersection.
Hwy. Res. 10   10-29-1980 Illinois Bell Telephone Co.       Certain rights in
                                                            the county.
                                                            Easement in
                                                            perpetuity on Co.
Hwy. Res. 1    2-26-1981  Will County                       Hwy. 88, Weber
                                                            Rd., Lockport
                                                            Township.
                                                            Pipeline for
                                                            transporting
Hwy. Res. 1    3-11-1981  U.P.G., Inc.                      liquid petroleum
                                                            products on Co.
                                                            Hwy. 17 (Frontage
                                                            Rd.).
                                                            Water main and
                                                            sanitary sewer
Hwy. Res. 2    4-23-1981  Midwest Utility Co.               line on Bell Rd.
                                                            (Co. Hwy. 16) for
                                                            K-Mart.
                                                            Water main; Co.
                          Peter Radakovich, -- -President,  Hwy. 56. (Black
Hwy. Res. 5    5-28-1981  St. Saua Serbian Church           Rd.) - St. Saua
                                                            Serbian Orthodox
                                                            Church.
                                                            Water main and
Hwy. Res. 5    8-27-1981  Gould Excavating and Trucking     sanitary sewer;
                                                            Mills Rd. (Co.
                                                            Hwy. 51).
                                                            Sanitary sewer
                                                            and casing;
Hwy. Res. 6    8-27-1981  C. Thompson and Sons              Channahon Minooka
                                                            Rd. (Co. Hwy.
                                                            32).
                                                            Water main;
Hwy. Res. 4    10-22-1981 Citizens Utilities Co.            Boughton Rd. (Co.
                                                            Hwy. 67).
                                                            Easement in
                                                            perpetuity on Co.
Hwy. Res. 2    7-22-1982  Will County                       Hwy. 88, Weber
                                                            Rd., Lockport
                                                            Twp.
Hwy. Res. 3    7-22-1982  Frankfort Aviation Service, Inc.  Water line.
Hwy. Res. 2    8-26-1982  Midwest Utility Co.               Water and sewer
                                                            lines.
Hwy. Res. 3    8-26-1982  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Overhead CATV
                                                            cables.
Hwy. Res. 4    8-26-1982  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Underground CATV
                                                            cable.
Hwy. Res. 5    10-28-1982 Dan’s Automotive Service        Water and sewer
                                                            lines.
                                                            Easement along,
                                                            across, and under
-              11-23-1982 Joyce Cable, Inc.                 the public
                                                            highways for
                                                            installation of
                                                            CATV cable.
Hwy. Res. 3    1-20-1983  Derby Meadows Utility Co.         Water and sewer
                                                            lines.
Hwy. Res. 4    1-20-1983  Tele-Communications of South      Television
                          Suburbia, Inc.                    cables.
Hwy. Res. 4    4-21-1983  City of Lockport                  Water lines.
Hwy. Res. 6    5-19-1983  Tele-Communications of South      Television
                          Suburbia, Inc.                    cables.
Hwy. Res. 7    5-19-1983  Village of Romeoville             Storm sewer.
Hwy. Res. 8    5-19-1983  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Television
                                                            cables.
Hwy. Res. 9    5-19-1983  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Television
                                                            cables.
Hwy. Res. 4    6-16-1983  Burke Electrical Construction     Water mains.
Hwy. Res. 3    8-18-1983  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Television
                                                            cables.
Hwy. Res. 4    8-18-1983  Rousenelos Farms, Inc.            Drainage
                                                            encasement.
Hwy. Res. 8    9-15-1983  Illinois Community Cablevision,   Television
                          Inc.                              cables.
Hwy. Res. 9    9-15-1983  Midwest Utility Co.               Water and sewer
                                                            lines.
Hwy. Res. 3    10-20-1983 Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Television
                                                            cables.
Hwy. Res. 4    10-20-1983 Beecher Home Furnishings          Sewer lines.
Hwy. Res. 5    10-20-1983 Village of Mokena                 Water and sewer
                                                            lines.
Hwy. Res. 3    11-17-1983 Dean Stahl                        Water lines.
Hwy. Res. 6    1-19-1984  Garbelman Drainage                Drainage casing.
Hwy. Res. 7    1-19-1984  Village of Peotone                Water mains.
Hwy. Res. 1    2-16-1984  Illinois Community Cablevision,   Television
                          Inc.                              cables.
Hwy. Res. 5    4-19-1984  Central Cable Television Co.      Television
                                                            cables.
Hwy. Res. 3    6-21-1984  East Joliet Sanitary District     Sanitary sewer
                                                            force main.
Hwy. Res. 11   8-16-1984  Loitz Bros. Construction Co.,     Manhole and sewer
                          Inc.                              line repair.
Hwy. Res. 12   8-16-1984  The People’s Gas Light and Coke Refinery fuel gas
                          Company                           pipeline.
Hwy. Res. 14   8-16-1984  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 Overhead CATV
                                                            cables.
                                                            Overhead and
Hwy. Res. 5    9-20-1984  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 underground CATV
                                                            cables.
                                                            Overhead and
Hwy. Res. 6    9-20-1984  Joyce Cable, Inc.                 underground CATV
                                                            cables.
                          United Telecom Communications,    Steel pipe casing
Hwy. Res. 4    10-18-1984 Inc.                              for fiber optic
                                                            cable.
Hwy. Res. 3    11-15-1984 City of Naperville                Water main.
                                                            Six-month
Hwy. Res. 5    7-18-1985  U.S. Department of of the Army    irrevocable right
                                                            of entry for
                                                            construction.
Res. 86-120    9-18-1986  Commonwealth Edison Co.           Pad-mounted
                                                            switch gear.
                                                            Electric light
Res. 90-47     3-15-1990  Commonwealth Edison Co.           and power
                                                            transmission
                                                            equipment.
Res. 90-48     3-15-1990  Illinois Gas                      Gas distributing
                                                            system.
                          Penn Central Corp. and Michigan   Right-of-way for
Res. 90-244    11-15-1990 Central Railroad Co.              highway
                                                            improvement.
Res. 94-321    12-15-1994 Illinois Central Railroad         Permanent right-
                                                            of-way.
Res. 00-307    8-3-2000   Will County Department of         Road or street.
                          Highways
Res. 01-74     3-15-2001  Northern Illinois Gas             Perpetual right-
                                                            of-way.
                                                            Permanent non-
Res. 01-257    6-21-2001  City of Crest Hill                exclusive public
                                                            utility easement.
                                                            Permanent
                                                            easement of
                                                            ingress and
Res. 02-385    9-19-2002  Russell and Sharon Jacobs         egress over,
                                                            under and across
                                                            Laughton
                                                            Cemetery.
                                                            Temporary
Res. 03-240    5-15-2003  County Executive                  easement for
                                                            county road to
                                                            landfill.
                                                            Perpetual roadway
Res. 03-569    12-18-2003 County Executive                  easement for
                                                            Gougar Rd.
                                                            Subordination of
Res. 04-142    4-15-2004  County Executive                  surface rights at
                                                            Co. Hwy. 16 and
                                                            151st St.
                                                            Subordination of
Res. 04-237    6-17-2004  County Executive                  surface rights at
                                                            Co. Hwy. 84.
                                                            Subordination of
                                                            NICOR Gas Company
                                                            surface rights at
                                                            Co. Hwy. 74
Res. 04-338    8-19-2004  County Executive                  (Laraway) and Co.
                                                            Hwy. 52 (Gougar
                                                            Rd.) in the
                                                            Village of New
                                                            Lenox.
                                                            Subordination of
                                                            Wolverine
Res. 04-341    8-19-2004  County Executive                  Pipeline Company
                                                            surface rights at
                                                            Co. Hwy. 17
                                                            (Arsenal Rd.).
                                                            Sewer easement
Res. 04-410    9-16-2004  County Executive                  for Heartland
                                                            Group Properties.
                                                            Permanent
                                                            easement across
                                                            the property of
                                                            Norfolk Southern
                                                            Railway Company
                                                            for improvements
Res. 05-73     2-17-2005  County Executive                  to the Co. Hwy.
                                                            26 (Zilm Rd.)
                                                            structure over
                                                            the tributary to
                                                            Horse Creek in
                                                            Custer Township,
                                                            County Board
                                                            District #6.
                                                            Authorizing an
                                                            agreement between
                                                            the county and
                                                            the Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company
Res. 05-162    4-21-2005  County Executive                  for reimbursement
                                                            for a permanent
                                                            easement from
                                                            their facilities
                                                            along Co. Hwy. 76
                                                            (Gin Mill Rd.).
                                                            Authorizing an
                                                            agreement between
                                                            the county and
                                                            the Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company
                                                            for reimbursement
Res. 05-163    4-21-2005  County Executive                  for a permanent
                                                            easement and two
                                                            temporary
                                                            construction
                                                            easements from
                                                            their facilities
                                                            along Co. Hwy. 5
                                                            (Caton Farm Rd.).
                                                            Authorizing an
                                                            agreement with
                                                            Exxon Mobile Oil
                                                            Corporation for a
                                                            permanent
                                                            easement from
                                                            their facilities
Res. 05-173    4-21-2005  County Executive                  along Co. Hwy. 17
                                                            (Arsenal Rd.),
                                                            Energy and
                                                            maintenance cost
                                                            of traffic signal
                                                            and reimbursement
                                                            for construction
                                                            cost.
                                                            Authorizing an
                                                            easement
Res. 05-338    7-21-2005  County Executive                  agreement with
                                                            Exxon Mobile Oil
                                                            Corporation.
                                                            Authorizing an
                                                            agreement with
                                                            Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company
Res. 06-439    10-19-2006 County Executive                  for reimbursement
                                                            for a permanent
                                                            easement from the
                                                            facilities along
                                                            Veterans Parkway.
                                                            Authorizing an
                                                            agreement with
                                                            Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company
Res. 06-440    10-19-2006 County Executive                  for reimbursement
                                                            for a permanent
                                                            easement from the
                                                            facilities along
                                                            Plainfield-
                                                            Naperville Rd.
                                                            Authorizing grant
                                                            of easement
                                                            documents for
                                                            property owned by
Res. 11-83     2-17-2011  County Executive                  the county, as
                                                            trustee for a
                                                            City of Braidwood
                                                            construction
                                                            project.
                                                            Authorizing
                                                            agreement for use
Res. 11-209    6-16-2011  County Executive                  of easement over
                                                            lands of
                                                            Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company.
                                                            Authorizing
                                                            agreement for use
Res. 11-384    10-20-2011 County Executive                  of easement over
                                                            lands of
                                                            Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company.
                                                            Authorizing
                                                            agreement for use
Res. 13-97     4-18-2013  County Executive                  of easement over
                                                            lands of
                                                            Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company.
                                                            Authorizing
                                                            agreement for use
Res. 13-347    12-19-2013 County Executive                  of easement over
                                                            lands of
                                                            Commonwealth
                                                            Edison Company.
                                                          
 
TABLE VI: ELECTION DISTRICT CHANGES
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date       Description
Ord.
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -        Dividing Wards - Crete Township.
179
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -        Dividing Wards - Monee Township.
191
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -        Dividing Wards - New Lenox Township.
193
1975, p. 256 - -        Adjusting election districts - DuPage Township.
1975, p. 259 - -        Adjusting election districts - Frankfort Township.
1975, p. 260 - -        Adjusting election districts - Joliet Township.
1975, p. 261 - -        Adjusting election districts - Monee Township.
1975, p. 262 - -        Adjusting election districts - Plainfield Township.
1975, p. 263 - -        Adjusting election districts - Troy Township.
k.   , p. 7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
227                     in Channahon Township - districts 1 and 2.
k.   , pp.           Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
228—229    7-13-1977  in Frankfort Township - districts 1, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12
                        and 13.
k.   , pp.7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
230—231               in Homer Township - districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
k.   , p. 7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
232                     in Lockport Township - districts 12 and 25.
k.   , pp.7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
233—234               in Manhattan Township - districts 1 and 2.
k.   , pp.7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
234—235               in New Lenox Township - districts 1, 8 and 11.
k.   , pp.           Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
236—237    7-13-1977  in Plainfield Township - districts 1, 2, 6, 8, 10 and
                        11.
k.   , pp.7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
238—239               in Troy Township - districts 1, 2, 8, 11 and 12.
k.   , pp.7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
239—240               in Washington Township - districts 1, 2 and 3.
k.   , pp.7-13-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
241—242               in Wheatland Township - districts 1, 2 and 3.
k.   , pp.           Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
311—315    7-13-1977  in DuPage Township- districts 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 14, 15,
                        16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27.
k.   , p. 7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
347                     in Channahon Township - districts 1 and 2.
k.   , pp.           Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
348—349    7-29-1977  in Frankfort Township - districts 1, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12
                        and 13.
k.   , pp.7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
350—351               in Homer Township - districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
k.   , p. 7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
352                     in Lockport Township - districts 12 and 25.
k.   , p. 7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
353                     in Manhattan Township - districts 1 and 2.
k.   , pp.7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
354—355               in New Lenox Township - districts 1, 8 and 11.
k.   , pp.           Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
355—356    7-29-1977  in Plainfield Township - districts 1, 2, 6, 8, 10 and
                        11.
k.   , pp.7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
357—358               in Troy Township - districts 1, 2, 8, 11 and 12.
k.   , pp.7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
358—359               in Washington Township - districts 1, 2 and 3.
k.   , pp.7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
359—360               in Wheatland Township - districts 1, 2 and 3.
k.   , p.�7-29-1977  Creating, dividing or readjusting election districts
                        in Troy Township - districts 2 and 12.
Res. 81-91   5-28-1981  Redistricting County Board Districts for the ten-year
                        period beginning December 1, 1982.
Res. 81-99   6-25-1981  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Channahon Township - districts 1, 2 and 3.
Res. 81-100  6-25-1981  Creating or readjusting election districts in Crete
                        Township - districts 6, 7, 8, 13, 14 and 15.
                        Creating or readjusting election districts in DuPage
Res. 81-101  6-25-1981  Township - districts 14, 16, 20, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29
                        and 30.
Res. 81-102  6-25-1981  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Frankfort Township - districts 2, 11, 14 and 15.
Res. 81-103  6-25-1981  Creating or readjusting election districts in Homer
                        Township - districts 1, 5, 8 and 9.
Res. 81-104  6-25-1981  Creating or readjusting election districts in New
                        Lenox Township - districts 7 and 12.
Res. 81-105  6-25-1981  Creating or readjusting election districts in Troy
                        Township - districts 2, 8, 13 and 14.
Res. 81-114  6-25-1981  Changing date of implementation of Res. 81-91 to a
                        ten-year period beginning July 1, 1981.
Res. 82-71   6-24-1982  Creating or readjusting election districts in Crete
                        Township - districts 7, 8, 9, 10 and 13.
                        Creating or readjusting election districts in DuPage
Res. 82-72   6-24-1982  Township - districts 7, 8, 13, 14, 16, 19, 20, 21, 28,
                        30 and 31.
                        Combining election districts in Joliet Township -
                        districts 38-45, 43-44, 48-49, 50-51, 52-53, and 67-68
Res. 82-73   6-24-1982  and changing the numbering in existing election
                        districts as follows: 87 to 45, 88 to 51, 89 to 44, 90
                        to 68, 91 to 49 and 92 to 53.
Res. 82-74   6-24-1982  Creating or readjusting election districts in Troy
                        Township - districts 3, 6 and 12.
Res. 82-75   6-24-1982  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Plainfield Township - districts 9 and 12.
Res. 83-49   6-16-1983  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Channahon Township - districts 2 and 4.
Res. 83-50   6-16-1983  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Frankfort Township - districts 1, 5, 7, 13, 16 and 17.
Res. 83-51   6-16-1983  Readjusting election districts in Jackson Township
                        districts 1 and 2.
Res. 83-52   6-16-1983  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Manhattan Township - districts 1, 2 and 3.
                        Creating or readjusting election districts in New
Res. 83-53   6-16-1983  Lenox Township - districts 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13
                        and 14.
Res. 83-54   6-16-1983  Creating or readjusting election districts in Troy
                        Township - districts 3, 4, 5, 15, 16 and 17.
Res. 85-71   6-20-1985  Creating or readjusting election districts in
                        Wheatland Township - districts 2 and 4.
Res. 85-72   6-20-1985  Creating or readjusting election districts in Lockport
                        Township - districts 23, 24 and 26.
Res. 85-73   6-20-1985  Creating or readjusting election districts in Homer
                        Township - districts 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10 and 11.
Res. 89-115  6-15-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 14, 30, 31,
                        32 and 33 in DuPage Township.
Res. 89-116  6-15-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 12 and 18
                        in Frankfort Township.
Res. 89-117  6-14-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 2, 5, 7, 8,
                        12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 in Homer Township.
Res. 89-118  6-15-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 2 and 15 in
                        New Lenox Township.
Res. 89-119  6-15-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 10 and 13
                        in Plainfield Township.
Res. 89-120  6-15-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 11 and 18
                        in Troy Township.
Res. 89-121  6-15-1989  Creating or readjusting election districts 1, 2, 4, 5,
                        6, 7 and 8 in Wheatland Township.
Res. 91-169  6-20-1991  Redistricting districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Res. 91-169R 7-1-1991   Redistricting districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Res. 92-156  7-16-1992  Redistricting districts 28, 30, 31, 33, 34 and 35.
Res. 92-157  7-16-1992  Redistricting districts 5, 6, 10 and 17.
Res. 92-158  7-16-1992  Redistricting districts 5, 6, 7, 8 and 20.
Res. 92-159  7-16-1992  Redistricting districts 4, 9, 11, 16, 18, 19 and 20.
Res. 92-160  7-16-1992  Redistricting districts 3, 5 and 8.
                        Redistricting districts 4, 11, 15, 25, 27, 28, 30, 32,
Res. 92-161  7-16-1992  34, 57, 58, 60, 61, 64 and 69; and changing the
                        numbering in existing election districts.
Res. 93-167  7-15-1993  Readjusting Channahon Precinct No. 3 and creating
                        Channahon Precinct No. 5 in Channahon Township.
Res. 93-168  7-15-1993  Readjusting Dupage Precinct No. 32 and creating Dupage
                        Precinct No. 36.
Res. 93-169  7-15-1993  Readjusting Frankfort Precinct Nos. 2 and 9 and
                        creating Frankfort Precinct Nos. 19, 20 and 21.
Res. 93-170  7-15-1993  Readjusting Plainfield Precinct No. 8 and creating
                        Plainfield Precinct No. 14.
Res. 93-171  7-15-1993  Readjusting Troy Precinct No. 13 and creating Troy
                        Precinct No. 21.
Res. 93-172  7-15-1993  Readjusting Wheatland Precinct No. 3 and creating
                        Wheatland Precinct No. 9.
                        Readjusting Crete Precinct No. 8 and No. 11, and
Res. 95-128  6-15-1995  splitting Crete Precinct No. 15 to create Precinct No.
                        16 and No. 17.
                        Readjusting and splitting Dupage Precinct No. 14 and
Res. 95-129  6-15-1995  No. 15, splitting Precinct No. 25, No. 27, No. 28, and
                        No. 29, creating Precinct No. 37, No. 38, No. 39, No.
                        40 and No. 41.
                        Readjusting Frankfort Precinct No. 6, No. 7, No. 9,
Res. 95-130  6-15-1995  No. 11, No. 13, No. 15, splitting Precinct No. 3, No.
                        8, No. 19, and creating Precinct No. 22, No. 23 and
                        No. 24.
Res. 95-131  6-15-1995  Splitting Green Garden Precinct No. 1 and creating
                        Precinct No. 2.
Res. 95-132  6-15-1995  Splitting Lockport Precinct No. 24 and creating
                        Precinct No. 27.
                        Readjusting New Lenox Precinct No. 1, splitting
Res. 95-133  6-15-1995  Precinct No. 5, No. 8, No. 11, No. 12, and creating
                        Precinct No. 16, No. 17, No. 18 and No. 19.
Res. 95-134  6-15-1995  Readjusting Peotone Precinct No. 1 and No. 2.
Res. 95-135  6-15-1995  Splitting Plainfield Precinct No. 9 and creating
                        Precinct No. 15.
Res. 95-136  6-15-1995  Splitting Reed Precinct No. 1 and No. 2 and creating
                        Precinct No. 3 and No. 4.
Res. 95-137  6-15-1995  Splitting Troy Precinct No. 1 and No. 2 and creating
                        Precinct No. 22 and No. 23.
Res. 95-138  6-15-1995  Splitting Wheatland Precinct No. 5 and No. 9 and
                        creating Precinct No. 10, No. 11 and No. 12.
Res. 97-140  6-19-1997  Splitting Crete Precinct No. 14 and creating Precinct
                        No. 18.
97-141       6-19-1997  Splitting DuPage Precinct No. 22 and No.
Amended 7-   35 and creating Precinct No. 42 and No. 43.
17-1997
97-142       6-19-1997  Splitting Frankfort Precinct No. 1, No. 4 and No. 19
                        and creating Precinct No. 25, No. 26. and No. 27.
97-143       6-19-1997  Splitting Homer Precinct No. 4 and No. 6 and creating
                        Precinct No. 18 and No. 19.
97-144       6-19-1997  Splitting Manhattan Precinct No. 1, readjusting
                        Precinct No. 3 and creating Precinct No. 4.
97-145       6-19-1997  Splitting Monee Precinct No. 1 and creating Precinct
                        No. 9.
97-146       6-19-1997  Splitting New Lenox Precinct No. 14 and creating
                        Precinct No. 20.
                        Splitting Plainfield Precinct No. 2, No. 6, No. 7 and
97-147       6-19-1997  No. 14 and creating Precinct No. 17, No. 18, No. 19,
                        No. 20, No. 21, No.22 and No. 23.
97-148       6-19-1997  Splitting and readjusting Wheatland
                        Precinct No. 1, No. 5, No. 8 and No. 10, splitting
            Amended 7- Precinct No. 3 and No. 12, readjusting Precinct No. 6
             17-1997    and creating Precinct No. 13, No. 14, No. 15, No. 16,
                        No. 17, No. 18, No. 19 and No. 20.
99-256       6-17-1999  Splitting Channahon Precinct No. 3 and creating
                        Channahon Precinct No. 6.
                        Splitting Dupage Precinct No. 1, No. 14, No. 21 and
99-257       6-17-1999  No. 34, and creating Dupage Precinct No. 44, No. 45,
                        No. 46 and No. 47.
99-258       6-17-1999  Splitting Frankfort Precinct No. 7 and No. 11, and
                        creating Frankfort Precinct No. 28 and No. 29.
99-259       6-17-1999  Splitting Homer Precinct No. 7 and No. 10, and
                        creating Homer Precinct No. 20 and No. 21.
99-260       6-17-1999  Splitting Jackson Precinct No. 1 and No. 2, and
                        creating Jackson Precinct No. 3 and No. 4.
99-261       6-17-1999  Splitting Lockport Precinct No. 16 and No. 27, and
                        creating Lockport Precinct No. 28 and No. 29.
99-262       6-17-1999  Splitting New Lenox Precinct No. 13 and No. 15, and
                        creating New Lenox Precinct No. 21 and No. 22.
99-263       6-17-1999  Splitting Plainfield Township Precinct No. 14 and
                        creating Plainfield Township Precinct No. 24.
99-264       6-17-1999  Splitting Wheatland Township Precinct No. 12 and
                        creating Wheatland Township Precinct No. 21.
00-185       4-20-2000  Splitting Lockport Precinct No. 237 and creating
                        Lockport Precinct #30.
01-272A      6-21-2001  Redistricting the nine County Board Districts for the
                        next ten-year period.
01-273       6-21-2001  Splitting Dupage Township Precinct No. 38, readjusting
                        Precinct No. 22, and creating Precinct No. 43.
01-274       6-21-2001  Splitting Frankfort Precinct No. 6 and No. 15,
                        creating Precinct No. 30 and No. 31.
01-275       6-21-2001  Readjusting Lockport Precinct No. 4 and No. 18.
01-276       6-21-2001  Splitting New Lenox Precinct No. 8 and creating
                        Precinct No. 3.
                        Splitting Plainfield Township Precinct No. 1, No. 12,
01-277       6-21-2001  No. 15, No. 17, No. 18, and No. 22, and creating
                        Precinct No. 25 through No. 31.
01-278       6-21-2001  Readjusting Troy Township Precinct No. 9, splitting
                        Precinct No. 10, and creating Precinct No. 18.
01-279       6-21-2001  Splitting Wheatland Township Precinct No.3, No. 15 and
                        No. 18, and creating Precinct No. 22 through No. 24.
01-280       6-21-2001  Splitting and combining various election Precincts in
                        Troy, Lockport and Joliet.
01-313       7-19-2001  Readjusting Lockport Precinct No. 13 and splitting
                        Precinct No. 31.
                        Splitting Wheatland Precinct No. 13 and No. 27,
01-314       7-19-2001  readjusting Precinct No. 19 and creating Precinct No.
                        26.
02-300A      6-20-2002  Splitting districts in Homer Township.
02-300B      6-20-2002  Splitting districts in Plainfield Township.
02-381       8-15-2002  Dividing the County Board districts into three groups,
                        each group composed of three County Board districts.
Res. 03-290A 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in DuPage Township.
Res. 03-290B 6-19-2003  Splitting and combining election districts in
                        Frankfort Township.
Res. 03-290C 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in Homer Township.
Res. 03-290D 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in Lockport Township.
Res. 03-290E 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in Manhattan Township.
Res. 03-290F 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in New Lenox Township.
Res. 03-290G 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in Plainfield Township.
Res. 03-290H 6-19-2003  Splitting districts in Troy Township.
                        Reserving the rights to split further and/or
Res. 03-291  6-19-2003  consolidate voter precincts at the Board’s adjourned
                        July meeting.
Res. 03-340  7-17-2003  Splitting districts in Frankfort Township.
Res. 03-341  7-17-2003  Splitting districts in Troy Township.
Res. 03-342  7-17-2003  Splitting districts in Wheatland Township.
Res. 03-343  7-17-2003  Splitting districts in Lockport Township.
Res. 03-344  7-17-2003  Splitting districts in New Lenox Township.
Res. 05-294  6-16-2005  Splitting districts in Channahon Township.
Res. 05-295  6-16-2005  Readjusting districts in Crete Township.
Res. 05-296  6-16-2005  Splitting districts in Dupage Township.
Res. 05-297  6-16-2005  Readjusting and splitting districts in Frankfort
                        Township.
Res. 05-298  6-16-2005  Splitting districts in Green Garden Township.
Res. 05-299  6-16-2005  Readjusting and splitting districts in Homer Township.
Res. 05-300  6-16-2005  Combining, readjusting and splitting districts in
                        Joliet Township.
Res. 05-301  6-16-2005  Combining and splitting districts in Lockport
                        Township.
Res. 05-302  6-16-2005  Splitting districts in Monee Township.
Res. 05-303  6-16-2005  Readjusting and splitting districts in New Lenox
                        Township.
Res. 05-304  6-16-2005  Readjusting districts in Peotone Township.
Res. 05-305  6-16-2005  Readjusting and splitting districts in Plainfield
                        Township.
Res. 05-306  6-16-2005  Splitting districts in Reed Township.
Res. 05-307  6-16-2005  Combining and splitting districts in Troy Township.
Res. 05-308  6-16-2005  Splitting districts in Washington Township.
Res. 05-309  6-16-2005  Readjusting and splitting districts in Wheatland
                        Township.
Res. 06-269  6-15-2006  Readjusting two election precincts in Lockport
                        Township.
Res. 07-258  6-21-2007  Readjusting election districts in DuPage Township.
Res. 07-259  6-21-2007  Readjusting or eliminating election districts in
                        Joliet Township.
Res. 07-260  6-21-2007  Readjusting election districts in Lockport Township.
Res. 07-261  6-21-2007  Readjusting election districts in Plainfield Township.
Res. 07-262  6-21-2007  Readjusting election districts in Troy Township.
Res. 08-253  6-19-2008  Readjusting election districts in Joliet Township.
Res. 10-210  6-17-2010  Readjusting election districts in DuPage Township.
Res. 11-218  6-16-2011  Adopting the Consensus 13 District Plan.
Res. 11-294  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Channahon Township.
Res. 11-295  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Crete Township.
Res. 11-296  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Custer Township.
Res. 11-297  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in DuPage Township.
Res. 11-298  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Florence Township.
Res. 11-299  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Frankfort Township.
Res. 11-300  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Green Garden
                        Township.
Res. 11-301  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Homer Township.
Res. 11-302  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Jackson Township.
Res. 11-303  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Joliet Township.
Res. 11-304  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Lockport Township.
Res. 11-305  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Manhattan Township.
Res. 11-306  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Monee Township.
Res. 11-307  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in New Lenox Township.
Res. 11-308  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Peotone Township.
Res. 11-309  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Plainfield Township.
Res. 11-310  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Reed Township.
Res. 11-311  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Troy Township.
Res. 11-312  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Washington Township.
Res. 11-313  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Wesley Township.
Res. 11-314  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Wheatland Township.
Res. 11-315  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Will Township.
Res. 11-316  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Wilmington Township.
Res. 11-317  8-18-2011  Readjusting election districts in Wilton Township.
Res. 12-210  6-21-2012  Readjusting election districts in DuPage Township.
                       
 
TABLE VII: FRANCHISES
Res./Ord. Date Description
Res./ Date Description
Ord.
Hwy.  6-
Res.  16-  Granting cable television franchise to Joyce Cable, Inc.
3     1983
Hwy.  7-   Granting cable television franchise to Homer Cable, Inc. (rescinded by Hwy.
Res.  21-  Res. 1, adopted 11-17-1983)
5     1983
Hwy.  7-   Amending Hwy. Res. 3, adopted 6-16-1983, to transfer the franchise rights
Res.  18-  granted thereby from Joyce Cable, Inc. to American Cablesystems Midwest.
6     1985
Hwy.  7-   Consenting to assignment of petitions, orders, and resolutions granted to
Res.  18-  Joyce Cable, Inc. to American Cablesystems Midwest.
7     1985
Hwy.  12-  Consenting to assignment of Telecommunications of South Suburbia, Inc.’s
Res.  19-  rights, title, and interest in certain petitions, orders, and agreements to
85-   1985 American Cablesystems Midwest.
181
Hwy.  12-  Consenting to assignment by Illinois Community Cable Vision Inc.’s rights,
Res.  19-  title and interest in certain petitions, orders, and agreements to American
85-   1985 Cablesystems Midwest.
182
Hwy.  3-   Granting cable television franchise to Rite Cable Company of Illinois, Ltd.,
Res.  20-  for service in certain unincorporated areas of the county.
86-44 1986
Res.  5-   Approving transfer of cable television franchise from Rite Cable Company of
87-53 21-  Illinois, Ltd. to Jones Intercable, Inc.
      1987
Ord.  1-   Consenting to the merger of American Cablesystems Corporation with a
87-   21-  subsidiary of Continental Cablevision, Inc.
162   1988
Res.  6-   Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to U.S. Cable of Northern
88-79 16-  Indiana.
      1988
89-   6-
109   15-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to Carillon Cablevision, Inc.
      1989
89-   8-
204   17-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to MWI Cablesystem, Inc.
      1989
89-   9-
245   21-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to Cable Illinois Partners, Inc.
      1989
89-   9-
246   21-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to Kraus Electronic Systems.
      1989
      3-
90-52 15-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to MWI Cablesystems, Inc.
      1990
      3-   Granting cable television (CATV) franchise expansion to Carillon
90-53 15-  Cablevision, Inc.
      1990
90-   7-
155   19-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to Jones Intercable.
      1990
90-   11-  Granting cable television (CATV) franchise expansion to U.S. Cable of
245   15-  Northern Indiana.
      1990
      2-   Granting cable television (CATV) franchise transfer from LONI to LCNI, Inc.,
91-40 21-  and the transfer of its stock of LCNI to LCI.
      1991
91-   9-   Transferring cable television franchise from Cable Illinois Partners to TCI
236   19-  of Illinois, Inc.
      1991
91-   11-  Transferring cable television (CATV) franchise from Northwest MetroVision,
288   21-  Inc to MetroVision of Illinois, Inc.
      1991
92-   6-
135   18-  Granting cable television expansion to TCI of Illinois.
      1992
92-   6-   Approving certain restructurings involving U.S. Cable of Northern Indiana
136   18-  Limited Partnership.
      1992
      2-   Granting cable television (CATV) franchise to Western Cable Communication,
94-47 17-  Inc.
      1994
94-   12-  Transferring cable television franchise to Time Warner Entertainment-
328   15-  Advance/Newhouse Partnership.
      1994
95-   12-  Transferring the unincorporated county franchise from Continental
293   21-  Cablevision of Will County, L.P. to Continental Cablevision of Northern
      1995 Illinois, Inc.
97-   6-
131   19-  Transferring cable television franchise to East Arkansas Cablevision, Inc.
      1997
98-   12-  Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
379   17-  concerning the establishment, construction, amendment and maintenance of a
      1998 cable television system in the county.
      2-   Amending the county cable franchise granted to Cable TV fund 15-A Ltd.,
99-60 18-  pursuant to Res. 90-155.
      1999
99-   3-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
111   18-  concerning the establishment, construction, amendment and maintenance of a
      1999 cable television system in the county.
99-   9-   Approving the transfer of the cable communications franchise from MediaOne
367   16-  to TCI Affiliate.
      1999
99-   12-  Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
474   16-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      1999 cable television system.
00-   3-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
114   16-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2000 cable television system.
00-   4-   Granting Western Cable Communications, Inc. expansion of cable television
151   20-  franchise to areas that were previously unserved.
      2000
00-   6-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
248   15-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2000 cable television system.
00-   9-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
355   21-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2000 cable television system.
00-   12-  Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
501   21-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2000 cable television system.
      3-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
01-77 15-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2001 cable television system.
01-   5-
155   17-  Approving transfer of the cable franchises.
      2001
01-   9-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
374   20-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2001 cable television system.
01-   12-  Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
562   20-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2001 cable television system.
01-   3-   Amending Highway Resolution No. 3, as it pertains to granting a franchise
108   21-  concerning the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a
      2002 cable television system.
02-   4-
174   18-  Amending Cable television franchise agreement with AT&T Broadband, Inc.
      2002
04-   8-   Granting to Kraus Electronic Systems expansion of cable television franchise
354   19-  to Manhattan and Jackson Townships.
      2004
      1-   Consenting to the assignment of the cable system assets of Western Cable
05-39 20-  Communications, Inc.
      2005
          
 
TABLE VIII: HISTORICAL REFERENCES
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./Ord.                    Date Description
1861, p. 30                       - -  Support for families of volunteers who lost lives in service of United States in
(Sup. Rec. Bk. G, p. 102)              the Civil War.
1868, p. 6                        - -  Reward for arrest of horse thief.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. G, p. 445)
1868, p. 16                       - -  Bid of $26.75 accepted to repair sidewalk around public square.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. G, p. 462)
1874, p. 3                        - -  Plans authorized for building poor house.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. H, p. 239)
1874, p. 21                       - -  Report of County School Superintendent (textbook recommendations).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. H, p. 266)
1876, p. 25                       - -  Annual report of County School Superintendent; example of interesting information
(Sup. Rec. Bk. H, p. 273)              relating to early years of education and the county school system.
1877, p. 20                       - -  Annual report of County School Superintendent; example of interesting information
(Sup. Rec. Bk. H, p. 516)              relating to early years of education and the county school system.
1880, p. 19                       - -  Contract for construction of poor house.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. I, p. 336)
1880, p. 38                       - -  Report of mining inspection for county.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. I, p. 417)
1880, p. 73                       - -  Resolution to place question of building a new courthouse on ballot of November
(Sup. Rec. Bk. I, p. 552)              2, 1880.
1881, p. 18                       - -  Report on conveyance of courthouse square from Edmund C. Holbrook and wife to the
(Sup. Rec. Bk. J, p. 263)              county (see Recorders Office, Bk. 218, p. 107).
1882, p. 21                       - -  Committee appointed to prepare plans for new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. J, p. 274)
1884, p. 19                       - -  Resolution to urge fast completion of courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. K, p. 77)
1884, p. 28                       - -  Civil War Memorial for courthouse to honor those who lost lives in war.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. K, p. 107)
1885, p. 22                       - -  Resolution for construction of clock tower on courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. K, p. 222)
1885, p. 70                       - -  County Treasurer authorized to establish one general account called general
(Sup. Rec. Bk. K, p. 323)              county fund.
1886, p. 25                       - -  First rules of procedure adopted for County Board.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. K, p. 377)
1888, p. 23                       - -  Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument to be erected on southeast corner of courthouse
(Sup. Rec. Bk. L, p. 161)              square.
1889, p. 18                       - -  Contract for Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. L, p. 369)
1892, p. 560                      - -  First map of general election precincts.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 125, p. 44)
1894, p. 90                       - -  Adoption of official seal for the county (description given in office of the
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 125, p. 553)            County Clerk).
1901, p. 285                      - -  Resolution relating to assassination of President McKinley.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 186, p. 131)
1909, p. 284                      - -  Report of committee to set up tract indices.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 204, p. 214)
1913, p. 148                      - -  Building county hospital approved.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 206, p. 458)
1913, pp. 192, 332—334
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 206, p. 486; Sup.  - -  Report concerning location of county hospital.
Rec. Bk. 206, pp. 571—573)
1914, p. 103                      - -  First State Aid Road (Lincoln Highway) to be improved.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 206, p. 651)
1914, p. 337                      - -  Record of all hard road improvements to be referenced by County Surveyor or
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 207, p. 85)             Superintendent.
1916, p. 254                      - -  Purchase of plats from ex-County Supervisor.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 207, p. 499)
1918, p. 101                      - -  Coroner required to make semi-annual reports.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 208, p. 297)
1918, p. 355                      - -  Residence for Sheriff provided near jail.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 208, p. 461)
1918, p. 393                      - -  Permission to Daughters of American Revolution to place on the courthouse a
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 208, p. 488)            tablet in memory of Dr. Conrad Will, the man after which the county was named.
1924, p. 278                      - -  Construction approved for TB Sanitarium.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 211, p. 220)
1928, p. 129                      - -  Report of County Board Issue Committee (Roads).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 213, p. 77)
1928, p. 180                      - -  Six granite columns removed from courthouse given to American Legion for memorial
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 213, p. 118)            to steps World War I veterans.
1928, p. 388                      - -  Welfare Department created for the county.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 213, p. 240)
1929, p. 350                      - -  Authorization to employ county veterinarian.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 214, p. 63)
1933, p. 15 (                     - -  County purchases with home-owned stores versus chain stores.
Sup. Rec. Bk. 215, p. 490)
1935, p. 352                      - -  Committee appointed to draft Zoning Ordinance.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 217, p. 192)
1936, p. 26                       - -  News stand authorized in courthouse to be operated by physically handicapped
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 217, p. 256)            persons.
1936, p. 395                      - -  Bounty authorized for killing wolves and foxes.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 218, p. 63)
1938, p. 287                      - -  Authorize bond issue for new jail and courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 219, p. 167)
1946, p. 194                      - -  Rehabilitation of County Building Fund.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 203)
1949, p. 90                       - -  Operation of concession stand in courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 225, p. 143)
1958, p. 481                      - -  County Public Building Commission created.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 232, p. 105)
1959, p. 523                      - -  Report of Public Building Commission.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 27)
1960, p. 654                      - -  Feasibility study for Civic Center.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 415)
1961, p. 643                      - -  Resolution to proceed with planning new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 210)
1962, p. 12                       - -  Resolution relating to real estate for new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 268)
1962, p. 87                       - -  Approval of site location for new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 311)
1962, p. 334                      - -  Grant of money to County Public Building Company for courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 438)
1963, p. 374                      - -  Study and recommendation for courthouse and jail.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 269)
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 385)       - -  Approval to proceed.
1964, p. 12                       - -  Report on cost and construction details of new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 457)
1964, p. 16                       - -  Conveyance of real estate for new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 460)
1964, p. 147                      - -  Vacating floors 3 and 4 in old courthouse as fire hazard.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p. 4)
1964, p. 246                      - -  Lease of space in new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p. 64)
1964, p. 262                      - -  Tax authorized to pay for lease of courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p. 71)
1965, p. 806                      - -  Furnishings, furniture and equipment for new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 62)
1967, p. 447                      - -  Interior decorating contract for new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 342)
1968, p. 227                      - -  Refreshment stand in new courthouse.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 465)
1968, p. 715                      - -  Bond resolution for new county nursing home.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 54)
1970, p. 1832                     - -  Change name of public building complex located at Neal Avenue, Joliet, to Sunny
                                       Hill Center.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 239, p. 417      - -  County Board members chosen by district caucus.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 179      - -  Snack bar sublease; public building in Joliet “Meals on Wheels” program .
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 213      - -  Resolution on passing of Board of Supervisors.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 215      - -  Organizational meeting of newly elected County Board.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 346      - -  Coroner’s records turned over to County Historical Society.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 347      - -  Lease to Community Action Agency for space in Sunny Hill Complex.
                                  7-
1985, p. 201                      18-  Expression of sympathy in memory of Roy Schumacher.
                                  1985
                                  7-   Urging President Reagan to spearhead diplomatic efforts for the release of
Res. 85-88                        18-  American hostages in Beirut.
                                  1985
                                  9-
1985, p. 269                      19-  Expression of sympathy in memory of Dr. Clarence Larkin.
                                  1985
                                  9-   Resolution in appreciation of Kerry R. Sheridan’s services as Troy Fire
1985, p. 282                      19-  Department Chief.
                                  1985
                                  10-
1985, p. 307                      17-  Expression of sympathy in memory of Joseph R. Trizna.
                                  1985
                                  10-
1985, p. 308                      17-  Expression of sympathy in memory of Willard G. Blood.
                                  1985
                                  3-
1987, p. 89                       19-  Commendation of St. Francis girl’s pom pom squad.
                                  1987
                                  4-
Res. 87-36                        16-  Honoring the Girl Scouts seventy-fifth anniversary.
                                  1987
                                  4-
Res. 87-45                        16-  Commendation of Ludwig Grade School cheerleading squad.
                                  1987
                                  6-
Res.                              18-  Extending sympathy to the family of Gloria B. Bode.
                                  1987
                                  8-
Res.                              20-  Recognizing Joseph J. Talarico.
                                  1987
                                  10-
Res.                              15-  Proclaiming National Businesswomen’s Week, October 18 through 24, 1987.
                                  1987
                                  10-
Res.                              15-  Geography Awareness Week.
                                  1987
                                  10-
Res.                              15-  Northern Illinois Gas Day.
                                  1987
                                  12-  Honoring the Providence Catholic High School Class 4-A championship football
Res. 87-188                       17-  team.
                                  1987
                                  12-
Res. 87-189                       17-  Honoring the Joliet Catholic High School Class 5-A championship football team.
                                  1987
                                  3-
Res.                              17-  Expression of sympathy im memory of Donald E. Easterday.
                                  1988
                                  3-
Res.                              17-  Commendation of St. Francis girl’s pom pom squad.
                                  1988
                                  3-
Res.                              17-  Recognizing Crime Stoppers by declaring March, 1988 as March on Crime Month.
                                  1988
                                  3-
Res.                              17-  Declaring April 17 through 23 as National Victim’s Rights Week.
                                  1988
                                  4-
Res. 88-54                        21-  Proclaiming May 15, 1988 as Peace Officer’s Memorial Day.
                                  1988
                                  4-
Res. 88-55                        21-  Proclaiming April 26 to May 7, 1988 as Keep America Beautiful Week.
                                  1988
                                  5-
Res.                              19-  Expression of gratitude to Sergeant John R. Watters.
                                  1988
                                  5-
Res.                              19-  Expression of gratitude to Chief Theodore L. Kelly.
                                  1988
                                  9-
Res.                              15-  Expression of sympathy to the family of David A. Berry.
                                  1988
                                  9-
Res.                              15-  Commendation of Ludwig Grade School cheerleading squad.
                                  1988
                                  10-
Res.                              20-  Expression of sympathy to the family of Frank “Sis” Plankar.
                                  1988
                                  10-
Res.                              20-  Proclaiming National Businesswomen’s Week, October 16 through 22, 1988.
                                  1988
                                  10-
Res.                              20-  Honoring Stepan Company by declaring October 27, 1988 Stepan Company Day.
                                  1988
                                  10-
Res.                              20-  Proclaiming Learning Disabilities Month, October, 1988.
                                  1988
                                  11-
Res.                              17-  Recognizing Fred L. Richards on his retirement.
                                  1988
                                  1-
Res.                              19-  Expression of sympathy in memory of Theodore (Ted) Grabavoy.
                                  1989
                                  1-
Res.                              19-  Honoring the Violent Crimes Suppression Unit.
                                  1989
                                  1-   Commending the Washington Junior High School seventh and eighth grade girls’
Res.                              19-  basketball team.
                                  1989
                                  2-
Res.                              16-  Recognizing the NAACP on its eighty- ninth birthday.
                                  1989
                                  2-   Proclaiming the week of February 19 through 25, 1989 as Homemaker Extension
Res.                              16-  Association Week.
                                  1989
                                  2-
Res.                              16-  Congratulating Angie Conway for her invention of a “scientific cuddles”.
                                  1989
                                  2-
Res.                              16-  Awarding the County Citizen’s Award to Jackie Rinkenberger and Jeff Clark.
                                  1989
                                  2-
Res.                              16-  Awarding the County Citizen’s Award to Jenny Strle and Paula Ryan.
                                  1989
                                  2-
Res.                              16-  Recognizing Crime Stoppers by declaring March, 1989 as March on Crime Month.
                                  1989
                                  1-   Honoring the Providence Catholic High School Class 4-A championship football
Res. 92-2                         16-  team.
                                  1992
                                  6-
1996, p. 323                      20-  Honoring Gordon McCluskey on retirement.
                                  1996
                                  1-
1997, p. 2                        16-  Honoring Lockport Auxiliary V.F.W. Post 5788.
                                  1997
                                  1-
1997, p. 3                        16-  Saluting the Dow Chemical Company.
                                  1997
                                  2-
1997, p. 46                       20-  Recognizing 20th anniversary of Eastern Will County Senior Service Center.
                                  1997
                                  2-   Recognizing Joliet All City Band, Jazz Band and Orchestra on selection to
1997, p. 47                       20-  National Festival of States.
                                  1997
                                  3-
1997, p. 98                       20-  Recognizing Ray Nash for service to county.
                                  1997
                                  3-
1997, p. 99                       20-  Recognizing Janet M. Downing for her 35 years service to county.
                                  1997
                                  3-
1997, p.100                       20-  Recognizing Larry Wennlund on service to 38th Legislative District.
                                  1997
                                  3-
1997, p. 101                      20-  Honoring the life and legacy of District #8 Commissioner Harvey Ferguson.
                                  1997
                                  4-
1997, p. 150                      17-  Recognizing Louise Nichols for being “Coca-Cola Educator of the Month”.
                                  1997
                                  4-
1997, p. 151                      17-  Proclaiming “Community Action Week”.
                                  1997
                                  4-
1997, p. 152                      17-  Recognizing reporter Jerry Schnay on retirement.
                                  1997
                                  5-   Recognizing Joliet Job Corps on 95 student/safety satisfaction rating for PY
1997, p. 189                      15-  1997.
                                  1997
                                  5-
1997, p. 190                      15-  Recognizing Mayor Landis Wheling on retirement.
                                  1997
                                  6-
1997, p. 257                      19-  Honoring Matthew Adam Crawford on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1997
                                  6-
1997, p. 257                      19-  Honoring Brian Edwards on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1997
                                  6-
1997, p. 258                      19-  Honoring Matthew K. Goska on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1997
                                  6-
1997, p. 259                      19-  Recognizing Richard Colzani on retirement from County Highway Department.
                                  1997
                                  6-
1997, p. 260                      19-  Recognizing John E. Randall for service to the County Board of Review.
                                  1997
                                  6-   Recognizing Dr. Isaac Singleton, Sr. on retirement as president of Rainbow/PUSH
1997, p. 261                      19-  Coalition-Joliet Chapter.
                                  1997
                                  7-   Honoring Walter Nichols on induction into American Football Association Minor Pro
1997, p. 334                      17-  Football League Hall of Fame.
                                  1997
                                  7-
1997, p. 335                      17-  Honoring Lockport Township High School girl’s softball team on first in state.
                                  1997
                                  7-
1997, p. 336                      17-  Recognizing Loretta Ferguson on retirement from County Circuit Clerk’s office.
                                  1997
                                  7-
1997, p. 337                      17-  Honoring Harry E. Anderson VFW Post 9545.
                                  1997
                                  8-
1997, p. 390                      21-  Expression of sympathy in memory of Grace Dudlicek.
                                  1997
                                  8-
1997, p. 391                      21-  Plaque honoring Paul M. Drdak, Sr.
                                  1997
                                  9-
1997, p. 452                      18-  Observing Childhood Hunger Day.
                                  1997
                                  10-  Honoring Mrs. Bobbie Baird, New Lenox Chamber of Commerce 1997 “Citizen of the
1997, p. 493                      16-  Year”.
                                  1997
                                  11-  Recognizing Milano Baking Company as Joliet Chamber of Commerce 1997 Entrepreneur
1997, p. 535                      20-  of the Year.
                                  1997
                                  11-  Recognizing Richard J. Kavanagh on service to Valley View School District Board
1997, p. 536                      20-  of Education.
                                  1997
                                  12-
1997, p. 595                      18-  Honoring Lincoln Way High School for Class 6A football championship.
                                  1997
                                  12-
1997, p. 596                      18-  Honoring Providence Catholic High School for Class 4A football championship.
                                  1997
                                  12-  Recognizing the Peter Claver Center Vikings Karate Team on winning gold cup and
1997, p. 597                      18-  nine medals.
                                  1997
                                  12-
1997, p. 598                      18-  Honoring William Michael Rees on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1997
                                  1-   Recognizing Jasper C. “J.C.” Tromp on retirement as Veterans Assistance
1998, p. 1                        15-  Commission Chairman.
                                  1998
                                  1-
1998, p. 2                        15-  Recognizing Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
                                  1998
                                  1-   Recognizing Deputy Denise Bode on being awarded nationally credentialed law
1998, p. 3                        15-  enforcement officer (NCLEO).
                                  1998
                                  2-   Recognizing Sheriff Brendan Ward’s office on re-accreditation of adult detention
1998, p. 48                       19-  facility.
                                  1998
                                  2-   Recognizing 25th anniversary of the Community Service Council of Northern Will
1998, p. 49                       19-  County.
                                  1998
                                  2-   Recognizing 25th anniversary of Big Brothers/Sisters and designating recruitment
1998, p. 50                       19-  week.
                                  1998
                                  4-
1998, p. 223                      16-  Proclaiming “Community Action Week”.
                                  1998
                                  5-
1998, p. 222                      21-  Honoring Rogelio (Roy) Arredondo on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1998
                                  5-
1998, p. 223                      21-  Honoring Gregory 8th grade girls’ basketball team on winning city tournament.
                                  1998
                                  5-
1998, p. 224                      21-  Recognizing Joliet All City Band, and orchestra on accomplishments.
                                  1998
                                  6-
1998, p. 281                      18-  Recognizing John Verelote on retirement from the County Highway Department.
                                  1998
                                  6-
1998, p. 282                      18-  Recognizing Charles Evans on retirement from the County Highway Department.
                                  1998
                                  6-   Recognizing Blake Golom on receiving Edward Hanrahan Memorial Baseball
1998, p. 283                      18-  Scholarship Award.
                                  1998
                                  6-
1998, p. 284                      18-  Recognizing John Lyons on receiving Edward Hanrahan Memorial Scholarship Award.
                                  1998
                                  6-
1998, p. 284                      18-  Recognizing 50th anniversary of County Chapter of Credit Unions.
                                  1998
                                  6-
1998, p. 285                      18-  Recognizing plan on winning P.O.W. Career Guidance Program.
                                  1998
                                  7-
1998, p. 323                      16-  Recognizing Manhattan Fire Chief Dale L. Vanderboegh on retirement.
                                  1998
                                  7-
1998, p. 324                      16-  Recognizing Scott J. Hopkins on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1998
                                  7-
1998, p. 325                      16-  Recognizing Rose Singletary on retirement from the County Circuit Clerk’s office.
                                  1998
                                  8-
1998, p. 376                      20-  Honoring James Stetins on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1998
                                  8-
1998, p. 376                      20-  Recognizing Howard Wiegand on volunteer service and 68th birthday.
                                  1998
                                  9-
1998, p. 421                      17-  Recognizing Alice Archibald on 100th birthday.
                                  1998
                                  9-
1998, p. 422                      17-  Recognizing Kingsmen Drum and Bugle Corps.
                                  1998
                                  9-
1998, p. 423                      17-  Recognizing October 4 as Slovenian Heritage Day.
                                  1998
                                  9-
1998, p. 424                      17-  Proclaiming September and October United Way Months.
                                  1998
                                  9-
1998, p. 425                      17-  Designating POW/MIA Recognition Day September 18.
                                  1998
                                  9-
1998, p. 425                      17-  Recognizing Hispanic Heritage Month.
                                  1998
                                  10-
1998, p. 466                      15-  Recognizing John Lamb on receiving state IAHPC Local Preservation Award.
                                  1998
                                  10-
1998, p. 467                      15-  In memory of Mr. Elmer Ziegler.
                                  1998
                                  10-
1998, p. 468                      15-  In memory of Mr. Fred Richards.
                                  1998
                                  10-
1998, p. 469                      15-  In memory of Mr. Robert F. Schneider.
                                  1998
                                  10-  Proclaiming October 25, 1998 as Amanda Jane Long Day and supporting fundraising
1998, p. 469                      15-  efforts.
                                  1998
                                  10-
1998, p. 470                      15-  Recognizing Donald Robertson on retirement from the County Highway Department.
                                  1998
                                  10-
1998, p. 471                      15-  Celebration of America Recycles Day.
                                  1998
                                  11-
1998, p. 527                      19-  Recognizing Chester Licking on service as Monee Township Deputy Assessor.
                                  1998
                                  3-
1999, p. 154                      18-  Recognizing Manhattan Police Chief William J. Harris on retirement.
                                  1999
                                  3-   Recognizing Everett Moeller on his selection as the Conservation Education
1999, p. 155                      18-  Teacher of the Year by the Will-South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District.
                                  1999
                                  4-
1999, p. 229                      15-  Recognizing the county school waste reduction efforts.
                                  1999
                                  4-   Celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Community Development Block Grant
1999, p. 229                      15-  Program.
                                  1999
                                  5-
1999, p. 259                      20-  Recognizing Father Memenas on retirement.
                                  1999
                                  5-
1999, p. 260                      20-  Honoring Robert W. Sedlacek on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1999
                                  5-
1999, p. 261                      20-  Honoring Gregory W. Goska on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1999
                                  5-
1999, p. 262                      20-  Honoring Steven P. Annen on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1999
                                  5-
1999, p. 262                      20-  Recognizing Gwen Dean on public service.
                                  1999
                                  6-
1999, p. 321                      17-  Recognizing Joliet Area Church-Based Organized Body (JACOB).
                                  1999
                                  6-
1999, p. 322                      17-  Recognizing the 75th anniversary of WJOL radio station.
                                  1999
                                  6-
1999, p. 323                      17-  Recognizing Roy F. Hassert - dedication of Veteran’s Woods.
                                  1999
                                  7-   County citizens’ award, presented to Sandra Becker, Dorothy Ryden and Holly
1999, p. 379                      15-  Stech.
                                  1999
                                  7-   Recognizing Reed and Custer Townships and County Planner Dave Dubois on State
1999, p. 380                      15-  Planning Award.
                                  1999
                                  7-
1999, p. 381                      15-  Recognizing legacy of Eris L. Rudman - dedication of prairie.
                                  1999
                                  7-
1999, p. 381                      15-  Recognizing the City of Joliet on finalist for “All America City”.
                                  1999
                                  8-
1999, p. 416                      19-  Recognizing Delores Mueller in retirement from the County Circuit Clerk’s office.
                                  1999
                                  9-
1999, p. 482                      16-  Honoring Gregory R. Reavis on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1999
                                  9-
1999, p. 483                      16-  Recognizing Leona Green on retirement from the County Circuit Clerk’s office.
                                  1999
                                  10-
1999, p. 535                      21-  Honoring Mark Nicolay Oftedahl on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  1999
                                  10-
1999, p. 535                      21-  Proclaiming Blessed Anton Martin Slomsek Day in the county.
                                  1999
                                  10-
1999, p. 536                      21-  Recognizing Abraham Lincoln Veteran’s Cemetery.
                                  1999
                                  11-  Proclaiming National Drunk and Drugged Driving Prevention Months 1999 and “Lights
1999, p. 604                      18-  on for Taylor Pirc Day”.
                                  1999
                                  11-
1999, p. 606                      18-  Recognizing Harv Russell on retirement from the Christian Youth Center.
                                  1999
                                  11-
1999, p. 607                      18-  Celebration of America Recycles Day in the county.
                                  1999
                                  11-
1999, p. 670                      18-  Recognizing the Union Burial Society Cemetery as a county historical landmark.
                                  1999
                                  11-
1999, p. 671                      18-  Recognizing the John C. Baker Barn as a county historical landmark.
                                  1999
                                  12-
1999, p. 695                      16-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy High School for Class 4A football championship.
                                  1999
                                  12-
1999, p. 696                      16-  Honoring Fire Chief Elmer Joyce for 50 years of service.
                                  1999
                                  1-   Honoring Michael Lambert for service as Historic Preservation Commission
2000, p. 1                        20-  Chairperson.
                                  2000
                                  1-
2000, p. 3                        20-  Recognizing John Gavin on retirement from Lucent Technologies.
                                  2000
                                  3-   Congratulatory proclamation for the 150th anniversary of the first township
2000, p. 115                      16-  governments.
                                  2000
                                  4-   Celebration of 13th Annual Freedom Fund Banquet hosted by the Joliet Branch
2000, p. 168                      20-  NAACP.
                                  2000
                                  4-
2000, p. 169                      20-  Recognizing 50th anniversary of Trinity Services.
                                  2000
                                  6-
2000, p. 310                      15-  Honoring Matthew Davis on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2000
                                  7-
2000, p. 353                      20-  Honoring John Racich on retirement.
                                  2000
                                  7-   Recognizing Philip A. Mock for 20 years of service to the County State’s
2000, p. 357                      20-  Attorney’s office.
                                  2000
                                  7-   Recognizing John A. Urban for 20 years of service to the County State’s
2000, p. 358                      20-  Attorney’s office.
                                  2000
                                  10-
2000, p. 523                      19-  Honoring Patrick Michael Jahn III on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2000
                                  11-
2000, p. 577                      16-  Recognizing 100th Anniversary of Joliet Junior College.
                                  2000
                                  11-
2000, p. 578                      16-  Recognizing 100th Anniversary of Channahon Fire Department.
                                  2000
                                  2-
2001, p. 55                       15-  Recognizing Tribune reporter Bob Merrifield on retirement.
                                  2001
                                  2-
2001, p. 56                       15-  Recognizing 100th Anniversary of Joliet Township High School.
                                  2001
                                  3-
2001, p. 102                      15-  Honoring James A. Braner on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2001
                                  4-
2001, p. 177                      19-  Honoring Alan Rogers on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2001
                                  5-   Recognizing the continued service of Emma Meier Schweer as Crete Township
2001, p. 290                      17-  Collector.
                                  2001
                                  5-
2001, p. 291                      17-  Recognizing Helen Barrett on retirement as Monee Township Clerk.
                                  2001
                                  5-
2001, p. 292                      17-  Recognizing Frederick Pehkron on retirement as Crete Township Trustee.
                                  2001
                                  5-
2001, p. 292                      17-  Honoring Robert R. Richardson on becoming an Eagle Scout.
                                  2001
                                  5-
2001, p. 293                      17-  Recognizing National Historic Preservation Week.
                                  2001
                                  5-
2001, p. 294                      17-  Honoring Jason Seeman on heroic rescue.
                                  2001
                                  5-
2001, p. 295                      17-  Recognizing 10th anniversary of the New Lenox Rotary Club.
                                  2001
                                  6-   Designating Beecher Railroad Depot as a landmark under the County Historic
2001, p. 351                      21-  Preservation Ordinance.
                                  2001
                                  7-   Recognizing Cantigny Post 367VFW and the Ladies Auxiliary #367 for their
2001, p. 437                      19-  continued donations of American, state and MIA flags to the county.
                                  2001
                                  7-   Recognizing Sherry Williams for years of dedicated service as Union President of
2001, p. 437                      19-  AFSCME Local 1028.
                                  2001
                                  9-
2001, p. 560                      20-  Honoring the American victims of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks.
                                  2001
                                  9-   Supporting the United States postage stamp dedicated to the memory of the coal
2001, p. 561                      20-  mining industry.
                                  2001
                                  10-
2001, p. 635                      18-  Recognizing Alzheimer’s Disease Awareness Month.
                                  2001
                                  10-  Congratulating St. John the Baptist Catholic Church on the celebration of 150
2001, p. 636                      18-  years of service to the Joliet community.
                                  2001
                                  10-
2001, p. 637                      18-  Recognizing National Hospice Month.
                                  2001
                                  10-
2001, p. 701                      18-  Supporting the establishment of a Child Exchange Center Program.
                                  2001
                                  11-
2001, p. 718                      15-  Recognizing the 25th anniversary of Kiwanis Club of Frankfort.
                                  2001
                                  12-
2001, p. 808                      20-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy for Class 5A State Football Championship.
                                  2001
                                  12-  Recognizing the individual efforts for newly created juvenile evening reporting
2001, p. 809                      20-  center.
                                  2001
                                  12-  Establishing name of new Highway Department maintenance garage as “Brent Hassert
2001, p. 882                      20-  Facility”.
                                  2001
                                  1-   Honoring Providence Catholic High School for Class 6A State Football
2002, p. 2                        17-  Championship.
                                  2002
                                  1-
2002, p. 10                       17-  Designating Patrick Fitzpatrick Home as historic landmark.
                                  2002
                                  1-
2002, p. 11                       17-  Designating H.A. Rathje Mill as historic landmark.
                                  2002
                                  2-
2002, p.44                        21-  Recognizing February as Black History Month.
                                  2002
                                  3-   Recognizing Sheldon Latz as “Zone 1 - County Engineer of the Year 2001" for the
2002, p. 117                      21-  State Association of County Engineers.
                                  2002
                                  3-
2002, p. 118                      21-  Recognizing Anthony and Mary Rudis as Conservation Farm Family of the year.
                                  2002
                                  4-
2002, p.178                       18-  Recognizing National Historic Preservation Week.
                                  2002
                                  5-
2002, p. 250                      16-  Recognizing Don Gould, Director, County Emergency Management Agency.
                                  2002
                                  6-
2002, p. 298                      20-  Honoring Lincoln-Way East Girl’s Class AA Softball Championship.
                                  2002
                                  7-   Recognizing the county’s receipt of prestigious Metropolitan Planning Council’s
2002, p. 386                      18-  Burnham Award for excellence in planning.
                                  2002
                                  7-
2002, p. 387                      18-  Recognizing 150th anniversary of the City of Joliet.
                                  2002
                                  8-
2002, p. 449                      15-  Honoring the County Sheriff’s explorer post 911 community service program.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 595                      17-  Designating Union Cemetery an historic landmark.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 596                      17-  Designating Schmuhl Schoolhouse an historic landmark.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 597                      17-  Designating Ritchie Railroad Depot an historic landmark.
                                  2002
                                  10-  Recognizing Richard A. Loding, Supervisor of Assessments, County Supervisor of
2002, p. 669                      17-  Assessments office.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 670                      17-  Recognizing Claire Hubbell, County Deputy County Clerk.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 671                      17-  Recognizing Dorothy Drost, County Deputy Treasurer.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 672                      17-  Recognizing the nomination of Colonel Mark Stanich, Jr. for Brigadier General.
                                  2002
                                  10-
2002, p. 675                      17-  Recognizing the County Sheriff’s office on Chief’s Challenge Award.
                                  2002
                                  11-  Celebrating America Recycles Day in the county by considering buying recycled
2002, p. 774                      21-  content items whenever economically feasible for all county operations.
                                  2002
                                  11-  To decrease waste in the county governmental operations by establishing recycling
2002, p. 775                      21-  as the preferred solid waste management practice for all county operations.
                                  2002
                                  2-
2003, p. 154                      20-  Honoring Lockport High School for Class 8A state football championship.
                                  2003
                                  2-
2003, p. 155                      20-  Honoring Jeff Tomczak on being named State’s Attorney of the year.
                                  2003
                                  2-
2003, p. 156                      20-  Recognizing the 100th Anniversary of Ridgewood Baptist Church.
                                  2003
                                  3-   Recognizing the Ogalla family of unincorporated Will Township, Conservation Farm
2003, p. 256                      20-  Family of the year.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 300                      20-  In opposition of IL HB29.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 302                      20-  In opposition of IL HB112.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 303                      20-  In opposition of IL HB113.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 304                      20-  In opposition of IL HB114.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 306                      20-  In support of IL HB300.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 307                      20-  In support of IL HB526.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 308                      20-  In support of IL HB527.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 310                      20-  In support of IL HB528.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 311                      20-  In opposition of IL HB529.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 313                      20-  In support of IL SB82.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 314                      20-  In support of HB6.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 315                      20-  In support of HB7.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 317                      20-  In support of IL HB3509.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 318                      20-  In support of IL HB2501 and SB1045.
                                  2003
                                  3-   Supporting amending the State Environmental Protection Act to increase the fees
2003, p. 319                      20-  on tires sold in the state to provide funds to certified health departments to
                                  2003 combat vector borne diseases.
                                  3-
2003, p. 321                      20-  In support of IL HB105.
                                  2003
                                  3-
2003, p. 322                      20-  In opposition of IL HB2206.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 332                      17-  In honor of the memory of Richard L. “Dick” Budde.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 395                      17-  Declaring May 15, 2003 as American Peace Officers Memorial Day.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 399                      17-  In support of the concept of SB291.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 400                      17-  In opposition to the concept of HB3427.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 401                      17-  In opposition to the concept of HB1631.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 403                      17-  In opposition to the concept of HB1251.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 404                      17-  In opposition to the concept of HB220.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 405                      17-  In support of the concept of HB1533.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 406                      17-  In opposition to the concept of SB1373.
                                  2003
                                  4-
2003, p. 408                      17-  In support of the concept of SB1001.
                                  2003
                                  5-
2003, p. 436                      15-  Honoring Lewis University NCAA men’s volleyball championship.
                                  2003
                                  5-
2003, p. 498                      15-  In support of the amendment to remove the county from IL SB1373.
                                  2003
                                  6-
2003, p. 515                      19-  Honoring Wilmington High School Class A baseball state championship
                                  2003
                                  7-
2003, p. 611                      17-  Recognizing 100th anniversary of the county fair.
                                  2003
                                  8-
2003, p. 688                      21-  Recognizing establishment of College of Education at Lewis University.
                                  2003
                                  9-
2003, p. 760                      18-  Designating October and November, 2003 as United Way Month.
                                  2003
                                  9-
2003, p. 762                      18-  Recognizing retirement of District 2 County Board member Glenn Warning.
                                  2003
                                  10-
2003, p. 851                      16-  Recognizing November, 2003 as National Hospice Month.
                                  2003
                                  10-
2003, p. 861                      16-  Designating Riegel Farm an historic landmark (Res. 03-435).
                                  2003
                                  10-
2003, p. 919                      16-  Seeking designation as local sponsor for South Suburban Airport (Res. 03-477).
                                  2003
                                  11-  Recognizing Joe Babich, Kerry Sheridan, James Blackburn and Margie Woods for 20
2003, p. 924                      20-  years of service to county.
                                  2003
                                  12-
2003, p. 1043                     18-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy Class AA state volleyball championship.
                                  2003
                                  12-
2003, p. 1044                     18-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy Class 5A state football championship.
                                  2003
                                  12-
2003, p. 1045                     18-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy Class 8A state football championship.
                                  2003
                                  12-
2003, p. 1046                     18-  Extending appreciation to Senator Phil Novak for work on SB 1937.
                                  2003
                                  12-
2003, p. 1046                     18-  Extending appreciation to Senator Debbie Halvorson for work on SB 1937.
                                  2003
                                  1-   Recognizing accomplishments of Sunny Hill, Inc. and presenting of new wheelchair-
2004, p. 2                        15-  accessible van.
                                  2004
                                  2-
2004, p. 68                       19-  Recognizing Affordable Housing Week March 14 through March 20, 2004.
                                  2004
                                  2-
2004, p. 69                       19-  Honoring Matthew Gummess of Joliet Catholic Academy.
                                  2004
                                  3-
2004, p. 144                      18-  Recognizing 100th anniversary of Rockdale Fire Department.
                                  2004
                                  4-   Recognizing George M. Hernandez, first Hispanic police officer for Joliet, on his
2004, p. 222                      15-  retirement.
                                  2004
                                  4-   Designating Friedrich Gottlieb Seggebruch Homestead an historic landmark (Res.
2004, p. 239                      15-  04-86)
                                  2004
                                  5-
2004, p. 304                      20-  Honoring Gregory Middle School on National Space Day Design Challenge.
                                  2004
                                  5-   Designating Soldier’s Widow’s Laundry Building an historic landmark (Res. 04-
2003, p. 329                      20-  171).
                                  2004
                                  5-
2003, p. 331                      20-  Designating 12 Mile Grove Cemetery an historic landmark (Res. 04-172).
                                  2004
                                  6-
2004, p. 419                      17-  Proclaiming June 17, 2004 Indoor Air Quality Day.
                                  2004
                                  6-   Recognizing Larry Radtke on his retirement as chief of the County Emergency
2004, p. 420                      17-  Management Agency Hazardous Materials Response Unit.
                                  2004
                                  6-
2004, p. 421                      17-  Honoring Beecher High School Class A girls’ softball state championship.
                                  2004
                                  7-   Designated September 12 through 19, 2004, as Building on Faith Week and
2004, p. 506                      15-  recognizing the efforts of Habitat for Humanity with faith communities in
                                  2004 providing safe and affordable housing to county families in need.
                                  7-
2004, p. 507                      15-  Honoring Lockport High School Class AA girls’ softball state championship.
                                  2004
                                  7-   Opposing the diversion of state highway funds to non-highway uses to solve state
2004, p. 560                      15-  budget problems (Res. 04-288).
                                  2004
                                  7-   Opposing the creation of a new software computer tax to generate revenues which
2004, p. 561                      15-  would offset state budget problems.
                                  2004
                                  8-   Honoring State’s Attorney Jeff Tomczak’s recognition by the State Crime
2004, p. 589                      19-  Commission.
                                  2004
                                  8-   Honoring Mayor Roger Claar on being named Municipal Leader of the Year by the
2004, p. 594                      19-  State Crime Commission.
                                  2004
                                  9-   Endorsing and supporting the Wikaduke Trail land use and access management study
2004, p. 729                      16-  (Res. 04-385).
                                  2004
                                  9-   Affirming support for extension of I-355 tollway between I-55 and I-80 and
2004, p. 773                      16-  commending the governor’s vision for the tollway.
                                  2004
                                  10-
2004, p. 779                      21-  Recognizing October as “United Way Month.”
                                  2004
                                  10-
2004, p. 780                      21-  Recognizing the Supervisor of Assessment’s office for exemplary performance.
                                  2004
                                  10-
2004, p. 781                      21-  Designating November 2004 as National Hospice Month.
                                  2004
                                  10-
2004, p. 782                      21-  Designating October 21, 2004, as Lions World Sight Day in the county.
                                  2004
                                  10-  Designating the Small-Towle House, 515 County Road, as an historic landmark (Res.
2004, p. 796                      21-  04-424).
                                  2004
                                  10-  Renewing county commitment to appropriate funds for the United Way employee match
2004, p. 800                      21-  2005 campaign.
                                  2004
                                  11-
2004, p. 883                      18-  Recognizing the 40th anniversary of the County Historical Society.
                                  2004
                                  11-
2004, p. 884                      18-  Honoring outgoing elected officials.
                                  2004
                                  12-  Designating signatory authority to County Judge Executive Lawrence M. Walsh at
2004, p. 993                      6-   proceedings of the County Board reorganizational meeting (Res. 04-525).
                                  2004
                                  12-
2004, p. 993                      16-  Honoring Providence Catholic High School’s Class 6A state football championship.
                                  2004
                                  12-
2004, p. 994                      16-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy’s Class 5A state football championship.
                                  2004
                                  12-  Recognizing Rita Briley on retirement from Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center after
2004, p. 995                      16-  27 years of service.
                                  2004
                                  1-   Recognizing Jean Cook-Gordon on retirement from the County Auditor’s office after
2005, p. 2                        20-  31 years of service.
                                  2005
                                  1-
2005, p. 80                       20-  Endorsing the Kankakee County commuter rail feasibility study (Res. 05-38).
                                  2005
                                  1-
2005, p. 89                       20-  Supporting the county’s 2005 legislative agenda (Res. 05-42).
                                  2005
                                  1-   Confirming selection of adult detention facility expansion design option (Res.
2005, P. 95                       20-  05-44).
                                  2005
                                  2-
2005, p. 108                      17-  Recognizing February as Black History Month.
                                  2005
                                  2-
2005, p. 109                      17-  Recognizing March 13 through 20, 2005, as Affordable Housing Week.
                                  2005
                                  2-   Supporting the design and construction of full interchanges at Route 126 and at
2005, p. 182                      17-  Airport/Lockport Road, provided that ancillary and secondary road impacts are
                                  2005 considered and addressed (Res. 05-81).
                                  2-   Permitting use of the county courthouse parking lot by the USSSA Hall of Fame 3-
2005, p. 198                      17-  in-3 national tour on July 16 and 17, 2005 (Res. 05-91).
                                  2005
                                  3-
2005, p. 204                      17-  Recognizing March 24th as World TB Day.
                                  2005
                                  3-
2005, p. 205                      17-  Recognizing April as Child Abuse Prevention Month in the county.
                                  2005
                                  3-   Supporting the concept of HB 2692/SB 564 relating to water well construction
2005, p. 278                      17-  permit fees (Res. 05-127).
                                  2005
                                  3-   Authorizing negotiation with governmental entities to promote the adoption of the
2005, p. 296                      17-  county plan for the county regional airport (Res. 05-138).
                                  2005
                                  4-
2005, p. 303                      21-  Recognizing Neuqua Valley High School Special Olympics Basketball Championship.
                                  2005
                                  5-
2005, p. 394                      19-  Supporting American Red Cross “Heroes Campaign”.
                                  2005
                                  5-
2005, p. 395                      19-  Designating June 7, 2005 as National Hunger Awareness Day.
                                  2005
                                  6-
2005, p. 488                      16-  Recognizing the 100th anniversary of Rotary International.
                                  2005
                                  6-   Designating Wheatland Presbyterian Church, cemetery and site as a historic
2005, p. 506                      16-  landmark (Res. 05-238).
                                  2005
                                  7-
2005, p. 665                      21-  Honoring Wilmington High School Class A baseball championship.
                                  2005
                                  8-
2005, p. 757                      18-  Honoring Lockport High School Class AA state baseball championship.
                                  2005
                                  8-   Proclaiming September as National Alcohol and Drug Addiction Recovery month in
2005, p. 758                      18-  the county.
                                  2005
                                  9-   Recognizing the 80th anniversary of St. Joseph Catholic School and the dedication
2005, p. 853                      15-  of the Father O’Malley Parish Center.
                                  2005
                                  9-   Recognizing the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse Family Day, a
2005, p. 855                      15-  day to eat dinner with your children.
                                  2005
                                  9-   Honoring White Chocolate Girls basketball team 15 and under USSSA Hoop It Up 3 on
2005, p. 856                      15-  3 World Championship.
                                  2005
                                  10-  Declaring October as reflex sympathetic dystrophy/Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
2005, p. 944                      20-  Awareness Month.
                                  2005
                                  10-  Designating November 2005 as National Hospice Month. Hospice Care: comfort and
2005, p. 946                      20-  compassion when it’s needed most.
                                  2005
                                  11-
2005, p. 1051                     17-  Honoring Rosa Parks.
                                  2005
                                  12-
2005, p. 1194                     15-  Honoring Lincoln-Way High School for Class 8A state football championship.
                                  2005
                                  12-
2005, p. 1196                     15-  Recognizing 50th anniversary of Troy Township Fire Department.
                                  2005
                                  12-
2005, p. 1197                     15-  Recognizing Bryan R. Hartnell on highest GED score in the state.
                                  2005
                                  12-
2005, p. 1223                     15-  Designating Paton School as a historic landmark (Res. 05-505).
                                  2005
                                  12-  Designating Wesley Township hall (historically known as Landon’s Store) as a
2005, p. 1225                     15-  historic landmark.
                                  2005
                                  1-
2006, p. 3                        19-  Recognizing the 100th anniversary of St. Joseph Church.
                                  2006
                                  2-
2006, p. 109                      16-  Recognizing February as Black History Month.
                                  2006
                                  3-
2006, p. 222                      16-  Honoring Bolingbrook High School Girl’s Class AA State Basketball Championship.
                                  2006
                                  3-
2006, p. 224                      16-  Recognizing Affordable Housing Week March 19 through March 25, 2006.
                                  2006
                                  3-   Recognizing the Heritage Corridor Convention and Visitors Bureau as the agency to
2006, p. 306                      16-  promote convention and tourism business in the county.
                                  2006
                                  4-   Recognizing the Dooley Family of Crete Township as Conservation Farm Family of
2006, p. 322                      20-  the Year.
                                  2006
                                  4-   Recognizing 9-1-1 Emergency Telecommunicators Week in the county, April 16
2006, p. 323                      20-  through April 22, 2006.
                                  2006
                                  4-
2006, p. 352                      20-  Preserve America Community Initiative (Res. 06-138).
                                  2006
                                  5-   Recognizing Rialto Square Theatre 80th Aniversary Celebration Week, May 21— May
2006, p. 437                      18-  27, 2006.
                                  2006
                                  5-
2006, p. 439                      18-  Recognizing May as National Historic Preservation Month.
                                  2006
                                  6-
2006, p. 556                      15-  Designating September 2, 2006 as Kayley’s Day for Children’s Cancer.
                                  2006
                                  6-
2006, p. 558                      15-  Recognizing Village of Peotone, Illinois Sesquicentennial.
                                  2006
                                  6-
2006, p. 559                      15-  Honoring Lincoln-Way High School for Boys State Gymnastics Championship.
                                  2006
                                  6-   Establishing the official name of the Emco Building as Will County Court Annex
2006, p. 628                      15-  Building (Res. 06-267).
                                  2006
                                  7-
2006, p. 659                      20-  Designating July 23 through July 29, 2006 Accessibility Awareness Week.
                                  2006
                                  7-
2006, p. 660                      20-  Recognizing Teresa Stinnett on retirement from the County Board of Review.
                                  2006
                                  7-
2006, p. 662                      20-  Recognizing Ellen Carlson on retirement from the County Circuit Clerk’s office.
                                  2006
                                  7-   Designating Homer Trail Barn and Milk House (historically known as William Tilsy
2006, p. 682                      20-  Barn and Milk House) as historic landmarks (Res. 06-282).
                                  2006
                                  8-
2006, p. 769                      17-  Recognizing Sheriff Kaupas’ receipt of Excellence in Law Enforcement Award.
                                  2006
                                  8-
2006, p. 770                      17-  Declaring September as National Recovery Month.
                                  2006
                                  8-
2006, p. 771                      17-  Honoring County Board Member Mary Ann Deutsche’s retirement.
                                  2006
                                  9-   Recognition of local representatives and senators by Legislative Committee
2006, p. 873                      21-  Chairman Ron Svara.
                                  2006
                                  9-   Honoring Annette Etheridge’ retirement, Sunny Hill Nursing Home Director of
2006, p. 874                      21-  Nursing.
                                  2006
                                  9-   Designating the Russell-Hoyt-Wilbourn- White-Parker-Smazik House (historically
2006, p. 892                      21-  known as the Benjamin F. Russell House) as a historic landmark (Res. 06-360).
                                  2006
                                  9-
2006, p. 937                      21-  Adopting the countywide All-Hazards Mitigation Plan (Res. 06-393).
                                  2006
                                  10-
2006, p. 963                      19-  Recognizing October as Golden Apple Nominate A Teacher Month.
                                  2006
                                  10-
2006, p. 965                      19-  Designating November, 2006 as National Hospice Month.
                                  2006
                                  11-
2006, p. 1082                     16-  Honoring Minooka Eighth Grade Baseball Team IESA Class 3A State Championship.
                                  2006
                                  11-
2006, p. 1083                     16-  Recognizing 100th Anniversary of the Joliet Rivals Club.
                                  2006
                                  12-
2006, p. 1272                     21-  Recognizing 75th Anniversary of DeVry University.
                                  2006
                                  12-
2006, p. 1273                     21-  Honoring Drew Zitzke, Workforce Services Division of Will County Customer.
                                  2006
                                  1-
2007, p. 2                        18-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy Class AA third place state volleyball finish.
                                  2007
                                  2-
2007, p. 121                      15-  Recognizing February as Black History Month.
                                  2007
                                  5-
2007, p. 474                      17-  Recognizing 40th anniversary of senior services center of the county.
                                  2007
                                  5-
2007, p. 475                      17-  Declaring June 5, 2007 as Hunger Awareness Day.
                                  2007
                                  5-
2007, p. 477                      17-  Recognizing June 20, 2007 as Health Care Worker Appreciation Day.
                                  2007
                                  6-
2007, p. 579                      21-  Recognizing Lois Hemphill on retirement from the County Circuit Clerk’s office.
                                  2007
                                  6-
2007, p. 580                      21-  Recognizing Carol LeGrand on retirement from the County Executive’s office.
                                  2007
                                  6-   Recognizing Helen “Pat” Motta, Mapping and Platting employee, County Supervisor
2007, p. 582                      21-  of Assessments office.
                                  2007
                                  6-
2007, p. 583                      21-  Honoring Neuqua Valley High School Class AA baseball championship.
                                  2007
                                  7-
2007, p. 708                      19-  Disability and Accessibility Awareness Week - July 22 through July 28, 2007.
                                  2007
                                  7-
2007, p. 710                      19-  Acknowledging Mayor Joseph Cook on recognition by State Crime Commission.
                                  2007
                                  8-
2007, p. 815                      16-  Declaring September as National Alcohol and Drug Addiction Recovery Month.
                                  2007
                                  9-
2007, P. 912                      20-  Designating October 2 and 4, 2007 for “Take Back The Night”.
                                  2007
                                  9-
2007, p. 13                       20-  Welcoming Governor’s State University President, Dr. Elaine P. Maimon.
                                  2007
                                  9-
2007, p. 915                      20-  Recognizing Fred Breen on retirement from the County Merit Commission.
                                  2007
                                  10-
2007, P. 1025                     18-  Recognizing Bang Long, Jr, disability advocate.
                                  2007
                                  10-
2007, p. 1026                     18-  Recognizing November 2007 as Affordable Housing Month.
                                  2007
                                  10-
2007, p. 1028                     18-  Declaring November as Veterans Appreciation Month.
                                  2007
                                  10-  Designating the Ritchey United Methodist Church as an historic landmark (Ord. 07-
2007, p. 1064                     18-  391).
                                  2007
                                  11-
2007, p. 1135                     15-  Designating November 2007 as National Hospice Month.
                                  2007
                                  12-
2007, p. 1309                     20-  Recognizing Joliet Catholic Academy’s Class 6A state football championship.
                                  2007
                                  12-  Committing financial support for Rialto Square Theatre’s capital campaign (Res.
2007, p. 1364                     20-  07-501).
                                  2007
                                  1-   Recognizing Virginia Ferry as the recipient of Realtor Magazine’s 2007 Good
2008, p. 2                        17-  Neighbor Award.
                                  2008
                                  2-
2008, p. 114                      21-  Recognizing February as Black History Month.
                                  2008
                                  2-   Recognizing induction of Junior Ray into the United Professional Horseman’s
2008, p. 116                      21-  Association (UPHA) National Hall of Fame.
                                  2008
                                  12-
2008, p. 1203                     18-  Honoring Joliet Catholic Academy Class 3A state volleyball championship.
                                  2008
                                  12-
2008, p. 1205                     18-  Recognizing Pete McLenigham as Executive Director of Stepping Stones.
                                  2008
                                  12-
2008, p. 1206                     18-  Honoring Larry James Kleikamp on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2008
                                  1-
2009, p. 3                        15-  Certificate of appreciation to George Michas.
                                  2009
                                  1-
2009, p. 4                        15-  Certificate of appreciation to Mary Beth Meader.
                                  2009
                                  2-
2009, p. 81                       19-  Honoring memory of Louise Rey.
                                  2009
                                  2-
2009, p. 82                       19-  Honoring Joe Davis on heroic rescue.
                                  2009
                                  3-
2009, p. 148                      19-  Honoring Ricky McCully on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2009
                                  3-
2009, p. 149                      19-  Honoring Alex Baker on becoming Eagle Scout.
                                  2009
                                  3-   Honoring Providence Catholic High School student Eddie Klimara Class 3A state
2009, p. 151                      19-  wrestling championship.
                                  2009
                                  3-   Honoring Providence Catholic High School student Edwin Cooper Class 3A state
2009, p. 152                      19-  wrestling championship.
                                  2009
                                  5-   Designating Salisbury-Miller-Filipiak- Altemus-Blazina-Paulsen House located at
Res. 09-131                       21-  110 W. Haven Ave. as a historic landmark.
                                  2009
                                  7-
Res. 09-197                       16-  Designating Lovell Farm as an historic landmark.
                                  2009
                                  11-
Res. 09-366                       19-  Designating Kathy A. Miller Insurance Agency as a historic landmark.
                                  2009
                                  1-
Res. 10-01                        21-  Designating Aldrich-Schutten house as a historic landmark.
                                  2010
                                  3-   Correction of a scrivener’s error (Case No. HPC 09-42; CKA: Kathy Miller
Res. 10-73                        18-  Insurance Agency).
                                  2010
                                  3-
2010, p. 205                      18-  Recognizing 38 employees that participated in the Retirees Severance Program.
                                  2010
                                  3-
2010, p. 206                      18-  Census 2010 proclamation.
                                  2010
                                  3-
2010, pp. 207—208               18-  Recognizing the 30th anniversary of the Center for Correctional Concerns.
                                  2010
                                  6-   Designating Bowen-Turakowski House as a historic landmark (historically known as
Res. 10-163                       17-  the Rodney Bowen House).
                                  2010
                                  10-  Designating Brown Cemetery as a historic landmark (historically known as Brown
Res. 10-331                       21-  Church Cemetery).
                                  2010
                                  2-   Designating Krohn-Kwiatkowski House as a historic landmark (historically known as
Res. 11-47                        17-  Christian Krohn House).
                                  2011
                                  2-   Designating Wheatland Township Cemetery as a historic landmark (historically
Res. 11-48                        17-  known as Wheatland Cemetery).
                                  2011
                                  4-   Designating Scout Cabin as a historic landmark (historically known as Boy Scout
Res. 11-124                       21-  Cabin).
                                  2011
                                  5-   Designating Tilsy-Konow Barn as a historic landmark (historically known as
Res. 11-161                       19-  William Tilsy Barn).
                                  2011
                                  12-
Res. 11-453                       15-  Designating Northern Providence Ridge Cemetery as a historical landmark.
                                  2011
                                  5-   Designating St. John United Church of Christ as a historic landmark in Peotone
Res. 12-137                       17-  Township.
                                  2012
                                  8-   Designating Marshall Cemetery as a historic landmark in New Lenox Township,
Res. 12-254                       16-  Mokena, Illinois.
                                  2012
                                  5-   Designating North Island City Memorial Flagpole Monument as a historic landmark
Res. 13-111                       16-  in Wilmington Township.
                                  2013
                                  7-
Res. 21-236                       15-  Authorizing the John Fiddyment House Landmark rescission in Lockport Township.
                                  2021
                                      
 
TABLE IX: LEASES
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date Description
Ord.
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Lease of space across from courthouse for safety and traffic information sign.
296
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Lease of Caswell Yellow Cab property.
26
1964, p. 334

(Sup. Rec.   - -  Lease for sanitary landfill.
Bk. 236, p.
112)
1967, p. 99
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Termination of lease with City of Joliet.
Bk. 237, p.
263)
1968, p. 390

(Sup. Rec.   - -  Lease for auxiliary police in town of Crete.
Bk. 237, p.
498)
1969, p. 363 - -  Lease property on Chicago Street for parking lot.
1970, p.     - -  Lease with Forest Preserve; maintenance building.
1210
1970, p.     - -  Northeastern Illinois Flood Management Program Agreement.
1891
1975, p. 182 - -  Extension of lease with I.B.M. Corp.
1975, p. 333 - -  Lease of vehicles for Sheriff’s office.
1975, p. 333 - -  Extension of lease with I.B.M. Corp.
1975, p. 413 - -  Lease agreement on I.B.M. equipment.
1975, p. 474 - -  Lease agreement on I.B.M. equipment.
k.   , p. 3-
122          30-  Extension of lease with I.B.M. Corp.
             1977
             3-
Res. 17      23-  Lease of Caswell Garage property.
             1978
             7-
Res. 78-33   20-  Extension of lease with I.B.M. Corp.
             1978
             3-
Res. 79-55   21-  Lease of CETA space.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-115  20-  Lease agreement on I.B.M. equipment.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-119  20-  State and local government lease for data processing equipment.
             1979
             7-
Res. 79-140  25-  Installment lease plan purchase of I.B.M. equipment.
             1979
             8-
Res. 79-159  29-  State and local government lease plan for terminal equipment.
             1979
             8-
Res. 79-160  29-  Extension of lease with I.B.M. Corp.
             1979
             6-
Res. 80-112  25-  Purchase/lease agreement for five pieces of data processing equipment.
             1980
             1-
Res. 81-11   22-  Lease/purchase contract with I.B.M.
             1981
             2-
Res. 81-27   26-  Lease of I.B.M. equipment.
             1981
             3-
Res. 81-48   26-  Lease of space in Emco Building.
             1981
             12-
Res. 81-229  17-  Lease of #8200 Xerox copier for the Reproduction Department.
             1981
             1-
Res. 82-10   28-  Lease of space in the Chicago Jefferson Building for the Probation Department.
             1982
             1-
Hwy. Res. 8  19-  Lease agreement with the state for the use of the Department of Nuclear Safety.
             1984
             8-
Res. 84-97   16-  Extension of lease of space in Emco Building.
             1984
             3-
Res. 85-24   21-  Lease/purchase of power file from Chicago Power Files.
             1985
Res. 85-92   8-8- Lease of the Sunny Hill Nursing Home, the County Courthouse, and the County
             1985 Office Building to the Public Building Commission for 25 years.
             9-   Lease of suites 500 and 501 at 58 North Chicago Street in Joliet, for the
Res. 86-121  18-  County Probation Department.
             1986
             7-   Lease with the state for sites in the county to be used for the installation,
Res. 88-91   21-  operation and maintenance of radiological monitoring devices.
             1988
             6-   Lease for sixth floor of Ottawa Street parking deck for purpose of parking
Res. 89-164  15-  jurors.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-238  21-  Lease/purchase agreement for IBM printer.
             1989
             2-
90-22        15-  Lease of space in Emco Plaza Building for County Circuit Court.
             1990
             3-   Lease of space in building at 16 W. Van Buren Street, Joliet, Ill., for County
Res. 90-42   15-  Public Defender’s office.
             1990
             8-
Res. 93-193P 19-  Lease for office space for Juvenile Probation.
             1993
             9-
Res. 192     16-  Lease of office space for Juvenile Probation.
             1993
             1-   Lease agreement between Community Development Department and Farm Bureau for
Res. 95-5    19-  office space.
             1995
             3-
Res. 95-49   16-  Leasing office space for Public Defender’s office.
             1995
             6-
Res. 95-115  15-  Lease for garage space for Emergency Management Agency.
             1995
             1-   Lease agreement between Community Development Department and County Farm Bureau
Res. 96-7    18-  for office space.
             1996
             3-
Res. 96-43   21-  Lease for office space for juvenile probation office.
             1996
             11-
Res. 96-270  21-  Lease for office space for adult probation office.
             1996
             1-
Res. 97-3    16-  Lease between Community Development and County Farm Bureau for office space.
             1997
             9-   Authorizing extending lease for office space for animal control office on a
97-218       18-  month-to-month basis.
             1997
             10-
97-244       16-  Authorizing lease for office space for animal control office.
             1997
             10-
97-245       16-  Authorizing lease for court reporter storage.
             1997
             11-  Authorizing extending lease for office space for juvenile probation on month-
97-278       20-  to-month basis.
             1997
             11-  Authorizing lease agreement between Community Development Department and the
97-279       20-  County Farm Bureau for office space.
             1997
             12-
97-302       18-  Authorizing extension of lease with City of Joliet for juror parking.
             1997
             1-   Authorizing extension of lease for office space at Farm Bureau for Merit
98-17        15-  Commission.
             1998
             2-   Authorizing lease for office space for Land Use Department, Water Services
98-45        19-  Division.
             1998
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute a lease for offices of
99-121A      18-  the county public defender.
             1999
             5-
99-212       20-  Exercising option for lease of the 5th floor of the Pioneer Building.
             1999
             9-
99-324       16-  Authorizing an extension of lease for office space for animal control.
             1999
             8-   Authorizing a lease for the offices of the County Veterans Assistance
99-325       19-  Commission.
             1999
             9-
99-365       16-  Authorizing a lease for space for the county radio systems.
             1999
99-324       10-
(As          21-  Extension of lease for office space for animal control.
corrected)   1999
             10-
99-419       21-  Negotiating lease for office space for Recorder of Deeds.
             1999
             11-
99-455       18-  Executing lease for office space for Recorder of Deeds.
             1999
             11-  Lease agreement between the County Development Department and the County Farm
99-456       18-  Bureau for office space.
             1999
             12-
99-493       16-  Renewal of lease with the City of Joliet for juror parking at the courthouse.
             1999
             2-
00-92        17-  Lease for office space at Farm Bureau for the Sheriff’s Merit Commission.
             2000
             3-
00-131       16-  Lease of Pitney Bowes Paragon II mail processor with accounting package.
             2000
             4-   Authorizing renewal of lease for court transcript storage space - Circuit
00-181       20-  Court.
             2000
             6-
00-259       15-  Leasing 806 Nicholson Street.
             2000
             8-   Authorizing County Executive to execute extension of lease for office space at
00-317       17-  Arbitration Center for Circuit Court of the county.
             2000
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute lease renewal for the county radio
00-369       21-  lab.
             2000
             10-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute lease renewal for the county radio
00-369       19-  lab.
             2000
             12-  Lease agreement between Community Development Department and County Farm Bureau
00-487       21-  for office space.
             2000
             1-   Authorizing County Executive to execute office space lease renewal for Merit
01-7         18-  Commission at Farm Bureau.
             2001
             2-   Authorizing the lease/rental of optical scan voting booths for County’s Clerk’s
01-38        15-  office.
             2001
             2-   Authorizing the execution and delivery of an equipment lease/purchase
01-42        15-  agreement, and related instruments, and determining other matters in connection
             2001 therewith.
             6-   Authorizing the execution of the extension of lease for office space at the
01-268       21-  Arbitration Center for Circuit Court of the county.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing the execution of lease for the County State’s Attorney’s office
01-348       16-  located at 54 North Ottawa Street.
             2001
             8-
01-349       16-  Extension of County Probation Department lease.
             2001
             9-
01-384       20-  Authorizing the execution of a lease renewal for the county radio lab.
             2001
             11-
01-491       15-  Renewal of lease with the City of Joliet for juror parking.
             2001
             11-
01-492       15-  Authorizing the execution of a lease agreement for animal control office space.
             2001
             12-  Authorizing the execution of a lease agreement for Merit Commission office
01-569       20-  space.
             2001
             12-  Lease between the Community Development Department and the County Farm Bureau
01-570       20-  for office space.
             2001
             2-   Authorizing the execution of a lease agreement for Pitney Bowes Mail Management
02-43        21-  System.
             2002
             4-   Authorizing the negotiation and execution of four county leases for
02-188       18-  agricultural purposes on 455-acre county landfill property.
             2002
             5-   Authorizing the execution of a lease for Workforce Investment Board at Emco
02-226       16-  Building.
             2002
             9-   Authorizing the execution of an amended lease for office space for the County
02-434       19-  Recorder of Deeds at the Executive Centre.
             2002
             10-  Authorizing the execution of the first amendment to tower lease between
02-484       17-  Enbridge Energy, LP, F/K/A Lakehead Pipe Line Company, LP and the county.
             2002
             10-
02-485       17-  Authorizing execution of an addendum to radio tower lease with FBA Corporation.
             2002
             10-
02-486       17-  Authorizing execution of lease renewal for the county radio lab.
             2002
             10-  Authorizing execution of renewal of sublease agreement for office space at
02-487       17-  Arbitration Center for Circuit Court of the county.
             2002
             2-   Authorizing execution of addendum to lease agreement with Phelan and Nolan
03-93a       20-  regarding carpet replacement at EMCO Building at lessee’s expense.
             2003
             3-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of a lease for agricultural purposes on
03-114       20-  204 acres of the county landfill property at the former Joliet Army Ammunition
             2003 Plant.
             4-
03-185       17-  Authorizing execution of lease for Handel A. Metcalf at the Emco Building.
             2003
             4-
03-186       17-  Authorizing execution of lease for Thomas P. Naughton at the Emco Building.
             2003
             7-   Authorizing execution of ground lease agreement with Oliver Hoffmann
Res. 03-324  17-  Corporation.
             2003
             7-   Authorizing execution of renewal of sublease agreement for office space at
Res. 03-335  17-  Arbitration Center for Circuit Court of the county.
             2003
             8-   Authorizing execution of amended lease for office space for the County Recorder
Res. 03-377  21-  at Executive Centre.
             2003
             10-
Res. 03-472  16-  Authorizing execution of lease renewal for radio lab.
             2003
             10-
Res. 03-473  16-  Authorizing execution of lease renewal for workforce services.
             2003
             11-
Res. 03-535  20-  Authorizing execution of lease renewal for public defenders’ office.
             2003
             11-
Res. 03-536  20-  Authorizing execution of lease renewal for animal control office.
             2003
             2-   Awarding bid for master lease purchase agreement for Sheriff’s Department
Res. 04-52   19-  vehicles.
             2004
             3-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of lease for agricultural purposes on
Res. 04-113  18-  160.3 acres of county landfill property.
             2004
             3-   Authorizing execution of first amendment to lease agreement for offices of the
Res. 04-124  18-  County Veterans Assistance Commission.
             2004
             7-   Authorizing execution of sublease renewal for office space at Arbitration
Res. 04-294  15-  Center for the County Circuit Court.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing execution of lease for an antenna site on West New Monee Road with
Res. 04-369  19-  MidAmerica Towers, Inc.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing execution of lease renewal for office space at the Executive Center
Res. 04-370  19-  for the County Land Use Department.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing execution of lease renewal for office space at the Executive Center
Res. 04-371  19-  for the County Recorder of Deeds.
             2004
             10-  Authorizing execution of lease renewal at 14537 Edison Drive, Unit #4, for the
Res. 04-478  21-  county radio lab.
             2004
             12-  Extending lease authorizing the Public Building Commission to oversee the
Res. 04-556  16-  design and construction of the adult detention facility expansion through
             2004 December 15, 2008.
             2-
Res. 05-48b  17-  Amending lease between the County Public Building Commission and the county.
             2005
             2-
Res. 05-55   17-  Authorizing execution of 60-month lease for a printer with Xerox Corp.
             2005
             2-   Authorizing execution of second amendment to lease for expansion of offices of
Res. 05-87   17-  the County Veterans Assistance Commission at 124 North Scott Street.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing execution of lease agreement for a digital mail management system
Res. 05-99   17-  with Pitney-Bowes.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of lease for agricultural purposes on
Res. 05-112  17-  160.3 acres of county landfill property.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing negotiation with ESI & Patron Systems to lease a facility to house
Res. 05-139  17-  the County Emergency Management Agency, its emergency operations center, data
             2005 back-up services, and related services.
             4-   Awarding bid for master lease purchase agreement for Sheriff’s Department,
Res. 05-148  21-  Emergency Management and Public Defender.
             2005
             5-   Awarding bid for master lease purchase agreement for Sheriff’s Department and
Res. 05-195  19-  coroner’s office.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute master equipment lease purchase
Res. 05-196  19-  agreement for Sheriff’s Department, Emergency Management and Public Defender’s
             2005 office.
             8-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for county animal
Res. 05-382  18-  control.
             2005
             9-   Authorizing a renewal of a sublease agreement for office space at arbitration
Res. 05-414  15-  center for the circuit court.
             2005
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease with the County Farm Bureau
Res. 05-415  15-  for the Sheriff’s Gangs and Warrants Divisions.
             2005
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for the county
Res. 05-452  15-  radio lab.
             2005
             1-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease with the County Farm Bureau
Res. 06-24   19-  for the Sheriff’s Gangs and Warrants Divisions.
             2006
             2-   Authorizing the County Executive to re-execute the lease documents for the
Res. 06-48   16-  financing of the AVAYA S8700 Upgrade and Telephone upgrade (originally approved
             2006 as Res. 05-428).
             3-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease for agricultural purposes
Res. 06-112  16-  on 149.8 acres of county landfill property.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease for office space for the
Res. 06-232  18-  County Arbitration Center at the Emco Building.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for Will County
Res. 06-452  19-  Animal Control, 1200 South Cedar Road, Unit 1D, New Lenox.
             2006
             10-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for Will County
Res. 06-453  19-  Radio Lab, 14537 Edison Drive, Unit 4, New Lenox.
             2006
             1-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease for the County Regional
Res. 07-30   18-  Office of Education, located at 700 W. Lincoln Highway, New Lenox, IL.
             2007
             3-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease for the County Regional
Res. 07-107  15-  Office of Education, located at 700 W. Lincoln Highway, New Lenox, IL.
             2007
             3-   Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute the county lease for
Res. 07-115  15-  agricultural purposes on 130 acres of county landfill property.
             2007
             6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute lease for Workforce Services
Res. 07-269  21-  Division at the Joliet Junior College’s City Center Campus.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute lease renewal for county animal
Res. 07-388  20-  control.
             2007
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute lease renewal for the county radio
Res. 07-389  20-  lab.
             2007
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute lease agreement for Pitney Bowes mail
Res. 08-137  20-  management system.
             2008
             4-   Authorizing County Executive to execute lease agreement for emergency
Res. 08-174  17-  management response vehicle storage.
             2008
             10-
Res. 08-428  16-  Authorizing County Executive to execute lease renewal for the county radio lab.
             2008
             11-  Authorizing County Execute to execute a lease amendment to extend the term of a
Res. 08-467  20-  lease between the county and the County Public Building Commission through
             2008 December 15, 2011.
             4-
Res. 09-88   19-  Modification of the 2009 Public Building Commission lease payment.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing five-year term lease renewal for the County Recorder of Deeds
Res. 90-116  16-  offices, 58 East Clinton Street, Joliet Illinois.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing a five-year term lease renewal for the offices of the County Land
Res. 09-117  16-  Use Department, 58 East Clinton Street, Joliet, Illinois.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing a five-year term lease renewal for the County Veterans Assistance
Res. 09-118  16-  Commission at 128 North Scott Street, Joliet, Illinois.
             2009
             4-   Authorizing a five-year term lease renewal for the County Public Defender’s
Res. 09-119  16-  offices, 58 East Clinton Street, Joliet, Illinois.
             2009
             5-   Authorizing execution of temporary lease renewal for the County Bankruptcy
Res. 09-166  21-  Court.
             2009
             6-   Authorizing all documents necessary to ratify the assignment and assumption of
Res. 09-180  18-  lease between the former owner Philip Cocomise and the new owner, the City of
             2009 Joliet, IL, for approximately 100 juror parking spaces located at the Joliet
                  Warehouse property, 12 - 14 New Street, Joliet, IL.
             8-   Authorizing negotiation and execution of lease renewal for Federal Bankruptcy
Res. 09-253  20-  Court.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-298  17-  Authorizing lease renewal for county animal control.
             2009
             10-  Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for the county
Res. 09-363  15-  radio lab at 145367 Edison Drive.
             2009
             2-   Authorizing approval of lease with Pitney Bowes for new mail machine (emergency
Res. 10-31   18-  replacement necessary).
             2010
             4-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for emergency
Res. 10-119  15-  management response vehicle storage.
             2010
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute lease renewal for Will County Radio
Res. 10-352  21-  Lab.
             2010
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute amendment lease with BP Pipelines
Res. 10-353  21-  (North America) Inc., formerly known as Amoco Pipeline Company.
             2010
             3-   Awarding bid for farm lease for agricultural purposes on 77 acres of county
Res. 11-119  17-  landfill property.
             2011
             6-   Authorizing a lease agreement with the Administrative offices of the Illinois
Res. 11-226  16-  Courts for Office Space for the Will County Arbitration Center at the Will
             2011 County Court Annex.
             7-
Res. 11-251  21-  Authorizing a lease agreement for Pitney Bowes Mail Management System.
             2011
             10-
Res. 11-408  20-  Authorizing a lease renewal for Will County Radio Lab.
             2011
             1-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease amendment to extend the
Res. 12-22   19-  term of a lease between the county and the Will County Public Building
             2012 Commission.
             4-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal agreement with
Res. 12-126  19-  Michael Malak Investments, LLC for emergency management response vehicle
             2012 storage.
             6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute a lease renewal for space at 214
Res. 12-217  21-  North Ottawa Street for Workforce Services.
             2012
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute lease renewal for space at 14537 Edison
Res. 12-329  18-  Drive, Unit #4, New Lenox, for Will County radio lab.
             2012
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute second amendment to Tower Lease between
Res. 12-330  18-  Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership, (f/k/a Lakehead Pipe Line Company,
             2012 Limited Partnership) and the county.
             11-  Authorizing County Executive to execute lease with Walgreen Company for
Res. 12-355  15-  community pharmacy located within the Will County Community Health Center.
             2012
             11-
Res. 12-361  15-  Authorizing County Executive to execute radio tower lease with FBA Corporation.
             2012
             2-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a tower lease renewal with Willow
Res. 13-36   21-  Communications Corporation.
             2013
             3-   Authorizing County Executive to execute a lease agreement for Pitney Bowes Main
Res. 13-79   21-  Mail Management System.
             2013
             9-   Authorizing County Executive to execute lease renewal for Will County Animal
Res. 13-241  19-  Control.
             2013
             10-  Authorizing County Executive to execute lease renewal for Will County radio
Res. 13-284  17-  lab.
             2013
                 
 
TABLE X: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date      Description
Ord.
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -       Agreement with Regional Law Enforcement Commission.
224
1965, p. 404
(Sup. Rec.   - -       Federal surplus commodities for county.
Bk. 236, p.
521)
1966, p. 113
(Sup. Rec.   - -       Local implementation of Federal Economic Opportunity Act of 1964.
Bk. 237, p.
121)
1970, p.     - -       Northeastern Illinois Flood Management Program Agreement.
1891
1971, p. 290 - -       Regional Transportation Interim Plan and Program adopted.
1974, p. 411 - -       Communications agreement with Village of Rockdale.
1975, p. 92  - -       Participation in coordinated waste treatment management system.
k.   , pp.3-30-1977 Agreement for Faus Project M-5138 (3) between state, City of Joliet and county.
109—111
k.   , p. 3-30-1977 Manpower program consortium agreement with Grundy County.
128
k.   , pp.10-19-    Authorizing the county to enter into an agreement to subscribe to Governmental
517—518    1977      Interinsurance Exchange.
k.   , pp.10-19-    Amendments to the 208-Water Quality Management Planning Contract between the
552—553    1977      county (contractor) and the Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission (planning
                       agency).
k.   , pp.11-16-    Development of Coordinated Solid Waste Management System for Northeastern
604—605    1977      Illinois
Res. 2       5-18-1978 Adoption of the county land use plan as element of the county general plan.
Res. 9       4-21-1978 Regional Criminal Justice Planning Program for Will, Kane, Kendall, Grundy and
                       Kankakee Counties.
Res. 10      4-21-1978 Joint power agreement with City of Aurora.
Res. 24      1-18-1978 Adoption of the county overall economic development plan.
Res. 78-57;  8-24-1978 Transportation study as element of the county general plan; amendment to
and 78-58              transportation study.
Res. 78-78   9-14-1978 Waiver of rights to receive grant funds through Region IV Law Enforcement Comm.
Res. 78-79   9-14-1978 Joint power agreement with City of Naperville.
Res. 79-13   1-18-1979 Authorizing payment to Northeastern Illinois Planning Comm.
Res. 79-20   1-18-1979 Renewal of multi-jurisdictional agreement with Grundy County.
Res. 79-35   2-22-1979 County Criminal Justice Planning Comm. to become part of Region IV Law
                       Enforcement Comm. in Criminal Justice Planning.
Res. 79-165  9-26-1979 Acceptance of certain responsibilities under Water Quality Management Plan for
                       Northeastern Illinois.
Res. 79-189  10-24-    Agreement between Northeastern Illinois Planning Comm. and the county as regards
             1979      water quality.
Res. 79-194  10-24-    Renewal of multi-jurisdictional agreement with Grundy County.
             1979
Res. 79-211  12-19-    Extension of agreement between Northeastern Illinois Planning Committee and the
             1979      county.
Res. 79-221  12-19-    Intergovernmental agreement with Forest Preserve District.
             1979
Res. 80-67   4-23-1980 Joint purchasing agreement with the state.
Res. 80-69   4-23-1980 Intergovernmental agreement - MEG Narcotics Unit.
Res. 80-85   5-21-1980 Designating Village of Plainfield emergency operations center as location for
                       county emergency response to be directed.
Hwy. Res. 9  5-21-1980 Continuation of construction of Lake-Will Freeway (FAP 431-Route 53 Freeway).
                       Agreement with Northeastern Illinois Regional Planning Commission under which
Res. 80-92   6-25-1980 the Planning Department will provide technical services in connection with an
                       energy conservation study.
Res. 80-103  6-25-1980 Renewal of county’s participation in the Metropolitan Area Narcotic’s Squad.
Res. 80-93   7-23-1980 Agreement with Regional Transportation Authority for a county transit study.
Res. 80-115  7-23-1980 Endorsement of and commitment to the Industry Retention Program offered by the
                       State Department of Commerce and Community Affairs.
Res. 80-144  8-27-1980 Amendment to agreement between Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission and the
                       county.
Res. 80-145  8-27-1980 Authorizing entry into intergovernmental agreement with the County of Cook and
                       the Village of Steger.
Res. 81-49   3-26-1981 Agreement between Housing Authority of Joliet and the county.
Res. 81-82   5-28-1981 Authorization of county to join the County Municipal League.
Hwy. Res. 4  7-23-1981 Agreement for maintenance of certain county highways.
Res. 81-130  7-23-1981 Extension of agreement between Urban Mass Transportation Administration and the
                       county.
Res. 81-145  8-27-1981 Agreement with Lewis University to use computerized motor fuel dispensing
                       system.
Res. 81-207  10-22-    Agreement with Regional Transportation Authority to complete the transit study.
             1981
Res. 81-209  10-22-    Authorizing entry into intergovernmental agreement with the County of Cook and
             1981      the Village of Steger.
Res. 81-224  12-17-    Continuation of services of the State’s Attorney Appellate Service Commission to
             1981      administer the operation of appellate offices.
Res. 82-9    1-28-1982 County membership in National Association of Counties.
Res. 82-45   4-22-1982 Communications agreement with Rockdale, Manhattan and Shorewood.
Res. 82-93   7-22-1982 Agreement between the county and Joliet for use of jail facilities.
Res. 82-121  10-28-    Continued support for the State’s Attorney Appellate Service Commission.
             1982
Res. 82-135  11-23-    Supporting the Clean Community System, the county and Joliet.
             1982
Res. 82-158  12-16-    Establishing an enterprise zone encompassing contiguous portions of the county,
             1982      Joliet, Lockport and Rockdale.
Hwy. Res. 2  1-20-1983 Agreement between the county and Joliet for snow removal maintenance of county
                       highways.
Res. 83-11   1-20-1983 Intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officers In-Service Training Act, Public Act
                       82-674.
Res. 83-13   1-25-1983 Intergovernmental agreement between the county, Joliet, Lockport and Rockdale
                       concerning the establishment of an enterprise zone.
Hwy. Res. 2  5-19-1983 Agreement between the state and the county for highway improvements.
Res. 83-143  11-17-    Continuation of services of the State’s Attorney Appellate Service Commission to
             1983      administer the operation of appellate offices.
Res. 84-25   4-19-1984 Communications agreement between the county and the Villages of Rockdale,
                       Manhattan and Shorewood.
Res. 84-66   6-21-1984 Cancellation of intergovernmental agreement with the City of Joliet for use of
                       its jail facilities.
Res. 84-72   6-21-1984 Amends Ord. 82-158, expanding the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley
                       Enterprise Zone.
Res. 84-73   6-21-1984 Amends the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone intergovernmental agreement.
Hwy. Res. 2  7-19-1984 Agreement between the state and the county for highway improvements.
Res. 84-83   7-19-1984 Agreement with Joliet Township for utilization of Workfare participants.
Res. 84-108  8-16-1984 Intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Steger, Cook County and the
                       county for housing and community development.
Hwy. Res. 2  11-15-    Agreement with the City of Crest Hill for maintenance of certain county
             1984      highways.
Hwy. Res. 2  1-17-1985 Agreement with the City of Joliet for snow removal maintenance of county
                       highways.
                       Agreement with local governments in the southwest metropolitan area in a
Res. 85-32   3-21-1985 cooperative program of economic development centering on Argonne National
                       Laboratory.
Hwy. Res. 2  6-20-1985 Agreement between the state and the county for highway improvements.
Hwy. Res. 3  6-20-1985 Reimbursement to the Village of Romeoville for contractual engineering services
                       with Barton-Aschman Association, Inc. in connection with highway improvements.
Hwy. Res. 4  7-18-1985 Agreement between the county, state and City of Joliet for the extension of
                       Briggs Street.
Hwy. Res.    8-15-1985 Agreement between the state and county for highway improvements.
85-102
Res. 85-108  8-15-1985 Agreement with Joliet Township High School District No. 204 for defending
                       unwarranted tax protests.
Hwy. Res.    10-17-    Agreement between the state and county for highway improvements.
85-140       1985
Ord. 85-173  11-21-    Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
             1985
Ord. 85-174  11-21-    Amending the Des Plaines Valley Enterprise Zone agreement.
             1985
Res. 85-186  12-19-    Establishment of economic and cultural exchange relations between the county
             1985      Liaoyang City, People’s Republic of China.
Hwy. Res.    1-16-1986 Agreement between the state and county for highway improvements.
86-9
Res. 86-45   3-20-1986 Agreement between the county and the Villages of Manhattan, Rockdale and
                       Shorewood for use of communications equipment.
Res. 86-46   3-20-1986 Mutual aid agreement between the Will and Grundy County Emergency Services and
                       Disaster Agencies.
Hwy. Res.    4-17-1986 Agreement between the state and county for highway improvements.
86-53
Ord. 86-87   6-19-1986 Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Ord. 86-88   6-19-1986 Amending the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone Agreement.
                       Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Bolingbrook to improve the
Res. 86-93   7-17-1986 Weber-Williams and Naperville Road corridors and the Boughton-Naperville Road
                       intersection.
Ord. 86-110  8-21-1986 Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Ord. 86-111  8-21-1986 Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Res. 86-122  9-18-1986 Agreement between the City of Joliet, Commuter Rail Division of the RTA, and the
                       county, for parking lots in the area of Union Station.
Ord. 87-4    1-15-1987 Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Ord. 87-5    1-15-1987 Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Res. 87-8    2-19-1987 Adoption of the regional mass transit policy.
                       Intergovernmental agreement with Plainfield Community Consolidated S.D. 202,
Res. 87-40   4-16-1987 City of Joliet, Plainfield Park District and Plainfield Township for the purpose
                       of defending these districts against loss of tax revenue because of unwarranted
                       tax protests.
Res. 87-55   5-21-1987 Joint purchasing agreement with the state; reaffirming Res. 80-67.
                       Authorization for the county to enter into a delegation agreement with the State
Res. 87-74   7-16-1987 Environmental Protection Agency for a cooperative solid management site
                       inspection, investigation and enforcement program.
Res. 87-107  8-20-1987 Agreement with Phelan Acres Condominium Association to assist in traffic
                       regulation.
                       Agreement with Wheatland Township, Plainfield Community Consolidated School
Res. 87-132  9-17-1987 District No. 202, Indian Prairie Community Unit School District No. 204 and the
                       Wheatland Township Road District to employ an appraiser.
Ord. 87-148  10-15-    Expanding the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley enterprise zone.
             1987
Ord. 87-149  10-15-    Adopting the Des Plaines River Valley enterprise zone governmental agreement.
             1987
             12-17-    Agreement with Lockport Township High School District No. 205 and Ludwig- Walsh
Res. 87-187  1987      School District 92, Lockport Township Park District, Lockport Township Fire
                       Department and Lockport Township to employ an appraiser.
Res. 88-30   3-17-1988 Agreement with the state to facilitate the free flow of traffic and to ensure
                       the safety of the motoring public, to make improvements.
Res. 88-42   4-21-1988 Agreement with DuPage County, City of Naperville and Naperville Township, and
                       Wheatland Township for street improvements.
Res. 88-43   4-21-1988 Agreement with the City of Joliet for snow removal maintenance of county
                       highways.
Res. 88-51   4-21-1988 Communications agreement with Village of Manhattan.
Res. 88-52   4-21-1988 Communications agreement with Village of Rockdale.
Res. 88-53   4-21-1988 Communications agreement with Village of Shorewood.
Res. 88-61   5-19-1988 Approval, with conditions, of an application for a regional pollution control
                       facility.
Res. 88-80   6-16-1988 Amending and revising the county overall economic development plan.
Res. 88-112  8-18-1988 Interagency agreement with the State Criminal Justice Information Authority to
                       install an ALERTS antenna.
Res. 88-113  8-18-1988 Grant of tax abatement to Metropolitan Pump Company.
                       Entering into an intergovernmental agreement with the Plainfield Community
Res. 88-114  8-18-1988 Consolidated School District No. 202, Indian Prairie School District No. 204,
                       Wheatland Township and the Wheatland Township Highway Department.
                       Authorizing entry into an interagency agreement with the State Criminal Justice
Res. 88-130  9-15-1988 Information Agency to allocate and disburse grant funds under the Federal Crime
                       Control Act of 1973 to the county.
Res. 88-138  10-20-    Agreement entered into by and between the State Department of Transportation and
             1988      the County Highway Department for highway improvements.
             11-17-    Expanding the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley enterprise zone;
Res. 88-165  1988      amending Ord. 82-158 as amended by Res. 84-72, Ord. 85-173, Ord. 86-87, Ord. 86-
                       110, Ord. 87-4 and Ord. 87-148.
             11-17-    Amending the Des Plaines River Valley enterprise zone intergovernmental
Res. 88-166  1988      agreement; amending Res. 84-73 as amended by Ord. 85-174, Ord. 86-88, Ord. 86-
                       89, Ord. 86-111, Ord. 87-5 and Ord. 87-149.
Res. 88-182  12-15-    Granting tax abatement to Formax, Inc. of Mokena.
             1988
Res. 89-17   1-19-1988 Granting tax abatement to Customwood Stairs, Inc. of Village of Romeoville.
Res. 89-95   6-15-1989 Endorsement of DuPage River Greenway Coalition.
                       Agreement with State Department of Transportation and Village of Romeoville for
Res. 89-104  6-15-1989 construction of interchange on F.A.I. Route 55 at County Highway 88 (Weber
                       Road).
Res. 89-106  6-15-1989 County maintenance resolution on patrol 1 of certain portion of county/state
                       highway.
Res. 89-175  7-20-1989 Amendment of Res. 85-108 to provide for expiration date of.
Res. 89-176  7-20-1989 Agreement between county and City of Joliet as to improvement of courthouse
                       parking lot.
Res. 89-202  8-17-1989 Various county highway improvements funded as part of Chicago Area
                       Transportation Study membership.
Res. 89-212  8-17-1989 Commitment of funds for Houbolt Road interchange; call to other government units
(as amended)           to commit funds to this project.
                       Agreement between Villages of Park Forest, Naperville and Bolingbroke and
Res. 89-218  8-17-1989 Counties of Cook and Will, and Will as to 9-1-1 emergency telephone system
                       (subject to voter approval).
Res. 89-235  9-21-1989 Amendment of Res. 88-130, extending grant funds to 6-30-1990.
Res. 89-236  9-21-1989 Renewal of Des Plains River Valley Enterprise Zone Incubator Program Grant
(as amended)           through 6-30-1990.
Res. 89-255  9-21-1989 Agreement with City of Aurora regarding the White Eagle Golf Club liquor
                       license.
Res. 89-275  10-19-    Agreement between Village of Park Forest, Cook and Will Counties, and Will
             1989      County to fund a 9-1-1 emergency telephone system, subject to voter approval.
Res. 89-281  10-19-    Agreement with Will Township to aid in construction of new bridge over Exline
             1989      Slough on Kennedy Road.
Res. 89-282  10-19-    Agreement with Jackson Township to aid in construction of new bridge over
             1989      Jackson Creek on Ridge Road.
Res. 89-283  10-19-    Agreement with Homer Township to aid in construction of new bridge over Spring
             1989      Creek on Oak Avenue.
Res. 89-284  10-19-    Agreement with Homer Township to aid in construction of new bridge over North
             1989      Fraction Creek on Farrell Road.
Res. 89-285  10-19-    Agreement with Wilton Township to aid in construction of new bridge over Forked
             1989      Creek over Gougar Road.
Res. 89-286  10-19-    Delegation agreement between State EPA and the county re: joint solid waste
             1989      management site inspection, investigation and enforcement program.
Res. 89-288  10-19-    Agreement between the county and City of Naperville to fund 9-1-1 emergency
             1989      telephone system, subject to voter approval.
Res. 89-303  11-16-    Supplemental resolution to Res. 88-61 (regional pollution control facility).
             1989
Res. 89-326  12-21-    Agreement between county and State Department of Transportation as to
             1989      maintenance of county/state highways.
Res. 89-327  12-21-    Agreement between County and City of Naperville for improvement of County
             1989      Highway 11 (Naperville Road - Washington Street).
Res. 89-329  12-21-    Agreement between county and City of Naperville for improvement of County
             1989      Highway 14 (Plainville-Naperville Road and 95th Street).
Res. 89-341  12-21-    Endorsement of Joliet/County Headstart Program.
             1989
Res. 90-51   3-15-1990 Agreement between the county and Village of Monee for improvement of West Court
                       Street Bridge over I.C. Railroad.
Res. 90-60   3-15-1990 Intergovernmental agreements for volume reduction/recycling grant program.
(as amended)
Res. 90-111  5-17-1990 Local subgrant awards for County CDBG Program.
Res. 90-131  6-21-1990 Approval of intergovernmental agreement for right-of-way acquisition, between
                       the county and Naperville Park District.
Res. 90-151  7-19-1990 Approval of dues to be paid to Northeastern Illinois Planning Commission (NIPC).
Res. 90-189  9-20-1990 Amendment to county multi-jurisdictional drug prosecution unit grant.
Res. 90-192  9-20-1990 Agreement between the county and Jackson Township for new bridge over Jackson
                       Creek.
Res. 90-193  9-20-1990 Agreement between the county and Peotone Township for new bridge over Forked
                       Creek.
Res. 90-194  9-20-1990 Agreement between the county and Plainfield Township for new bridge over DuPage
                       River.
Res. 90-195  9-20-1990 Agreement between the county and Washington Township for new bridge over creek
                       on Yates Avenue.
Res. 90-196  9-20-1990 Agreement between the county and Will Township for new bridge over Rock Creek.
Res. 90-197  9-20-1990 Approval of State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement as to
                       highway improvement of part of U.S. Route 45.
Res. 90-199  9-20-1990 Authorization to enter into agreements for volume reduction/recycling grant
                       program.
Res. 90-203  9-20-1990 Expansion of boundaries of Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Res. 90-204  9-20-1990 Adoption of Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone intergovernmental
                       agreement.
Res. 90-243  11-15-    Improvement of various county highways by becoming member of Chicago Area
             1990      Transportation Study.
Res. 90-249  11-15-    Execution of State Department of Nuclear Safety intergovernmental grant
             1990      agreement.
Res. 90-283  12-20-    Approval of intergovernmental agreement between the county and the state for
             1990      jurisdiction and maintenance of Caton Farm Road.
Res. 90-284  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and City of Naperville for city
             1990      impact fee program.
Res. 90-289  12-20-    Interagency agreement with State Criminal Justice Information Authority (Local
             1990      Agreement No. 4024).
Res. 90-294  12-20-    Agreement between the county and United States Army Corps of Engineers as to
             1990      Kankakee River Ice Management Project.
Res. 91-14   1-17-1991 Agreement with state and with City of Joliet for construction of intersection at
                       Houbolt Road and Interstate Route 80.
Res. 91-16   1-17-1991 Approval of state - county joint agreement for intersection improvement of U.S.
                       Route 3 at Schoolhouse Road.
Res. 91-18   1-17-1991 Agreement between county and Frankfort Township concerning improvement of
                       streets in Frankfort Square Subdivision.
Res. 91-43   2-21-1991 Entering into physical therapy agreement with Restorative Health Management.
Res. 91-44   2-21-1991 Entering into agreement for occupational therapy with Restorative Health
                       Management.
Res. 91-45   2-2-1991  Entering into speech therapy agreement with Restorative Health Management.
Res. 91-46   2-21-1991 Entering into physical therapy (DPA 2700 Program - Physical Rehabilitation)
                       agreement with Restorative Health Management.
Res. 91-77   3-21-1991 Amending Res. 82-158, by the deletion of Exhibit “A-8" and the substitution of
                       Exhibit “A-9".
Res. 91-78   3-21-1991 Amending Res. 8-73.
Res. 91-90   4-18-1991 Approving development agreement for Carillon Subdivision - Phase II.
Res. 91-98   4-18-1991 Awarding various contracts for public highway improvements.
Res. 91-100  4-18-1991 Approval of a professional services agreement for construction engineering.
Res. 91-102  4-18-1991 Mutual aid agreement with Des Plaines Valley Fire Chiefs Association.
Res. 91-124  5-16-1991 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 91-125  5-16-1991 Approval of a professional services agreement for design and construction
                       engineering.
Res. 91-126  5-16-1991 L.E.A.D.S. System agreement.
Res. 91-131  5-16-1991 Authorizing the Will-Grundy Area Labor Management Council non-financial
                       agreement.
Res. 91-73   6-20-1991 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Bonnie Brea Forest Manor
                       Sanitary District.
Res. 91-151  6-20-1991 Approval of a professional services agreement for design and construction
                       engineering.
Res. 91-156  6-20-1991 Medical Director agreement.
                       Adopting a revised joint grant agreement between the City of Joliet, the county
Res. 91-162  6-20-1991 and the Cummuter Rail Division of the Regional Transportation Authority relating
                       to commuter parking facilities.
Res. 91-166  6-20-1991 Adopting a collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME Local
                       2961.
Res. 91-191  7-18-1991 Agreements for the volume reduction/ recycling grant program.
Res. 91-195  7-18-1991 Intergovernmental agreement for the conveyance of certain real estate.
Res. 91-197  8-1-1991  Intergovernmental agreement among the
                       City of Joliet, the county, the County Public Building Commission and the State
Res. 05-43   1-20-2005 Department of Transportation for the sale of certain real estate for the South
                       Chicago Street crossover; acquisition of the South Chicago Street crossover
                       site.
Res. 91-213  8-15-1991 State Department of Transportation intergovernmental agreement.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the DuPage County and the county for a non-
Res. 91-219  8-15-1991 exclusive license of the DuPage County Circuit Court Clerk’s automated computer
                       system.
Res. 91-230  9-19-1991 Professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 91-235  9-19-1991 Agreement for laboratory testing of groundwater samples.
Res. 91-244  9-19-1991 Cost sharing agreement between the county and the state/Department of
                       Transportation for the Kankakee River ice control project.
Res. 91-295  11-21-    Agreement with Cigna Insurance Company of Illinois for commercial property
             1991      coverage.
Res. 91-296  11-21-    Agreement with PENCO for commercial auto coverage.
             1991
Res. 91-297P 11-21-    Agreement with Safety Mutual Casualty Corporation of St. Louis, Missouri for
             1991      excess worker’s compensation coverage.
Res. 91-298  11-21-    Agreement with Martin Boyer for administration of the county’s general liability
             1991      claims.
Res. 91-299  11-21-    Agreement with Martin Boyer for administration of the county’s worker’s
             1991      compensation claims.
Res. 92-15   1-16-1992 Providing for Formax real estate tax abatement.
Res. 92-30   2-20-1992 Intergovernmental agreement with Cook County concerning improvement of Steger
                       Road.
Res. 92-41   2-20-1992 Proposing a County Special Service Area No. 1 with the Bonnie Brae Forest Manor
                       Sanitary District.
Res. 92-42   2-20-1992 Intergovernmental agreement regarding the economic development project of the
                       Rock Run Business Park.
Res. 92-51   2-20-1992 Intergovernmental agreement between the State Department of Transportation, City
                       of Joliet and the county for Houbolt Road interchange project.
                       Agreement with the State Department of Transportation, Village of New Lenox and
Res. 92-74   4-16-1992 New Lenox Township for the intersection improvement of Cedar Road and Spencer
                       Road.
Res. 92-154  7-16-1992 Agreement with the State Department of Transportation for the intersection
                       improvement of Weber Road and Caton Farm Road.
Res. 92-233  11-19-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of New Lenox.
             1992
Res. 92-234  11-19-    Intergovernmental planning agreement with Village of Plainfield.
             1992
Res. 92-235  11-19-    Intergovernmental planning agreement with City of Wilmington.
             1992
Res. 92-23   1-21-1993 Mutual aid box alarm system agreement.
Res. 93-24   1-21-1993 Mutual aid agreement between County Emergency Management Agency and City of
                       Naperville Emergency Management Agency.
Res. 93-83   4-15-1993 Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Shorewood.
Res. 93-84   4-15-1993 Intergovernmental planning agreement with the Village of Minooka.
Res. 93-161  7-15-1993 Intergovernmental grant agreement of the State Department of Nuclear Safety.
Res. 93-162  7-15-1993 Agreement with Commonwealth Edison Co. for a perpetual centerline easement for
                       the river ice management siphon system.
Res. 93-164  7-15-1993 Agreement with the Suburban Mutual Assistance Response Team (S.M.A.R.T.)
Res. 93-165  7-15-1993 Agreement with the Greater Will County Emergency Services Mutual Aid
                       Association.
Res. 93-143  7-15-1993 Adopting the County Home Investment Partnership Community Housing Development
                       organization agreement.
Res. 93-192  8-19-1993 State Department of Nuclear Safety lease agreement.
Res. 93-211  9-16-1993 Approving State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement.
Res. 93-212  9-16-1993 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and state, Department of
                       Transportation.
Res. 93-262  11-18-    Intergovernmental agreement with Crete Township.
             1993
Res. 93-265  11-18-    Creating the Interstate 355 Southern Extension (FAP 340) Corridor Planning
             1993      Council.
Res. 93-266  11-18-    Intergovernmental agreement for ALERTS Program.
             1993
Res. 93-283  12-16-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of Joliet.
             1993
                       Agreement for architectural services with Richards/Johnson & Associates, Inc.
Res. 93-284  12-16-    for design and construction inspection for the removal and replacement of
             1993      certain existing exterior windows, door frames and doors at the Highway
                       Department Office Building and Maintenance Building.
Res. 93-285  12-16-    Approving a State Department of Transportation and county joint agreement.
             1993
Res. 93-292  12-16-    Collective bargaining agreement between the county, County Sheriff and MAP-
             1993      Sheriff’s Management Association Group.
Res. 94-26   1-20-1994 Intergovernmental agreement with the Joliet Arsenal.
                       Agreement for preliminary engineering services with Rice, Berry and Uzman for
Res. 94-46   2-17-1994 design of County Highway 14, Plainfield- Naperville Road, between 87th and 104th
                       Street.
Res. 94-71   3-17-1994 Agreement for design and construction engineering services with Willett, Hofmann
                       and Associates, Inc. for intersection of Division Street and Weber Road.
Res. 94-72   3-17-1994 Agreement for design and construction engineering services with Bucher, Willis
                       and Ratliff, Consulting Engineers for slope failure on Briggs Street.
                       Agreement for preliminary engineering services with Rice, Berry and Uzman, a
Res. 94-73   3-17-1994 Division of Hampton, Lenzini and Renwich, Inc for biennial inspection of all
                       local bridges over 20 feet in length.
Res. 94-82   3-17-1994 Intergovernmental agreement creating the Eastern Will County Regional Council.
Res. 94-83   3-17-1994 Intergovernmental agreement creating the I-80 Corridor Planning Council.
Res. 94-191  7-21-1994 An agreement with the State Department of Transportation, and the Atchison,
                       Topeka & Santa Fe Railway Company for the improvement of Brandon Road Crossing.
Res. 94-208  7-21-1994 An intergovernmental agreement with Dupage Township allowing for the appointment
                       of a Deputy County Clerk.
94-324       12-15-    An agreement between the State Department of Transportation and the county for
             1994      the construction of traffic signals.
94-329       12-15-    Intergovernmental agreement between Braidwood and the county to assign
             1994      addresses.
                       Agreement between the county, State Department of Agriculture Division of
95-22        1-19-1995 Natural Resources and the United States Department of Agricultural Soil
                       Conservation Service for the upgrading and digitizing of the soil survey of the
                       county.
95-28        2-16-1995 Entering into an agreement with the state by and through its Department of
                       Transportation for planning services.
95-41        2-16-1995 Approval of final by-laws and amendments to the Eastern Will County Regional
                       Planning Council to execute the amended intergovernmental agreement.
                       Contribution agreement between Commuter Rail Division of the Regional
Res. 95-61   3-16-1995 Transportation Authority and the County Land Use Department for a Transportation
                       Study.
95-79        4-20-1995 An agreement with the State Department of Transportation for the installation of
                       traffic signals and widening of Illinois Route 59.
95-101       5-18-1995 An agreement with the Lakewood Falls Community Association for the improvement
                       to Weber Road at Lakewood Falls Drive.
95-102       5-18-1995 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 14 under the State
                       Highway Code.
95-103       5-18-1995 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 88 under the State
                       Highway Code.
95-104       5-18-1995 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 88 under the State
                       Highway Code.
95-154       7-20-1995 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 88 under the State
                       Highway Code.
                       A resolution adopting principles regarding IDOT’s buffer zone proposal and the
95-126       7-20-1995 creation of an airport area development district and eastern county regional
                       council standards.
95-159       7-20-1995 A resolution authorizing the County Board to adopt the by-laws of the proposed
                       south suburban tollway planning council by-law committee.
                       A resolution authorizing the County Executive to enter into a memorandum of
95-160       7-20-1995 agreement with the state through the Department of Transportation, the county
                       region of the CATS Council of Mayors and the Chicago Area Transportation Study.
95-163       7-20-1995 Intergovernmental agreement between Dupage Township and the county.
95-164       7-20-1995 Intergovernmental agreement between Crete Township and the county.
95-176       8-17-1995 An amendment to a joint agreement between the State Department of Transportation
                       and the county.
95-179       8-17-1995 Intergovernmental grant agreement between the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       and the county.
95-209       9-21-1995 Intergovernmental agreement with Du Page County for right-of-way acquisition on
                       county line improvements.
95-237       10-19-    A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 11 by the county
             1995      under the State Highway Code.
95-240       10-19-    Intergovernmental police assistance agreement with the Village of Channahon.
             1995
96-14        1-18-1996 Intergovernmental agreement between the City of Joliet and the county.
96-14B       1-18-1996 Intergovernmental cooperation in connection by the County, the County Public
                       Building Commission and Kankakee County.
96-31        2-15-1996 An agreement to improve State Route 43, between the state, acting through the
                       Department of Transportation and the county.
96-51        3-21-1996 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 19 by the county
                       under the State Highway Code.
96-52        3-21-1996 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 17 by the county
                       under the State Highway Code.
96-53        3-21-1996 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 44 by the county
                       under the State Highway Code.
96-54        3-21-1996 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 29 by the county
                       under the State Highway Code.
96-55        3-21-1996 A resolution authorizing the improvement of County Highway 28 by the county
                       under the State Highway Code.
96-60        3-21-1996 A resolution authorizing the extension of the delegation agreement between the
                       State Environmental Protection Agency and the county.
96-88        4-18-1996 An intergovernmental agreement concerning north-south tollway extension between
                       the state toll highway authority and the county.
                       A resolution authorizing the County Executive to enter into a memorandum of
96-113       5-16-1996 agreement with the state through the Department of Transportation, the Will
                       Region of the CATS Council of Mayors and the Chicago Area Transportation Study.
                       An ordinance amending Resolution 84-73, as amended by Ordinances 85-174, 86-88,
96-115       5-16-1996 86-111, 87-5, 87-149, 88-166, 89-44, 90-204 and 91-78 adopting the Des Plaines
                       River Valley Enterprise Zone intergovernmental agreement.
96-120       6-6-1996  Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of Romeoville
                       regarding 135th Street between State Route 53 and New Avenue.
96-134       6-20-1996 Agreement with Lakewood Falls Community Association for enforcement of traffic
                       regulations.
96-136       6-20-1996 Authorizing execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant agreement.
96-178       8-15-1996 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Channahon.
96-186       8-15-1996 Collective bargaining agreement between the county and AFSCME Local 2961, AFL-
                       CIO, August, 1996 to November 30, 1997.
96-207       9-19-1996 Intergovernmental agreement form between County Executive/Sheriff and
                       municipalities for Child Sexual Notification Act.
96-209       9-19-1996 Intergovernmental agreement for use and operation of a Juvenile Justice Center.
96-212       9-19-1996 Adopting the County Home Investment Partnership Community Housing Development
                       Agreement.
96-213       9-19-1996 Intergovernmental agreement with Lockport Township Fire and Ambulance District.
96-215       9-19-1996 Amendment/extension of agreement for planning services between the county and
                       the state.
96-236       11-21-    Agreements for engineering services to analyze certain FEMA designated flood
             1996      areas in the country.
96-277       11-21-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
             1996      Bolingbrook for sidewalk construction.
96-278       11-21-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
             1996      Joliet for sidewalk construction.
96-279       11-21-    Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
             1996      Park Forest for sidewalk and bike path construction.
97-12        1-16-1997 Adopting the County Homer Investment Partnership Community Housing Development
                       Organization Agreement.
97-19        2-20-1997 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Monee for
                       sidewalk construction.
97-20        2-20-1997 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Mokena for
                       sidewalk construction.
97-32        2-20-1997 Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Channahon for road improvements.
97-33        2-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering with Teng &
                       Associates.
97-35        2-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering with
                       McDonough Associates, Inc.
97-36        2-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering with Casler,
                       Houser & Hutchinson, Inc.
97-52        3-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering for a bridge
                       in Florence Road District.
97-53        3-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering services
                       agreement with County Highway 16.
97-54        3-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition
                       services.
97-56        3-20-1997 Approval of professional services agreement for design engineering for bridge in
                       Homer Road District.
97-57        3-20-1997 Approving C.D.T. Host County agreement.
97-61        3-20-1997 Authorizing Ameritech ISDN prime service agreement and confirming service order
                       for various county locations.
                       Authorizing a memorandum of agreement by and between the county and BASF
97-69        4-17-1997 Corporation in connection with the issuance of industrial revenue bonds and
                       related matters.
97-57        4-17-1997 Approving C.D.T. Host County Agreement.
97-83        4-17-1997 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Joliet for school flash lights.
97-98        5-15-1997 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Bolingbrook for sidewalk construction.
97-99        5-15-1997 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       New Lenox for sidewalk construction.
97-100       5-15-1997 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       New Lenox for sidewalk construction.
97-102       5-15-1997 Authorizing a professional services agreement for design engineering.
                       Authorizing a memorandum of agreement with the state through the Department of
97-115       5-15-1997 Transportation, the Will Region of the CATS Council of Mayors and the Chicago
                       Area Transportation Study.
97-105       6-19-1997 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county, City of Joliet and
                       County Public Building Commission for adult detention facility.
97-123       6-19-1997 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Joliet
                       Arsenal Development Authority for development of two industrial parks.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county, the City of Crest
97-130       6-19-1997 Hill and Lockport Fire Protection District for the construction of an opticon
                       system.
97-132       6-19-1997 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county, State Department of
                       Transportation and United States federal government for various county highways.
97-152       6-19-1997 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement concerning licenses fees of the county
                       landfill.
97-154       7-17-1997 Authorizing agreement with Village of New Lenox for data distribution relating
                       to geographic information system.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
97-155       7-17-1997 Romeoville for cooperation in performing inspections and related code and
                       enforcement services.
97-181       8-21-1997 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Romeoville for sidewalk construction.
97-188       8-21-1997 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and State Department
                       of Nuclear Safety.
98-191       8-21-1997 Renewing intergovernmental agreement with DuPage County for services of County
                       Clerk’s office.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of Tinley
97-213       9-18-1997 Park for design and construction of 191st Street, County Highway 84 between 80th
                       Avenue and Harlem Avenue.
97-250       10-16-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement for county-wide radio system.
             1997
97-268       11-20-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Lockport Fire
             1997      Protection District.
97-269       11-20-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
             1997      Plainfield for street light construction.
97-270       11-20-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
             1997      Plainfield for sidewalk construction.
97-271       11-20-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
             1997      Plainfield for street light construction.
97-272       11-20-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Franklin Road
             1997      District for snow removal and grass cutting.
97-296       12-18-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and City of Joliet
             1997      for sidewalk construction.
98-21        2-19-1998 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Indian Prairie
                       Community Unit School District No. 204 and DuPage County.
98-35        2-19-1998 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
                       Plainfield for sidewalk construction.
98-47        2-19-1998 Authorizing agreement with City of Naperville regarding a floodplain study along
                       Leverenz Road near Naperville.
98-65        3-19-1998 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and City of Lockport
                       for sidewalk construction.
98-66        3-19-1998 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
                       Bollingbrook for traffic signals.
98-93        3-19-1998 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Joliet Township
                       regarding the County Children Advocacy Center.
98-214       8-20-1998 Authorizing agreement between the county and the Village of Channahon for bike
                       path construction.
98-365       11-19-    Authorizing agreement between the county and the City of Naperville for the
             1998      operation of a household hazardous waste collection facility.
98-363       11-19-    Authorizing agreement between the Joliet Arsenal Development Authority and the
             1998      county.
98-378       12-17-    Authorizing approval of agreement between the county and the City of Joliet.
             1998
                       Authorizing an agreement between the county and Waste Management Industrial
99-146       4-15-1999 Services to provide household hazardous waste/agricultural waste collection
                       services.
99-151       4-15-1999 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and Frankfort Fire
                       Protection District for Sheriff’s sub-station.
99-202       5-20-1999 Authorizing approval of an agreement between the county and Union Pacific
                       Railroad Company.
99-204       5-20-1999 Authorizing approval of an agreement between the county and Union Pacific
                       Railroad Company.
99-206       5-20-1999 Authorizing approval of an agreement between the county and Union Pacific
                       Railroad Company.
99-209       5-20-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement between the county and Envirogen,
                       Inc.
99-215       5-20-1999 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Rockdale for use of 800 MHZ radio system.
Res. 99-218  6-17-1999 Authorizing an agreement between the county and the Village of Channahon for
                       Geographical Information System (GIS) Services.
Res. 99-248  6-17-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement between the county and Envirogen,
                       Inc.
                       Authorizing an agreement with the state through the Department of
Res. 99-252  6-17-1999 Transportation, the Will Region of the CATS Council of Mayors and the Chicago
                       Area Transportation Study.
Res. 99-254  6-17-1999 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Manhattan for use of 800 MHz radio system.
Res. 99-267  7-15-1999 Authorizing renewal of long distance telephone service agreement with AT&T.
Res. 99-288  7-15-1999 Radio system intergovernmental agreement between the county and the state
                       police.
Res. 99-312  8-19-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 99-314  8-19-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 99-316  8-19-1999 Authorizing an agreement with Tire Grinders Transporters, Inc. for the
                       performance of tire collection and processing services.
Res. 99-317  8-19-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement between the county and Aerometric.
Res. 99-318  8-19-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement between the county and Patrick
                       Engineering.
Res. 99-319  8-19-1999 Authorizing the execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant agreement.
Res. 99-341  9-16-1999 Authorizing a pay phone service agreement with fixed compensation with
                       Ameritech.
Res. 99-358  9-16-1999 Authorizing a professional services agreement between the county and Envirogen.
Res. 99-375  10-21-    Authorizing an Ameritech ISDN prime service agreement and confirmation of
             1999      service order.
Res. 99-401  10-21-    Authorizing a professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition
             1999      services.
Res. 99-403  10-21-    Authorizing a professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition
             1999      services.
Res. 99-405  10-21-    Authorizing a professional services agreement for right-of-way acquisition
             1999      services.
Res. 99-408  10-21-    Authorizing a professional services/ supplemental agreement for bridge design
             1999      engineer.
Res. 99-411  10-21-    Authorizing a professional services agreement for design engineering.
             1999
Res. 99-413  10-21-    Authorizing a professional services agreement for engineering.
             1999
Res. 99-426  11-18-    Authorizing a software maintenance agreement with New World Systems.
             1999
Res. 99-429  11-18-    Authorizing an agreement of intent to abate property taxes for Medichem
             1999      Research, Inc.
Res. 99-433  11-18-    Authorizing an agreement of intent to abate property taxes for Dunkin’ Donuts.
             1999
Res. 99-434  11-18-    Professional services agreement with the county Chamber/CED-2000.
             1999
Res. 99-441  11-18-    Authorizing agreements with Lucent Technologies to provide station/trunk ports
             1999      at the courthouse.
Res. 99-443  11-18-    Authorizing professional services agreement for design engineering.
             1999
             12-16-    Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the City of Naperville and
Res. 99-475  1999      the county to provide partial funding for a household hazardous waste collection
                       facility.
Res. 99-478  12-16-    Authorizing a professional services agreement with American Consulting Engineers
             1999      for design engineering.
Res. 99-480  12-16-    Authorizing a professional services agreement with American Consulting Engineers
             1999      for design engineering.
Res. 99-484  12-16-    Authorizing an agreement between the State Department of Transportation and the
             1999      county for the installation of traffic signals at 111th Street.
Res. 99-486  12-16-    Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Joliet for snow
             1999      removal on County Highway 3.
Res. 99-498  12-16-    Authorizing a HOME grant agreement with the Village of Park Forest in support of
             1999      housing rehabilitation activities.
Res. 99-499  12-16-    Authorizing a grant agreement with the County Habitat for Humanity in support of
             1999      continued growth.
Res. 99-500  12-16-    Authorizing a contractual agreement with the Housing Authority of Joliet to
             1999      provide the housing administration for the program.
Res. 00-01   1-20-2000 Authorizing an agreement with Clarion Associates for consulting services for the
                       preparation of a draft land resource management plan update.
Res. 00-02   1-20-2000 Authorizing a memorandum of agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Frankfort for the coordination of geographic information system (GIS) services.
Res. 00-10   1-20-2000 Authorizing an agreement of intent to abate property taxes for Bolingbrook
                       Associates, for the benefit of Sprint PCS.
Res. 00-17   1-20-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Naperville for interim intersection improvements.
                       Authorizing an agreement between the county and the State Department of
Res. 00-30   1-20-2000 Transportation for the funding of the preliminary engineering (Phase I) study of
                       a high rise bridge connecting Caton Farm Road and Bruce Road.
                       Authorizing an agreement between the county and the State Department of
Res. 00-31   1-20-2000 Transportation for the funding of the construction of a salt dome and storage
                       facility.
Res. 00-43   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Rice, Berry and Uzman for
                       design engineering.
Res. 00-45   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Rice, Berry and Uzman for
                       design engineering.
Res. 00-47   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Casler, Houser and
                       Hutchinson, Inc. for design engineering.
Res. 00-49   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Casler, Houser and
                       Hutchinson, Inc. for design engineering.
Res. 00-51   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann and
                       Associates, Inc. for design engineering.
Res. 00-53   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann and
                       Associates, Inc. for design engineering.
Res. 00-57   1-20-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Casler, Houser and
                       Hutchinson, Inc. for design engineering.
Res. 00-79   2-17-2000 Authorizing a professional services agreement with Kimley-Horn and Associates,
                       Inc. for design engineering.
                       Authorizing a grant agreement between the State Department of Commerce and
Res. 00-95   2-17-2000 Community Affairs and the county for Drug Court Coordinator position for the
                       State Attorney’s office.
Res. 00-100  3-16-2000 Authorizing a maintenance agreement with the Crete F-Men for funding.
                       Amending the intergovernmental agreement among the county, the City of Lockport
Res. 00-103  3-16-2000 and the Village of Rockdale to establish a joint enterprise zone known as the
                       Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone.
Res. 00-118  3-16-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Bolingbrook for the improvement of County Highway 11 (Joliet-Naperville Road).
Res. 00-122  3-16-2000 Authorizing intergovernmental agreements between the county and various county
                       municipalities for the provision of an animal control program.
Res. 00-125  3-16-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide Bolingbrook Park District
                       access to the county radio system.
                       Authorizing an assignment of communication system agreement between the county
Res. 00-126  3-16-2000 and Com-Net Ericsson for the transfer of interests in the system purchase
                       contract for the county-wide radio system.
Res. 00-135  4-20-2000 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement between the
                       county and Will County RE: CLOW Airport.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreements to provide
Res. 00-148  4-20-2000 non-county agencies on the county radio system access to maintenance and repair
                       of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 00-168  4-20-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Forest
                       Preserve District of the county for bike and pedestrian trial construction.
Res. 00-171  4-20-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Romeoville for the improvement of County Highway 11 (Joliet-Naperville Road).
Res. 00-173  4-20-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Homer
                       Community Consolidated School District 33C.
Res. 00-178  4-20-2000 Authorizing the execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant supplemental agreement.
Res. 00-182  4-20-2000 Authorizing County Executive to execute EDACS FX agreement with Com-Net
                       Ericsson.
Res. 00-186  5-18-2000 Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement for consulting services
                       for the preparation of a draft Land Resource Management Plan update.
Res. 00-224  5-18-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Forest
                       Preserve District of the county for the extension of 95th Street.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
Res. 00-252  6-15-2000 provide Forest Preserve District of the county access to the county radio
                       system.
Res. 00-253  6-15-2000 Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
                       provide Joliet Township access to the county radio system.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute memorandum of agreements between the
Res. 00-258  6-15-2000 county and the City of Naperville, the Village of Beecher, the Village of
                       Romeoville, and the City of Lockport for geographic information systems.
                       Correcting a scrivener’s error in Res. 00-252 authorizing County Executive to
Res. 00-301  7-20-2000 execute an intergovernmental agreement to provide Forest Preserve District
                       access to county radio system.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
Res. 00-302  7-20-2000 provide County Forest Preserve access to maintenance and repair of
                       communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 00-325  8-17-2000 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 00-327  8-17-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Mokena.
Res. 00-333  8-17-2000 Renewing intergovernmental agreement with DuPage Township.
Res. 00-335  8-17-2000 Authorizing County Executive to execute a contract agreement for services with
                       the State Liquor Control Commission.
Res. 00-330  9-21-2000 Authorizing County Executive to execute a host agreement between the county and
                       C.D.T. Landfill Corporation.
Res. 00-354  9-21-2000 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Township
                       of Lockport.
Res. 00-360  9-21-2000 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement and the expenditure of motor fuel tax funds.
Res. 00-367  9-21-2000 Authorizing the execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant agreement.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
Res. 00-370  9-21-2000 provide the Village of Manhattan access to maintenance and repair of
                       communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 00-373  9-21-2000 Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement with the
                       City of Joliet.
Res. 00-410  10-19-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2000      agreement.
Res. 00-414  10-19-    Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
             2000      Lockport for Division Street at Farrell Road improvement construction.
Res. 00-426  11-16-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement between the
             2000      county and the Forest Preserve District of the county.
             11-16-    Authorizing the execution of a memorandum of agreement by and between the county
Res. 00-431  2000      and the Timbers of Shorewood, LLC and the Timbers of Shorewood A.L., LLC in
                       connection with the issuance of bonds and related matters.
Res. 00-432  11-16-    Professional services agreement with the County Chamber/CED.
             2000
Res. 00-458  11-16-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2000      agreement.
Res. 00-460  11-16-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2000      agreement.
Res. 00-462  11-16-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2000      agreement.
Res. 00-465  11-16-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2000      agreement.
Res. 00-466  11-16-    Authorizing the County Executive to execute the first amendment to the agreement
             2000      between the county and Aero-Metric, Inc. for professional services.
Res. 00-478  11-16-    Authorizing an agreement between the county and CenterPoint Intermodal, LLC, for
             2000      the CenterPoint Deer Run Intermodal and Industrial Park Project.
Res. 01-29   1-18-2001 Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute a professional
                       services agreement between the County of Will and Envirogen Inc.
                       Authorizing the execution and delivery of an amended and restated trust
Res. 01-15   2-15-2001 indenture, a financing agreement, a regulatory agreement, an assignment and
                       intercreditor agreement and certain other agreements and instruments and related
                       matters.
Res. 01-53   2-15-2001 Authorizing the execution of agreement with the State Toll Highway Authority.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement between
Res. 01-55   2-15-2001 the county and Village of Plainfield for the provision of an animal control
                       program.
Res. 01-81   3-15-2001 Authorizing the execution of Star Grant Agreement with State Emergency
                       Management Agency.
Res. 01-98   4-19-2001 Authorizing the County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement
                       between the county and the Village of Bolingbrook.
Res. 01-149  4-19-2001 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 01-150  4-19-2001 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 01-154  4-19-2001 Authorizing the intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village
                       of Mokena.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute the First Amendment to an agreement
Res. 01-156  4-19-2001 between the county and Onyx Environmental Services, LLC to provide household
                       hazardous waste/agricultural waste collection services.
Res. 01-157  4-19-2001 Authorizing the execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant supplemental agreement.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreements between the
Res. 01-160  4-19-2001 county and the Village of Symerton for the provision of an animal control
                       program.
Res. 01-165  4-19-2001 Authorizing County Executive to execute EDACS FX agreement with Com-Net
                       Ericsson.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement to provide
Res. 01-168  4-19-2001 the Village of Rockville maintenance and repair of communications equipment
                       through the radio lab of the county.
                       Authorizing the execution of the first amendment to the agreement for the
Res. 01-184  5-17-2001 provision of professional services between the county and Envirogen (see Res.
                       99-248).
                       Authorizing the execution of the first amendment to the agreement for the
Res. 01-185  5-17-2001 provision of professional services between the county and Prairie Analytical
                       Systems, Inc.
Res. 01-200  5-17-2001 Approving State Department of Transportation- county joint agreement.
Res. 01-202  5-17-2001 Approving State Department of Transportation- county joint agreement.
Res. 01-206  5-17-2001 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
                       and the Village of Homer Glen for the provisions of an animal control program.
Res. 01-211A 5-17-2001 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
                       and the Village of Homer Glen for law enforcement services.
Res. 01-211B 5-17-2001 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
                       and the Village of Homer Glen for land use services.
                       Authorizing approval of a State Department of Commerce and Community Affairs -
Res. 01-251  6-21-2001 county joint agreement for the installation of pedestrian signals at a crossing
                       on Gougar Road.
Res. 01-282  7-19-2001 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
                       and the Village of Homer Glen for GIS.
Res. 01-283  7-19-2001 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
                       and the Village of Peotone concerning the coordination of GIS services.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Forest
Res. 01-305  7-19-2001 Preserve District of the county pertaining to the construction catch basin and
                       storm sewer.
                       Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement concerning the
Res. 01-260  8-16-2001 reciprocal report of criminal offenses committed by students between the Joliet
                       Township Board of Education, City of Joliet City Council and the County Board.
                       Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to provide the
Res. 01-385  9-20-2001 Village of Manhattan maintenance and repair of communications equipment through
                       the radio lab of the county.
                       Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to provide the
Res. 01-386  9-20-2001 Village of Elwood maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the
                       radio lab of the county.
                       Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county,
Res. 01-389  9-20-2001 the Village of Bolingbrook and the City of Naperville, relative to the 95th
                       Street extension.
Res. 01-415  10-18-    Joint agreement between the county and the State Department of Transportation.
             2001
             10-18-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
Res. 01-422  2001      and the Village of Bolingbrook for the improvement of Weber Road and 115th
                       Street intersection.
Res. 01-424  10-18-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of Shorewood for
             2001      the installation of pedestrian signals and sidewalks.
Res. 01-428  10-18-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
             2001      and the Village of Crete for Brownfields Redevelopment grant monies.
             10-18-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to provide the
Res. 01-435  2001      Forest Preserve District of the county maintenance and repair of communications
                       equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 01-468  11-15-    Authorizing the execution of an agreement between the county and the State
             2001      Department of Natural Resources for the County Flood Mitigation Project.
Res. 01-478  11-15-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation joint agreement.
             2001
Res. 01-482  11-15-    Authorizing the execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
             2001      intergovernmental grant agreement.
Res. 01-510  12-20-    Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
             2001      Bolingbrook for the improvements of Veterans Parkway and Lily Cache Lane.
             12-20-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 01-519  2001      agreement for the improvement of a structure carrying 111th Street over DuPage
                       River.
Res. 01-520  12-20-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2001      agreement.
             12-20-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Natural Resources - county joint
Res. 01-532  2001      agreement in order to ensure safety to the motoring public and the pedestrians
                       crossing County Highway 74 at Nelson Road.
Res. 01-560  12-20-    Agreement with the State Commerce Commission to hear the BNSF Railroad at
             2001      Arsenal Road at grade crossing for the grade separation of the highway.
Res. 01-561  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Forest Preserve District
             2001      of the county for construction of pedestrian bike path.
Res. 02-12   1-17-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Romeoville for sidewalk construction.
Res. 02-35   2-21-2002 Authorizing the execution of a contract with People’s Energy Services for
                       providing natural gas to county facilities.
Res. 02-71   2-21-2002 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of Joliet for the
                       Black Road and I-55 East Frontage Road intersection.
Res. 02-80   2-21-2002 Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with State Emergency Management
                       Agency.
Res. 02-87   2-21-2002 Intergovernmental agreement regarding the State Department of Revenue per capita
                       tax distributions between the county and the Village of Homer Glen.
Res. 02-123  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Cedar Road over Spring Creek.
Res. 02-124  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Cedar Road over Spring Creek.
                       State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
Res. 02-125  3-21-2002 of the structure carrying Indiana Avenue over Trim Creek and Cedar Road over
                       Spring Creek.
Res. 02-126  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Indiana Avenue over Trim Creek.
Res. 02-127  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Harlem Avenue over Black Walnut Creek.
Res. 02-128  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Harlem Avenue over Black Walnut Creek.
Res. 02-129  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Cedar Road over Jackson Creek and Spring Creek.
Res. 02-130  3-21-2002 State Department of Transportation - county joint agreement for the improvement
                       of the structure carrying Cedar Road over Jackson Creek.
Res. 02-173  4-18-2002 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Forest Preserve District
                       of the county for construction of pedestrian crossing.
Res. 02-180  4-18-2002 Grant agreement with State Department of Public Health.
Res. 02-211  5-16-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Romeoville for street light construction.
Res. 02-214  5-16-2002 Authorizing the negotiation and execution of a project agreement and Forest Road
                       agreement with the United States Forest Service.
Res. 02-215  5-16-2002 Authorizing an agreement with the State Department of Transportation for
                       construction and funding of roads for the CenterPoint Development.
Res. 02-216  5-16-2002 Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Elwood for right of entry
                       easement.
Res. 02-224  5-16-2002 Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an intergovernmental agreement with
                       the City of Joliet.
Res. 02-227  5-16-2002 Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an intergovernmental agreement with
                       the City of Joliet for the use of county parking facilities.
Res. 02-267  6-20-2002 Agreement with CenterPoint Intermodel LLC for funding of Phase I engineering
                       services.
Res. 02-287  6-20-2002 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Joliet Park District of
                       the county for construction of a new main entrance to Wedgewood Golf Course.
Res. 02-292  6-20-2002 Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement for monies to facilitate a
                       “Functional Family Therapy” program.
Res. 02-295  6-20-2002 Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement between the county and the
                       County - MAP Chapter 123.
Res. 02-322  7-18-2002 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 02-325  7-18-2002 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 02-330  7-18-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Tinley Park for tree placement.
Res. 02-332  7-18-2002 Agreement between the county and G.B. Illinois 1, LLC for installation of
                       traffic signals at the Nelson Road intersection.
Res. 02-335  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Godley for animal control.
Res. 02-336  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Wilmington for animal control.
Res. 02-337  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Homer Glen for animal control.
Res. 02-338  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of New
                       Lenox for animal control.
Res. 02-339  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Symerton for animal control.
Res. 02-340  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Braidwood for animal control.
Res. 02-341  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Plainfield for animal control.
Res. 02-342  7-18-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Manhattan for animal control.
Res. 02-372  8-15-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Plainfield for construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 02-373  8-15-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Lockport for construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 02-375  8-15-2002 Authorizing execution of a linkage agreement with HEART Organization.
Res. 02-377  8-15-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Elwood for animal control.
Res. 02-380  8-15-2002 Authorizing execution of AIA agreement with Healy, Snyder, Bender & Associates,
                       Inc. for architectural services.
Res. 02-382  8-15-2002 Authorizing execution of an agreement with the City of Joliet for juror parking
                       at the Ottawa Street Parking Deck and on-street parking around the courthouse.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
Res. 02-403  9-19-2002 Joliet for improvement of County Highway 5 (Caton Farm Road) at Illinois Route
                       59.
Res. 02-404  9-19-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Joliet for the maintenance of traffic signals.
Res. 02-405  9-19-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Frankfort for construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 02-406  9-19-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Tinley Park for construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 02-407  9-19-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Romeoville for construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 02-408  9-19-2002 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       New Lenox for construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 02-409  9-19-2002 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county agreement
                       of understanding for maintenance.
Res. 02-410  9-19-2002 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county joint
                       agreement for the improvement of Baseline Road.
Res. 02-413  9-19-2002 Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for corridor traffic
                       study.
Res. 02-415  9-19-2002 Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design
                       engineering.
Res. 02-417  9-19-2002 Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for design
                       engineering.
Res. 02-428  9-19-2002 Authorizing execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant agreement.
Res. 02-433  9-19-2002 Authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Elwood for an enterprise zone.
Res. 02-471  10-17-    Agreement between the county and Diocese of Joliet for installing and
             2002      maintaining concrete storm sewer.
Res. 02-472  10-17-    Authorizing approval of a professional services supplemental agreement for
             2002      design engineering.
Res. 02-474  10-17-    Authorizing approval of a professional services agreement for Phase I
             2002      preliminary engineering.
             10-17-    Authorizing negotiation and execution of an intergovernmental agreement between
Res. 02-477  2002      the City of Naperville and the county to provide partial funding for a household
                       hazardous waste collection facility.
             10-17-    Authorizing execution of a second amendment to an agreement between the county
Res. 02-478  2002      and Onyx Environmental Service, LLC to provide household hazardous waste/
                       agricultural waste collection services.
Res. 02-482  10-17-    Authorizing renewal of the agreement with the County Local Development Company.
             2002
Res. 02-514  11-21-    Authorizing application for bond volume cap, issuance of bonds and execution of
             2002      intergovernmental agreement with the State Housing Development Authority.
Res. 02-517  11-21-    Professional services agreement with the County Chamber/CED.
             2002
Res. 02-532  11-21-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
             2002      Joliet for improvement of County Highway 5 (Caton Farm Road) at Drauden Road.
Res. 02-533  11-21-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
             2002      New Lenox for improvement of County Highway 64 (Francis Road) over Marley Creek.
Res. 02-535  11-21-    Intergovernmental assignment agreement with the Village of Elwood.
             2002
Res. 03-19   1-16-2003 Authorizing execution of a consultant and lobbyist agreement with William F.
                       Mahar.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide Joliet Township
Res. 03-23   1-16-2003 maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the
                       county.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of
Res. 03-24   1-16-2003 Rockdale maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio
                       lab of the county.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of
Res. 03-25   1-16-2003 Elwood maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab
                       of the county.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of
Res. 03-26   1-16-2003 Manhattan maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio
                       lab of the county.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide the Forest
Res. 03-27   1-16-2003 Preserve District maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the
                       radio lab of the county.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide the Bolingbrook
Res. 03-28   1-16-2003 Park District maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the
                       radio lab of the county.
Res. 03-71   2-20-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Bolingbrook for the improvement of County Highway 66 (111th Street).
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
Res. 03-72   2-20-2003 University Park for the improvement of County Highway 6 (Manhattan-Monee Road)
                       at Central Avenue.
Res. 03-74   2-20-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Joliet for construction of sidewalk, bike path, street lights and crosswalks.
Res. 03-75   2-20-2003 Authorizing execution of a membership agreement between JULIE, Inc., and the
                       Department of Highways.
Res. 03-80   2-20-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Homer
                       Township Road District for the maintenance of traffic signals.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide the County
Res. 03-90   2-20-2003 Emergency Telephone System Board maintenance and repair of communications
                       equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 03-113  3-20-2003 Authorizing approval of intergovernmental agreement between the county and the
                       City of Joliet for snow removal.
                       Authorizing execution of an agreement providing for the establishment of the
Res. 03-135  3-20-2003 South Suburban Airport Coalition regarding the development of a regional airport
                       in the county.
Res. 03-163  4-17-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
                       construction engineering.
Res. 03-166  4-17-2003 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 03-167  4-17-2003 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 03-169  4-17-2003 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental Police Mental Health Assistance
                       Agreement.
Res. 03-221  5-15-2003 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation – county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 03-223  5-15-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Naperville for the improvement of County Highway 66 (111th Street).
Res. 03-228  5-15-2003 Authorizing execution of the State Department of Nuclear Safety
                       intergovernmental grant supplemental agreement.
                       Authorizing execution of the state county nursing facility alternate
Res. 03-256  6-19-2003 reimbursement intergovernmental agreement between the county and the State
                       Department of Public Aid.
Res. 03-262  6-19-2003 Authorizing agreement between the county and the Village of Frankfort for a
                       welcome sign on County Highway 74 (Laraway Road).
                       Authorizing agreement between the county, Homer Road District and Menard, Inc.,
Res. 03-263  6-19-2003 for the installation of traffic signals at County Highway 16 (Bell Road) and
                       Glengary Drive.
Res. 03-264  6-19-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
                       Shorewood for construction and installation of improvements.
                       Authorizing execution of agreement for intersection improvements at Laraway Road
Res. 03-265  6-19-2003 and 116th Avenue between the County Department of Highways, Gander Development,
                       LLC, Flaherty Builders, Inc. and Frankfort School District 157C.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of
Res. 03-267  6-19-2003 Romeoville for the installation of traffic signals at County Highway 88 (Weber
                       Road) and Grand Haven Circle/Gaskin Drive.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
Res. 03-268  6-19-2003 Romeoville for the installation of traffic signals at County Highway 88 (Weber
                       Road) and Adler Creek Drive.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of
Res. 03-269  6-19-2003 Romeoville for the installation of traffic signals at County Highway 88 (Weber
                       Road) and Windham Parkway/Remington Boulevard.
                       Authorizing agreement between the county and the State Department of
Res. 03-270  6-19-2003 Transportation for the improvement of County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) at U.S.
                       Route 45.
                       Authorizing execution of a grant agreement with the State Emergency Management
Res. 03-281  6-19-2003 Agency to expand and improve upon the Weapons of Mass Destruction annex to the
                       County Emergency Operations Plan.
Res. 03-288  6-19-2003 Authorizing execution of the second amended intergovernmental agreement between
                       the county and the Joliet Arsenal Development Authority.
Res. 03-292  6-19-2003 Authorizing the construction of the County Community Health Center by the County
                       Board of Health on vacant property owned by the county.
                       Authorizing expenditure of county highway tax funds and payment to the State
Res. 271-01  6-19-2003 Department of Transportation for improvements to the intersection of U.S. Route
                       45 and County Highway 74 (Laraway Road).
Res. 03-297  7-17-2003 Authorizing execution of grant agreement with State Department of Commerce and
                       Economic Opportunity for Emco Building improvements.
Res. 03-321  7-17-2003 Authorizing execution of maintenance and liability agreement with METRA.
Res. 03-322  7-17-2003 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with Village of Elwood for
                       installation of improvements.
Res. 03-325  7-17-2003 Authorizing execution of agreement for access onto South Hickory Creek Drive
                       with Village of Mokena and 80 West, LLC.
Res. 03-326  7-17-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 03-328  7-17-2003 Authorizing approval joint agreement with State DOT for public road
                       improvements.
Res. 03-330  7-17-2003 Authorizing approval of joint agreement with State Department of Transportation
                       for public road improvements.
Res. 03-332  7-17-2003 Authorizing approval of joint agreement with State Department of Transportation
                       for public road improvements.
Res. 03-365  8-21-2003 Authorizing execution of interlocal agreement with Village of Homer Glen for
                       construction of appurtenance work.
Res. 03-366  8-21-2003 Authorizing execution of agreement with Peotone Chamber of Commerce for
                       maintenance and liability of village welcome sign.
Res. 03-367  8-21-2003 Authorizing execution of agreement with E.M.B. Shorewood, LLC for traffic signal
                       maintenance and energy.
Res. 03-369  8-21-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with Village of Bolingbrook for public
                       highway improvements at County Highway 88 and 111th Street.
Res. 03-371  8-21-2003 Authorizing approval of joint agreement with State Department of Transportation
                       for public highway improvements.
Res. 03-373  8-21-2003 Authorizing execution of agreement with State Department of Transportation for
                       construction and funding of roads for CenterPoint development.
Res. 03-405  9-18-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 03-407  9-18-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 03-409  9-18-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 03-411  9-18-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 03-413  9-18-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 03-415  9-18-2003 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for traffic signal
                       interconnect.
Res. 03-417  9-18-2003 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with the City of Crest Hill for
                       installation of traffic signals at County Highway 88 and Ryan Drive.
Res. 03-421  9-18-2003 Authorizing negotiation and execution of amended agreement with CenterPoint
                       Properties.
Res. 03-455  10-16-    Authorizing execution of consent to assignment of agreement of intent to abate
             2003      property taxes for iFulfillment, Inc.
Res. 03-459  10-16-    Authorizing approval of joint agreement with State Department of Transportation
             2003      for public highway improvements.
Res. 03-466  10-16-    Authorizing execution of IEMA intergovernmental grant agreement.
             2003
             11-20-    Authorizing execution of Amendment No. 1 to State County Nursing Facility
Res. 03-484  2003      Alternative Reimbursement intergovernmental agreement with State Department of
                       Public Aid.
Res. 03-508  11-20-    Authorizing application for bond volume cap, issuance of bonds and execution of
             2003      intergovernmental authority agreement with State Housing Authority.
Res. 03-518  11-20-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement for maintenance and energy costs of
             2003      traffic signals with Romeoville and Carillon Adult Master Association.
Res. 03-519  11-20-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
             2003      engineering.
Res. 03-521  11-20-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
             2003
Res. 03-522  11-20-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
             2003      engineering.
Res. 03-530  11-20-    Authorizing execution of Northeastern Illinois Regional Emergency Management
             2003      Mutual Aid Agreement.
Res. 03-538  11-20-    Authorizing execution of Workforce Investment Board youth mapping project
             2003      contract with University of Chicago, Chapin Hall Center for Children.
Res. 03-540  11-20-    Authorizing execution of second amendment to host agreement with Waste
             2003      Management of Illinois, Inc.
Res. 03-531  12-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
             2003      construction engineering.
Res. 03-533  12-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for design
             2003      engineering.
Res. 03-555  12-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
             2003      of-way acquisition services.
Res. 03-557  12-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for design
             2003      engineering.
Res. 03-559  12-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
             2003      construction engineering.
Res. 03-561  12-18-    Authorizing approval of joint agreement with State Department of Transportation
             2003      for public highway improvements.
Res. 03-563  12-18-    Authorizing execution of agreement with Lewis University for maintenance and
             2003      liability of destination signs on County Highways 36 and 88.
Res. 03-564  12-18-    Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for public highway
             2003      improvements with City of Lockport.
Res. 03-570  12-18-    Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for traffic study with
             2003      Village of New Lenox.
Res. 03-572  12-18-    Authorizing execution of traffic enforcement agreement with Dawnwood Homeowners’
             2003      Association.
Res. 03-579  12-18-    Authorizing execution of consultant and lobbyist agreement with William F.
             2003      Mahar.
Res. 03-580  12-18-    Authorizing execution of professional services agreement with the County
             2003      Chamber/CED.
Res. 04-02   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of data license intergovernmental agreements with fire
                       districts.
Res. 04-13   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of hazard mitigation planning grant agreement with IEMA.
Res. 04-25   1-15-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for addition design
                       engineering.
Res. 04-30   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of interim intergovernmental agreement for law enforcement
                       services with Village of Homer Glen.
Res. 04-35   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment for Village of Elmwood.
Res. 04-36   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment for Village of Rockdale.
Res. 04-37   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment for Village of Manhattan.
Res. 04-38   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment for Joliet Township.
Res. 04-39   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment for Bolingbrook Park District.
Res. 04-40   1-15-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to provide maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment for Forest Preserve District.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for road improvements with
Res. 04-68   2-19-2004 Plainfield Township Road District, Village of Plainfield and Plainfield Township
                       Park District.
Res. 04-69   2-19-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for maintenance and energy
                       costs of traffic signals with Village of Romeoville.
Res. 04-83   2-19-2004 Amending Res. 03-508.
Res. 04-104  3-18-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-106  3-18-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-108  3-18-2004 Authorizing execution of agreement for maintenance and liability of trees within
                       right-of-way on County Highway 84 with Village of Mokena.
Res. 04-109  3-18-2004 Authorizing execution of agreement for maintenance and liability of traffic
                       ordinance signs on various county highways with Village of New Lenox.
Res. 04-112  3-18-2004 Approving intergovernmental agreement regarding end use fees for Prairie View
                       recycling and disposal facility with Forest Preserve District.
Res. 04-114  3-18-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement to construct village
                       welcome signs with Village of Homer Glen.
Res. 04-115  3-18-2004 Authorizing Ruettiger, Tonelli & Associates, Inc. to sublet design engineering
                       services at intersection of Goodenow and Kedzie Avenues.
Res. 04-116  3-18-2004 Authorizing Ruettiger, Tonelli & Associates, Inc. to sublet design engineering
                       services at intersection of Manhattan-Monee Road and 88th Avenue.
Res. 04-117  3-18-2004 Authorizing Ruettiger, Tonelli & Associates, Inc. to sublet design engineering
                       services for improvements for Center Road.
                       Authorizing negotiation of intergovernmental agreement for renovation of
Res. 04-123  3-18-2004 sheriff’s substation in Crete with the County Public Building Commission and the
                       County Sheriff’s Department.
Res. 04-126  3-18-2004 Authorizing execution of interagency agreement for emergency telephone system
                       board maintenance and repair of communications equipment through radio lab.
Res. 04-134  4-15-2004 Authorizing negotiation and execution of agreement of intent to abate property
                       taxes for Wilton Industries, Inc.
Res. 04-145  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for engineering.
Res. 04-147  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for engineering.
Res. 04-149  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of supplemental professional services agreement for design
                       engineering.
Res. 04-151  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-153  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of joint agreement for reconstruction of intersection of
                       County Highways 88 and 36 with IDOT.
Res. 04-154  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-156  4-15-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for construction
                       engineering.
Res. 04-159  4-15-2004 Intergovernmental agreement for operation of household hazardous waste
                       collection with City of Naperville.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for expansion of Crete
Res. 04-167  4-15-2004 Sheriff’s substation with the County Public Building Commission and the County
                       Sheriff’s Department.
Res. 04-193  5-20-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-195  5-20-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
                       acquisition services.
Res. 04-197  5-20-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for right-of-way
                       acquisition services.
Res. 04-199  5-20-2004 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for destination sign with
                       City of Crest Hill.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for installation of
Res. 04-200  5-20-2004 emergency vehicle preemption system with Crete Township Fire Protection
                       District.
Res. 04-203  5-20-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for design
                       engineering.
Res. 04-207  5-20-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-208  5-20-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement for design engineering.
Res. 04-238  6-17-2004 Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for right-
                       of-way acquisition services.
                       Authorizing agreement for maintenance and energy costs of traffic signals at
Res. 04-276  7-15-2004 County Highway 16 (Bell Road) and Founders Crossing, County Board District #7,
                       between the county and the Village of Homer Glen and Farmingdale Development
                       Company.
                       Authorizing agreement for maintenance and energy costs of traffic signals at
Res. 04-277  7-15-2004 County Highway 16 (Bell Road) and Martingale Lane, County Board District #7,
                       between the county and the Village of Homer Glen.
                       Authorizing agreement for Weber Road traffic signal interconnect system, County
Res. 04-282  7-15-2004 Board Districts #3, #4, #7, #8 and #9, between the county and the State
                       Department of Transportation.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental grant agreement for the county traffic management
Res. 04-286A 7-15-2004 center feasibility study and implementation plan with the State Department of
                       Transportation.
Res. 04-286B 7-15-2004 Authorizing intergovernmental grant agreement for a state homeland security
                       regional grant with the State Emergency Management Agency.
                       Authorizing a new format for intergovernmental animal control agreements and fee
Res. 04-287  7-15-2004 structure and authorizing the rescission in writing of all agreements currently
                       in effect.
Res. 04-300  7-15-2004 Amending the boundaries of the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone
                       established by Res. 84-72.
Res. 04-301  7-15-2004 Amending the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone intergovernmental
                       agreement established by Res. 84-73.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to establish design criteria along
Res. 04-342  8-19-2004 Gougar Road from U.S. Route 30 to Illinois Route 52, County Board Districts #2
                       and #6, between the county and the Village of New Lenox.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to establish design criteria along
Res. 04-343  8-19-2004 Laraway Road from U.S. Route 52 to Scheer Road., County Board Districts #2, #6,
                       and #8, between the county and Village of New Lenox.
                       Approving joint agreement for reconstruction of County Highway 70 (Drecksler
Res. 04-348  8-19-2004 Road) bridge over Black Walnut Creek, County Board Districts #1 and #6, with the
                       State Department of Transportation.
                       Authorizing reconstruction of County Highway 70 (Drecksler Road) bridge over
Res. 04-349  8-19-2004 Black Walnut Creek, County Board Districts #1 and #6, by joint agreement with
                       the State Department of Transportation.
                       Authorizing execution of the intergovernmental police mental health assistance
Res. 04-358  8-19-2004 agreement to allow continued participation in the mental health assistance
                       program by the County Sheriff.
Res. 04-361  8-19-2004 Authorizing execution of agreement for the State-Local Hazard Mitigation
                       Planning Grant Program for planning with State Emergency Management Agency.
                       Approving joint agreement for reconstruction of County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)
Res. 04-399  9-16-2004 bridge over Spring Creek, County Board District #7, with the State Department of
                       Transportation.
                       Authorizing joint agreement for reconstruction of County Highway 4 (Cedar Road)
Res. 04-400  9-16-2004 bridge over Spring Creek, County Board District #7, with the State Department of
                       Transportation.
                       Approving joint agreement for reconstruction of County Highway 24 (Indiana
Res. 04-403  9-16-2004 Avenue) bridge over Trim Creek, County Board District #1, with the State
                       Department of Transportation.
                       Authorizing joint agreement for reconstruction of County Highway 4 (Indiana
Res. 04-404  9-16-2004 Avenue) bridge over Trim Creek, County Board District #1, with the State
                       Department of Transportation.
Res. 04-415  9-16-2004 Authorizing execution of the State Emergency Management Agency intergovernmental
                       grant agreement for nuclear safety preparedness.
             10-21-    Authorizing agreement regarding mutual rights or interests in Thorn Creek Woods
Res. 04-355  2004      Nature Preserve and adjacent property in Monee Township with the County Forest
                       Preserve District.
Res. 04-449  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for construction of appurtenance work within
             2004      county right-of-way with the Village of Beecher, County Board District #1.
             10-21-    Authorizing agreement for maintenance and liability of trees within the right-
Res. 04-456  2004      of-way of County Highway 60 (Exchange Street) along the Rosedale subdivision
                       frontage with the Village of University Park.
Res. 04-463  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of New
             2004      Lenox.
Res. 04-464  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the City of
             2004      Braidwood.
Res. 04-465  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of
             2004      Godley.
Res. 04-466  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of
             2004      Symerton.
Res. 04-467  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of Homer
             2004      Glen.
Res. 04-468  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of
             2004      Elwood.
Res. 04-469  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of
             2004      Plainfield.
Res. 04-470  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the City of
             2004      Wilmington.
Res. 04-471  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for animal control with the Village of
             2004      Manhattan.
Res. 04-473  10-21-    Authorizing execution of agreement for participation in the State Public Health
             2004      Mutual Aid System.
             11-18-    Amending the interim policy for GIS data distribution to allow the county board
Res. 04-484  2004      to enter into GIS data sharing agreement with the County Forest Preserve
                       District. (Am. Res. 04-531)
             11-18-    Authorizing agreement for maintenance and energy costs of traffic signals on
Res. 04-499  2004      County Highway 84 (191st Street) and Brookside Marketplace between the county
                       and the Village of Tinley Park.
Res. 04-514  11-18-    Authorizing acceptance and execution of grant award from the State Department of
             2004      Commerce and Economic Opportunity.
Res. 04-521  11-18-    Amending for second time agreement for land use services between the county and
             2004      the Village of Homer Glen.
             12-16-    Replacing the interim policy for GIS data distribution to allow the county board
Res. 04-531  2004      to enter into GIS data sharing agreement with the County Forest Preserve
                       District with the data distribution policy of the county.
             12-16-    Authorizing execution of the State Emergency Management Agency intergovernmental
Res. 04-554  2004      agreement for implementation of the IEMA Hazardous Materials Emergency
                       Preparedness Planning Grant Program.
Res. 04-560  12-16-    Authorizing execution of grant agreement with the state Department of Commerce
             2004      and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board.
Res. 04-557  1-20-2005 Amending the Joliet Arsenal Enterprise Zone.
Res. 05-04   1-20-2005 Authorizing payment to the Joliet Regional Port Authority, after bid through the
                       State Department of Transportation, for runway drainage and grading work.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the New Lenox Fire Protection
Res. 05-11   1-20-2005 Detection District and the county for installation of an emergency vehicle.
                       preemption system.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the City of Lockport and the
Res. 05-28   1-20-2005 county for the installation of traffic signals at the intersection of Division
                       Street and Farrell Road.
                       Approving first addendum to the State Department of Transportation - county
Res. 05-29   1-20-2005 joint agreement regarding five improvements along County Highway 17 (Manhattan-
                       Arsenal Road), Baseline Road and East Access Road.
Res. 05-40   1-20-2005 Amending intergovernmental cooperation agreement for law enforcement services
                       between the Village of Homer Glen and the county.
Res. 05-43   1-20-2005 Declaring intent to acquire the South Chicago Street crossover site for
                       expansion of the adult detention facility.
                       Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement pertaining to the required
Res. 05-47   2-17-2005 payment of school facilities fees between County School District No. 92 and the
                       county.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Mokena and the
Res. 05-74   2-17-2005 county for improvements to County Highway 84 (191st Street), County Board
                       District #2.
Res. 05-75   2-17-2005 Authorizing agreement to transfer jurisdiction of a portion of County Highway 84
                       (191st Street) from the county to the Village of Mokena municipal street system.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement between the City of Crest Hill and the
Res. 05-80   2-17-2005 county for the installation of traffic signals at the intersection of Weber Road
                       and Longmeadow Drive.
Res. 05-94   3-17-2005 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with Wilmington Community Unit School
                       District No. 209U pertaining to the required payment of school facilities fees.
Res. 05-124  3-17-2005 Authorizing disbursement of fiscal year 2005 allocation of E.B. Memorial Justice
                       Assistance Grant between the City of Joliet and the county.
Res. 05-126  3-17-2005 Authorizing entry into the State Emergency Management Agency Grant agreement for
                       Emergency Management Assistance Grant Program.
Res. 05-129  3-17-2005 Authorizing the County Public Building Commission to fund and manage the three-
                       phase renovation project at Sunny Hill Skilled Rehab Center.
Res. 05-131  3-17-2005 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to provide communications equipment
                       maintenance and repair for the Village of Elwood through the county radio lab.
Res. 05-132  3-17-2005 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to provide communications equipment
                       maintenance and repair for the Village of Rockdale through the county radio lab.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to provide communications equipment
Res. 05-133  3-17-2005 maintenance and repair for the Village of Manhattan through the county radio
                       lab.
Res. 05-134  3-17-2005 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to provide communications equipment
                       maintenance and repair for Joliet Township through the county radio lab.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to provide communications equipment
Res. 05-135  3-17-2005 maintenance and repair for the Bolingbrook Park District through the county
                       radio lab.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement to provide communications equipment
Res. 05-136  3-17-2005 maintenance and repair for the County Forest Preserve District through the
                       county radio lab.
Res. 05-166  4-21-2005 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Plainfield for
                       the improvement of County Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road/143rd Street).
Res. 05-167  4-21-2005 Transfer of jurisdiction of County Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road/143Rd Street) to
                       the Village of Plainfield by the county under the State Highway Code.
Res. 05-175  4-21-2005 Authorizing and extension of the delegation agreement with the State
                       Environmental Protection Agency for an enforcement agreement.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute an agreement with City of Joliet for
Res. 05-176  4-21-2005 juror parking at the Ottawa Street park deck and on-street parking around the
                       courthouse.
Res. 05-180  4-21-2005 Executing a Department Homeland Security Regional Grant Agreement from the State
                       Emergency Management Agency.
Res. 05-186  4-21-2005 Executing intergovernmental agreements with the county school districts.
                       Executing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the County Emergency
Res. 05-187  4-21-2005 Telephone System Board (ETSB) Maintenance and repair of communications equipment
                       through the radio lab.
                       Authorizing a grant award from the United States Department of Commerce Economic
Res. 05-191  4-21-2005 Development Administration for the reconstruction and widening of Arsenal Road
                       from the I-55 Interchange to Baseline Road.
                       Appropriating grant funds from the United States Department of Education Office
Res. 05-201  5-19-2005 of Safe and Drug Free Schools in Juvenile Probation Department budget to provide
                       probation officers at Joliet West and Central High Schools.
Res. 05-202  5-19-2005 Appropriating grant funds from the State Department of Commerce and Economic
                       Opportunity in Workforce Investment Board budget for one-stop system.
Res. 05-203  5-19-2005 Appropriating grant funds from the State Department of Commerce and Economic
                       Opportunity in Workforce Investment Board budget for local activities.
Res. 05-207  5-19-2005 Executing an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Joliet for snow
                       removal.
Res. 05-208  5-19-2005 Executing an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Joliet for emergency
                       warning lights.
Res. 05-209  5-19-2005 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Joliet for the
                       improvement of County Highway 5 (Canton Farm Road).
Res. 05-249  6-16-2005 Providing real estate tax abatement for Southern Wine and Spirit of America.
Res. 05-248  6-16-2005 Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an agreement of intent to abate
                       property taxes for Professional Locomotive Services, Inc.
Res. 05-261  6-16-2005 Executing an intergovernmental agreement with BPR-Romeoville LLC for maintenance
                       of the storm sewer system at Weber Road Retail Center.
Res. 05-262  6-16-2005 Executing an agreement with Orleans Homebuilders for maintenance of the storm
                       sewer system at River Hills Subdivision.
Res. 05-332  7-21-2005 Authorizing approval of an State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 05-335  7-21-2005 Authorizing approval of an State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 05-343  7-21-2005 Authorizing the execution the project civic access agreement between the United
                       States and the county, under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Res. 05-348  7-21-2005 Authorizing the execution of a special service area intergovernmental agreement
                       with the Village of Manhattan.
Res. 05-363  8-18-2005 Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Equimax Partners, LLC for
                       maintenance of the storm sewer system at Crest Hill Business Center.
                       Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the New Lenox Fire Protection
Res. 05-364  8-18-2005 District and Grubb Farm Development, LLC for maintenance and liability of the
                       existing storm water management system.
Res. 05-368  8-18-2005 Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the Village of Crete for
                       construction of sidewalks, streetlights and crosswalks.
Res. 05-371  8-18-2005 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 05-376  8-18-2005 Designating use of the National Incident Management System as the basis for
                       incident management.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to enter into the State Emergency Management
Res. 05-377  8-18-2005 Agency Department of Homeland Security, Office for Domestic Preparedness, First
                       Responder Preparedness for the Citizen Corps Public Outreach and Printing Grant
                       Program.
Res. 05-390  9-15-2005 Authorizing the waiving of application fees for Habitat for Humanity.
Res. 05-398  9-15-2005 Providing real estate tax abatement for Dollar Tree Distribution, Inc.
Res. 05-406  9-15-2005 Reimbursement costs for relocating law sprinkling system of Lockport Township
                       fire and ambulance district for county improvement.
Res. 05-411  9-15-2005 Authorizing the execution of the State Emergncy Management Agency (IEMA)
                       Hazardous Materials Emergency Preparedness (HMEP) Planning Grant Program.
Res. 05-417  9-15-2005 Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Department of
                       Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board.
Res. 05-433  10-20-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the City of
             2005      Joliet for the condemnation of land for road improvement purposes.
Res. 05-459  10-20-    Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Department of
             2005      Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board.
Res. 05-460  10-20-    Authorizing the execution of a subgrant agreement for regional workforce
             2005      development initiatives.
Res. 05-462  10-20-    Authorizing the execution of a STAG grant agreement with USEPA.
             2005
Res. 05-478  11-17-    Authorizing the execution an agreement of intent to abate property taxes for
             2005      Andrew Corporation.
Res. 05-482  11-17-    Authorizing an agreement with the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway Company for
             2005      installation of storm sewer along County Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road).
             11-17-    Authorizing the negotiation and execution of an intergovernmental agreement with
Res. 05-484  2005      the City of Naperville to provide partial funding for a household hazardous
                       waste collection facility.
Res. 05-491  11-17-    Amending boilerplate intergovernmental agreement to provide communication system
             2005      access to the county owned and operated 800 Mhz county-wide radio system.
             11-17-    Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement awarded to the Workforce
Res. 05-503  2005      Investment Board from critical skill shortages initiative to provide training
                       services in the manufacturing industry section.
Res. 05-525  12-15-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2005      agreement Phase III Engineering and Construction Participation.
Res. 05-533  12-15-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to provide the
             2005      Village of Monee access to the county radio system.
Res. 05-534  12-15-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to provide the
             2005      Village of Peotone access to the county radio system.
Res. 05-535  12-15-    Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to provide the
             2005      Village of Beecher access to the county radio system.
Res. 06-13   1-19-2006 Authorizing an agreement for the cost sharing associated with the proposed
                       improvements to the intersection of Laraway Road and Pfeiffer Road.
Res. 06-14   1-19-2006 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Joliet for
                       installation of an emergency vehicle preemption system.
Res. 06-16   1-19-2006 Rescinding Res. 05-371, authorizing approval of a State Department of
                       Transportation - county joint agreement.
Res. 06-17   1-19-2006 Authorizing the approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 06-18   1-19-2006 Granting county aid in construction of a new bridge over Manhattan Creek on
                       Rowell Avenue as petitioned by the Jackson Road District.
Res. 06-27   1-19-2006 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with the City of Wilmington.
Res. 06-29   1-19-2006 Providing real estate tax abatement for Wilton Industries, Inc.
Res. 06-30   1-19-2006 Providing real estate tax abatement for Chicago Tube and Iron Co.
Res. 06-32   1-19-2006 Professional services agreement with the County Chamber/CED.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Elwood
Res. 06-33   1-19-2006 maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the
                       county.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Manhattan
Res. 06-34   1-19-2006 maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the
                       county.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Rockdale
Res. 06-35   1-19-2006 maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the
                       county.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the Bolingbrook Park
Res. 06-36   1-19-2006 District maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio
                       lab of the county.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the Joliet Township
Res. 06-37   1-19-2006 maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the
                       county.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement to provide the Forest Preserve
Res. 06-38   1-19-2006 District of the county maintenance and repair of communications equipment
                       through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 06-39   1-19-2006 Authorizing the intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Mokena
                       access to the county radio system.
Res. 06-40   1-19-2006 Authorizing the intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Homer Glen
                       access to the county radio system.
                       Authorizing the execution of the first amendment to an agreement with Onyx
Res. 06-75   2-16-2006 Environmental Services, LLC to provide household hazardous waste collection
                       services.
                       Authorizing the approval of an endangered species mitigation survey, a condition
Res. 06-81   2-16-2006 to the United States Department of Commerce Economic Development Administration
                       Financial Assistance Award for the reconstruction and widening of Arsonal Road
                       from the I-55 Interchange to Baseline Road.
Res. 06-87   2-16-2006 Authorizing a State Emergency Management Agency Grant agreement for a emergency
                       management assistance grant program.
                       Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement with the State Department of
Res. 06-90   2-16-2006 Commerce and Economic Opportunity for the Workforce Investment Board to provide
                       training through the Trade Adjustment Assistance Act.
Res. 06-118  3-16-2006 Authorizing the execution and appropriation of a grant from the State Emergency
                       Services Management Association for EOC Equipment.
Res. 06-119  3-16-2006 Authorizing the execution of the State Emergency Management Agency FY 2006-2007
                       Hazard Mitigation Grant Program Agreement for planning.
Res. 06-126  3-16-2006 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement for ombudsman
                       services.
Res. 06-139  4-20-2006 Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement of intent
                       to abate property taxes for Quality Packaging of Illinois and Wagner Equities.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement of intent
Res. 06-140  4-20-2006 to abate property taxes for Levy Home Entertainment, LLC and Windgate Industrial
                       Partners, LLC.
Res. 06-150  4-20-2006 Awarding bid for Emco Building remodeling project to R. Berti & Son.
Res. 06-152  4-20-2006 Confirming award of contract to P.T. Ferro Construction Co.
Res. 06-175  4-20-2006 Authorizing the County Executive to execute intergovernmental police mental
                       health assistance agreement.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute the State Criminal Justice
Res. 06-176  4-20-2006 Information Authority Grant Extension for Joliet Metropolitan Area Narcotics
                       Squad.
Res. 06-210  5-18-2006 Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the county
                       and Joliet for school warning lights at Laraway Elementary School.
Res. 06-222  5-18-2006 Authorizing IEMA intergovernmental grant agreement for IPRA Local Compensation
                       Grant Award.
Res. 06-250  6-15-2006 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Plainfield Township Park
                       District for installation of pedestrian signal heads at Wesmere Parkway.
Res. 06-268  6-15-2006 Intergovernmental agreement between the State Toll Highway Authority and the
                       county for improvements to the South Extension of I-355.
Res. 06-287  7-20-2006 Authorizing approval of State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for sharing NAVTEQ proprietary data.
Res. 06-293  7-20-2006 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and Bolingbrook for the Weber
                       Road and Remington Boulevard intersection improvement.
Res. 06-304  7-20-2006 Authorizing approval of State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement amendment #1.
Res. 06-305  7-20-2006 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and Mokena for the installation
                       of traffic signals at the intersection with 191st Street and 88th Avenue.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and Shorewood for the
Res. 06-306  7-20-2006 installation of emergency vehicle preemption equipment at the existing
                       signalized intersection of Black Road and Sharp Drive.
Res. 06-307  7-20-2006 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and Bolingbrook for the
                       Plainfield-Naperville Road between 111th Street and 95th Street improvement.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and New Lenox for the
Res. 06-316  7-20-2006 installation of traffic signals at the intersection with Laraway Road and
                       Calistoga Drive.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the Illinois cities and agencies making up
Res. 06-394  9-21-2006 the Northeast Illinois Communications Consortium for an Interoperable and Shared
                       Communication System.
             10-19-    Agreement between the county and the member jurisdictions of the county
Res. 06-433  2006      governmental league public works emergency mutual aid intergovernmental service
                       agreement.
Res. 06-437  10-19-    Agreement between the county and the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway Company
             2006      for installation of storm sewer along Caton Farm Road.
Res. 06-441  10-19-    Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
             2006      provide the Village of Plainfield access to the county radio system.
Res. 06-442  10-19-    Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
             2006      provide the Village of Bolingbrook access to the county radio system.
Res. 06-471  11-16-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of Homer Glen for
             2006      the 143rd Street at Lemont Road intersection improvement.
Res. 06-512  12-21-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2006      agreement (Phase II engineering).
Res. 06-515  12-21-    Authorizing approval of agreement between the county and Wetlands Mitigation of
             2006      Illinois, LLC for the purchase of wetland banking site credits.
Res. 06-527  12-21-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of Naperville for
             2006      the Plainfield-Naperville Road between 111th Street and 95th Street improvement.
Res. 07-19   1-18-2007 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for Phase III Engineering and Construction Participation.
                       Authorizing approval of agreement with the State Commerce Commission, State
Res. 07-24   1-18-2007 Department of Transportation and Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway Company for
                       Renwick Road.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute second amendment to
Res. 07-34   1-18-2007 intergovernmental cooperation agreement for law enforcement services between the
                       county and the Village of Homer Glen.
Res. 07-59   2-15-2007 IDOT-county joint agreement for improvement of Plainfield-Naperville Road
                       between 111th Street and 95th Street.
Res. 07-60   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental police mental health assistance agreement.
Res. 07-66   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Beecher maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-67   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Bolingbrook maintenance
                       and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-68   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Elwood maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
                       Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Forest Preserve District of the
Res. 07-69   2-15-2007 county maintenance and repair of communications equipment through the radio lab
                       of the county.
Res. 07-70   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Homer Glen maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-71   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Joliet Township maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-72   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Manhattan maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-73   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Mokena maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-74   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Monee maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-75   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Peotone maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-76   2-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Village of Rockdale maintenance and
                       repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of New Lenox for the
Res. 07-101  3-15-2007 installation of traffic signals at the intersection of Laraway Road and
                       Schoolhouse Road.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and Village of New Lenox for the
Res. 07-102  3-15-2007 installation of traffic signals at the intersection of Laraway Road and Tower
                       Lane.
Res. 07-116  3-15-2007 Intergovernmental agreement with Frankfort Park District for permissive park
                       district recreational use of county real property.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to enter into State Historic Preservation
Res. 07-122  4-19-2007 Agency, FY 2007 Certified Local Government Grant Program for the creation of
                       educational brochures.
                       Intergovernmental cooperation agreement between the Village of Homer Glen and
Res. 07-134  4-19-2007 the county for the construction and sharing of costs of roadway improvements to
                       the intersection of 143rd Street and Parker Road and the intersection of 143rd
                       Street and Lemont Road.
Res. 07-140  4-19-2007 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of Joliet for snow
                       removal.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of Mokena for the
Res. 07-146  4-19-2007 installation of traffic signals at the intersection with 191st Street and
                       Hickory Creek Drive in the county.
Res. 07-171  4-19-2007 Amending Res. 07-60 authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental
                       police mental health assistance agreement.
Res. 07-217  5-17-2007 Intergovernmental agreement with Plainfield Township for permanent electronic
                       recycling drop-off.
Res. 07-218  5-17-2007 Intergovernmental agreement with Channahon Township for permanent electronic
                       recycling drop-off.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and City of Crest Hill for
Res. 07-235  6-21-2007 installation of traffic signals at the intersections of Weber Road with Len
                       Kubinski Drive and Patrick Drive.
Res. 07-245  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement between county and City of Joliet for 2007 Byrne
                       Just Assistance Grant (JAG) Program Award.
Res. 07-270  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement with Troy Township for permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 07-271  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Bolingbrook for a permanent
                       residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 07-272  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement for telecommunication dispatching services with the
                       Village of Elwood.
Res. 07-273  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement for telecommunications dispatching services with the
                       Village of Manhattan.
Res. 07-274  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement for telecommunications dispatching services with the
                       Village of Rockdale.
Res. 07-275  6-21-2007 Intergovernmental agreement for telecommunications dispatching services with the
                       County Forest Preserve.
Res. 07-284  7-19-2007 Intergovernmental agreement between county and City of Joliet for the
                       improvement of Black Road (County Highway 56).
Res. 07-285  7-19-2007 Ratifying execution of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 07-292  7-19-2007 Intergovernmental agreement between county and Village of Channahon for
                       provision of animal control services.
Res. 07-302  7-19-2007 Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Beecher/Washington Township for
                       permanent residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 07-309  8-16-2007 Intergovernmental agreement between State Toll Highway Authority and the county
                       for improvements to the south extension of I-355.
Res. 07-323  8-16-2007 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement to coordinate the State Great Rivers Ride.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between county and Village of New Lenox for
Res. 07-338  8-16-2007 installation of temporary traffic signals at intersection with Cedar Road and
                       Francis Road.
Res. 07-349  8-16-2007 Intergovernmental agreement between county and Village of Diamond for law
                       enforcement services.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between county and Lockport Township Fire Protection
Res. 07-374  9-20-2007 Park District for the installation of emergency vehicle preemption equipment at
                       existing signalized intersection of Renwick Road and Grand Haven Circle/Carillon
                       Lakes Drive.
Res. 07-382  9-20-2007 Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of New Lenox access to the county
                       radio system.
Res. 07-398  10-18-    Authorizing application for the bond volume cap, issuance of bonds and execution
             2007      of intergovernmental agreement with the State Housing Development Authority.
             10-18-    Intergovernmental agreement between county and Village of New Lenox for
Res. 07-399  2007      installation of temporary traffic signals at the intersection with Cedar Road
                       and Laraway Road.
Res. 07-411  10-18-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of New Lenox maintenance and
             2007      repair of communications equipment through the radio lab of the county.
Res. 07-456  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with City of Braidwood for animal control services.
             2007
Res. 07-457  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Elwood for animal control services.
             2007
Res. 07-458  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Godley for animal control services.
             2007
Res. 07-459  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Homer Glen for animal control
             2007      services.
Res. 07-460  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Manhattan for animal control
             2007      services.
Res. 07-461  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Plainfield for animal control
             2007      services.
Res. 07-462  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Symerton for animal control
             2007      services.
Res. 07-463  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement with City of Wilmington for animal control services.
             2007
Res. 07-473  11-15-    Intergovernmental agreement establishing City-County Advisory Committee.
             2007
Res. 07-508  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement with Village of New Lenox for animal control
             2007      services.
Res. 07-509  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Beecher maintenance and repair
             2007      of communications equipment.
Res. 07-510  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Bolingbrook maintenance and
             2007      repair of communications equipment.
Res. 07-511  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Elwood maintenance and repair
             2007      of communications equipment.
Res. 07-512  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Homer Glen maintenance and
             2007      repair of communications equipment.
Res. 07-513  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Manhattan maintenance and
             2007      repair of communications equipment.
Res. 07-514  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Mokena maintenance and repair
             2007      of communications equipment.
Res. 07-515  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Monee maintenance and repair
             2007      of communications equipment.
Res. 07-516  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of New Lenox maintenance and
             2007      repair of communications equipment.
Res. 07-517  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Peotone maintenance and repair
             2007      of communications equipment.
Res. 07-518  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Village of Rockdale maintenance and
             2007      repair of communications equipment.
Res. 07-519  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide the Forest Preserve District maintenance
             2007      and repair of communications equipment.
Res. 07-520  12-20-    Intergovernmental agreement to provide Joliet Township maintenance and repair of
             2007      communications equipment.
Res. 07-524  12-20-    Agreement between County of Will and County of Grundy for the loan and temporary
             2007      use of snow plow trucks.
Res. 08-96   2-21-2008 Intergovernmental agreement with City of Crest Hill for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 08-109  3-20-2008 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for design engineering services.
Res. 08-157  4-17-2008 Intergovernmental agreement with City of Joliet for installation of traffic
                       signals at Black Road and Timberline Drive intersection.
Res. 08-190  4-17-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of intergovernmental agreement
                       for ombudsman services.
Res. 08-202  5-15-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with
                       Channahon Park District for installation of canoe launch on DePage River.
Res. 08-214  5-15-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental cooperation agreement
                       with Village of Godley for law enforcement services.
Res. 08-230  6-19-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute agreement with IDNR for LIDAR
                       topographic project.
Res. 08-238  6-19-2008 Intergovernmental agreement with IEMA for installation of radiation monitoring
                       equipment along West I-55 Frontage Road south of Arsenal Road.
Res. 08-242  6-19-2008 Ratifying the execution of an IDOT - county joint agreement for design
                       engineering services (Phase I).
Res. 08-254  6-19-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement establishing
                       TRAC in opposition to CN rail congestion.
Res. 08-258  6-19-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with City of
                       Naperville for operation of household hazardous waste collection facility.
Res. 08-280  7-17-2008 Authorizing approval of IDOT - county joint agreement for Route 50 improvements.
Res. 08-282  7-17-2008 Authorizing memorandum of understanding with City of Joliet regarding JAG
                       program 2008 application and allocation.
Res. 08-286  7-17-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with
                       Northeast Illinois Regional Crime Laboratory.
Res. 08-288  7-17-2008 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with County
                       Forest Preserve for recyclables drop-off.
Res. 08-306  8-21-2008 Directing County Executive to execute agreement with Village of Tinley Park for
                       78th Avenue and 191st Street intersection.
Res. 08-311  8-21-2008 Authorizing approval of IDOT - county joint agreement, amendment #1 for Baseline
                       Road improvements.
Res. 08-312  8-21-2008 Authorizing approval of IDOT - county joint agreement, amendment #2 for Baseline
                       Road improvements.
Res. 08-313  8-21-2008 Authorizing approval of IDOT - county joint agreement for Black Road structure
                       over DuPage River improvements.
Res. 08-325  8-21-2008 Authorizing approval of IDOT - county joint agreement for designs engineering
                       services (Phase II).
Res. 08-337  8-21–200Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Village
                       of Frankfort granting access to county radio system.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Village
Res. 08-338  8-21-2008 of Frankfort for maintenance and repair of communications equipment through
                       radio lab.
             10-16-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with City of
Res. 08-388  2008      Lockport and Forest Preserve District of the county regarding I-355 area master
                       bike plan.
             10-16-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Village
Res. 08-396  2008      of Lenox for engineering services and construction of traffic signals and
                       roadway improvements at intersection of Gougar Road and Haven Avenue.
             11-20-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with the
Res. 08-448  2008      City of Joliet for a retaining wall at the northwest corner of South Briggs
                       Street and Spencer Road.
             11-20-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement for
Res. 08-449  2008      engineering services, and construction of roadway improvements and traffic
                       signal modifications at the intersection with Weber Road and Gaskin Drive.
             12-18-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Reed
Res. 08-509  2008      Township in conjunction with Reed-Custer High School for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
             12-18-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement between the
Res. 08-512  2008      City of Naperville and the county for the operation of a household hazardous
                       waste collection facility.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement between
Res. 09-06   1-15-2009 the State Toll Highway Authority, the State Department of Transportation, the
                       county, and the Northwest Homer Fire Protection District for emergency vehicle
                       pre-emption on 143rd Street at the I-355 Ramps.
Res. 09-09   1-15-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 09-23   1-15-2009 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with City of
                       Joliet for a permanent traditional recyclables drop-off.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with New
Res. 09-24   1-15-2009 Lenox Township for a permanent residential electronics and/or traditional
                       recyclables drop-off.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with
Res. 09-25   1-15-2009 Manhattan Township for a permanent residential electronics and/or traditional
                       recyclables drop-off.
Res. 09-27   2-19-2009 Intergovernmental assignment agreement with the Village of Romeoville.
Res. 09-31   2-19-2009 Intergovernmental agreement for the installation of traffic signals at the
                       intersection with Gougar Road and Spencer Road.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Frankfort and the county to
Res. 09-33   2-19-2009 retrofit the existing stop signs at the Laraway Road and 116th Avenue
                       intersection with flashing red lights.
                       Intergovernmental agreement for the maintenance of emergency vehicle preemption
Res. 09-34   2-19-2009 equipment at the existing signalized intersection of Laraway Road and Nelson
                       Road.
Res. 09-35   2-19-2009 Authorizing approval of Kane County, Lake County and the county joint agreement.
Res. 09-37   2-19-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 09-44   2-19-2009 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Village
                       of Mokena for a permanent electronics recycling drop-off.
Res. 09-58   3-19-2009 Intergovernmental agreement for the installation of radiation monitoring
                       equipment on Essex Road south of McQuire Road.
Res. 09-59   3-19-2009 Intergovernmental agreement for the right-of-way acquisition for roadway
                       improvements at the intersection with Laraway Road and Center Road.
Res. 09-68   3-19-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement.
Res. 09-96   4-16-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county
                       supplemental joint agreement.
Res. 09-112  4-16-2009 Authorizing execution of memorandum of understanding with the City of Joliet
                       mutually distributing the 2009 JAG allocation.
                       Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Romeoville for roadway
Res. 09-138  5-21-2009 improvements at the intersections of Weber Road with Lakeview Drive and Windham
                       Parkway.
Res. 09-151  5-21-2009 Renewing participation in the State Federal Surplus Property Program.
Res. 09-158  5-21-2009 Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with the City of Lockport for a
                       permanent residential electronics and or traditional recyclables drop-off.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with the County Forest Preserve District
Res. 09-159  5-21-2009 for a permanent residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off
                       at its Monee Facility.
                       Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with the State Emergency Management
Res. 09-174  6-18-2009 Agency for the installation of radiation monitoring equipment along Essex Road
                       south of Illinois Route 113 in the county.
Res. 09-183  6-18-2009 Authorizing a disaster community services grant agreement with the State
                       Department of Human Services.
Res. 09-193  6-18-2009 Authorizing a consortium agreement with other counties and municipalities within
                       the Northern Illinois region for NSP II funding.
                       Authorizing a cooperation agreement with the County Center for Community
Res. 09-227  7-16-2009 Concerns for award of Homeless Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing Grant Funds
                       (HPRP).
Res. 09-240  8-20-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for highway improvements.
Res. 09-241  8-20-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for highway improvements.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Homer Glen and
Res. 09-254  8-20-2009 the County of Will for a one-time household hazardous waste collection event for
                       Fall 2009.
                       Intergovernmental agreement with Frankfort Fire Protection District for
Res. 09-267  9-17-2009 installation of emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment at the intersection of
                       County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) and 116th Street.
                       Intergovernmental agreement with Frankfort Fire Protection District for
Res. 09-268  9-17-2009 installation of emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment at the intersection of
                       County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) and Wolf Road.
Res. 09-269  9-17-2009 Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Mokena, for traffic signal
                       installation at the intersection of Francis Road and Townline Road.
Res. 09-273  9-17-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for design engineering services.
Res. 09-275  9-17-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for design engineering services.
Res. 09-285  9-17-2009 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - County
                       Supplemental Joint Agreement.
Res. 09-319  10-15-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2009      agreement.
Res. 09-320  10-15-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2009      agreement.
Res. 09-343  10-15-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
             2009      agreement.
Res. 09-345  10-15-    Intergovernmental agreement for traffic signals and pedestrian crossing
             2009      facilities at the intersection of Laraway Road and 116th Street.
Res. 09-347  10-15-    Intergovernmental agreement for emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment at the
             2009      intersection of Francis Road and Townline Road.
Res. 09-367  11-19-    Regional Water Supply Planning Group.
             2009
             11-19-    Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 09-375  2009      agreement for improvement of Illinois Route 394/Illinois Route 1 at County
                       Highway 23 (Pauling-Goodenow Road).
Res. 09-392  11-19-    Intergovernmental agreement for the installation of traffic signals at the
             2009      intersection of Exchange Street and Independence Drive.
Res. 09-398  11-19-    Authorizing agreement with the County Center for Community Concerns for
             2009      operation of the FY 09 State Disaster Assistance Program grant.
                       Authorizing the adoption of the County Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Res. 09-403  11-19-    Strategy (EECS) in accordance with the requirements of the United States
             2009      Department of Energy (DOE) Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant
                       Program.
Res. 09-425  12-17-    Adoption of State Department of Transportation county maintenance resolution.
             2009
Res. 09-431  12-17-    Intergovernmental agreement between the county and City of Joliet for snow
             2009      removal.
Res. 09-438  12-17-    Intergovernmental agreement for emergency preemption equipment at the
             2009      intersection Francis Road and Schoolhouse Road.
Res. 09-450  12-17-    Directing County Public Building Commission to oversee the renovations of
             2009      proposed drug court recovery home located at 212 Frank Avenue, Joliet, Illinois.
Res. 09-458  12-17-    Authorizing County Executive to execute traffic enforcement agreement between
             2009      the county and Gateway II Phase III, Frankfort, Illinois.
Res. 10-14   1-21-2010 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for various sign upgrades throughout the county.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental cooperation
Res. 10-18   1-21-2010 agreement for law enforcement services between the county and the Godley Park
                       District.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental cooperation
Res. 10-26   1-21-2010 agreement between the City of Naperville and the county for operation of a
                       household hazardous waste collection facility.
                       Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 10-49   2-18-2010 agreement for improvement of County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) at U.S. Route 52
                       intersection.
Res. 10-62   2-18-2010 Authorizing the County Executive to execute state toll highway authority permit
                       agreement.
Res. 10-68   2-18-2010 Adopting the programmatic agreement between the county and the State Historic
                       Preservation officer.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to enter into State Historic Preservation
Res. 10-74   3-18-2010 Agency, fiscal year 2010 certified local government grant program to continue
                       county rural historic structures survey project.
Res. 10-75   3-18-2010 Regarding Northeastern Illinois Regional Water Supply Demand Plan (looking out
                       to 2050).
                       Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 10-81   3-18-2010 agreement for improvement of the intersection of County Highway 74 (Laraway
                       Road) at Wolf Road.
                       Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 10-87   3-18-2010 agreement for improvement of County Highway 56 (Black Road) over the DuPage
                       River.
Res. 10-89   3-18-2010 Intergovernmental agreement for the installation of traffic signals at the
                       intersection with Brandon Road and Laraway Road.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute an intergovernmental communication
Res. 10-96   3-18-2010 system agreement combining the Village of Bolingbrook ETSB with the county 9-1-
                       1 telephone system board.
Res. 10-116  4-15-2010 Establishing a pilot pharmaceutical take- back program between the county and
                       the City of Lockport.
Res. 10-118  4-15-2010 Requesting a veterans memorial facility be established in the City of Joliet at
                       the present Silver Cross Hospital location.
Res. 10-123  4-15-2010 Authorizing County Executive to execute renewal of EDACS FX agreement with
                       Harris Corporation.
Res. 10-125  4-15-2010 Concurring with District #8 recommendation for community groups to receive
                       contributions pursuant to the Waste Management Laraway Road Host agreement.
Res. 10-127  4-15-2010 Approving the CDBG/Home Advisory Board recommendation to fund the Ridgewood
                       Infrastructure Phase 6 with EPA STAG grant.
                       Adoption of successor collective bargaining agreement between county and AFSCME
Res. 10-128  4-15-2010 31 Local 1028 for executive branch, licensed practical nurses, registered
                       nurses, correctional offices and Health Department.
                       Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement of intent to
Res. 10-134  5-20-2010 abate taxes with Logoplaste Plainfield LLC Headquarters and Research and
                       Development Facility.
Res. 10-135  5-20-2010 Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement of intent to
                       abate taxes with Logoplaste Plainfield LLC Manufacturing Facility.
                       Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 10-141  5-20-2010 agreement for construction and for construction engineering services (Phase III)
                       for County Highway 42 (Brandon Road) over the Des Plaines River structure,
                       County Section 04-00090-07-BR, County Board District #8.
Res. 10-144  5-20-2010 Intergovernmental agreement for the construction and maintenance of a
                       pedestrian/bicycle trail across Black Road.
Res. 10-148  5-20-2010 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hutchison
                       Engineering for design engineering.
                       Authorizing County Executive to enter into grant agreement with HUD and other
Res. 10-159  5-20-2010 cooperation agreements with subrecipients in connection with the county’s Lead-
                       Based Paint Hazard Control and Health Homes grant (LBPHC).
Res. 10-160  5-20-2010 Authorizing County Executive to approve an extension of the delegation agreement
                       between the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the county.
Res. 10-161  5-20-2010 Authorizing County Executive to enter into agreement with Illinois Housing
                       Development Authority for state Neighborhood Stabilization funds.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental cooperation
Res. 10-166  6-17-2010 agreement between the county and units of local government for land use building
                       division services.
Res. 10-167  6-17-2010 Refund of the foreclosed letter of credit for Palomino Trace PUD Unit #1.
                       Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
Res. 10-175  6-17-2010 agreement for improvement of Highway 88 (Weber Road) from Lily Cache Road to I-
                       55 Bridge.
Res. 10-207  6-17-2010 Approval of the 2010 JAG grant application.
                       Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement with American
Res. 10-218  6-17-2010 Eagle.com to provide energy efficiency and conservation website development and
                       maintenance services.
                       Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement with J.V.
Res. 10-219  6-17-2010 Murphy and Associates to provide energy efficiency and conservation media
                       consulting.
Res. 10-233  7-15-2010 Intergovernmental agreement for emergency vehicle preemption equipment at the
                       intersection of Laraway Road and 80th Avenue in the county.
Res. 10-235  7-15-2010 Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement with SEC
                       Group, Inc. for design engineering services.
Res. 10-245  7-15-2010 Authorizing approval of additional professional services agreement with AECOM
                       for design engineering services.
Res. 10-246  7-15-2010 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann
                       and Associates, Inc. for engineering services.
Res. 10-247  7-15-2010 Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
                       Hutchison Engineering, Inc. for engineering services.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute a professional services agreement with
Res. 10-251  7-15-2010 Wight and Company for Phase II/continuation of services of the facility needs
                       analysis planning proposal.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement between
Res. 10-255  7-15-2010 the Village of Homer Glen and the county for a one-day household waste
                       collection event for fall of 2010.
Res. 10-256  7-15-2010 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Village
                       of Romeoville for a permanent electronics recycling drop-off.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with the
Res. 10-257  7-15-2010 Village of Frankfort for the partial transfer of jurisdiction of 300 feet of
                       Else Boulevard North of Laraway Road.
Res. 10-258  7-15-2010 Adopting County Consolidated Plan and PY 2010 Action Plan for the Community
                       Development Block Grant and Home Investment Partnership Grant Programs.
Res. 10-278  8-19-2010 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Baxter and Woodman,
                       Inc. for design engineering services (Phase II).
                       Authorizing approval of professional services extension of existing agreement
Res. 10-279  8-19-2010 with Smith Engineering Consultants Group, Inc. for Phase II Consultant Program
                       Coordinator.
                       Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Frankfort for traffic signals at
Res. 10-280  8-19-2010 the intersections of Laraway Road and 80tthAvenue and Laraway Road and Wolf
                       Road.
Res. 10-282  8-19-2010 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental cooperation agreement
                       for law enforcement services between the county and the City of Wilmington.
Res. 10-283  8-19-2010 Authorizing County Executive to negotiate a professional services agreement with
                       VisionAir for a jail management system (JMS).
Res. 10-298  9-16-2010 Granting county aid in construction of a new bridge over Manhattan Creek on
                       Ridge Road as petitioned by Jackson Road District.
Res. 10-299  9-16-2010 Granting county aid in construction of a new bridge over Black Walnut Creek on
                       Offner Road as petitioned by Monee Road District.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and City of Crest Hill for
Res. 10-300  9-16-2010 landscape median in the vicinity of the Weber Road and Renwick Road
                       intersection.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Village of Romeoville for
Res. 10-301  9-16-2010 landscape median in the vicinity of the Weber Road and Renwick Road
                       intersection.
Res. 10-302  9-16-2010 Intergovernmental agreement for the installation of emergency vehicle protection
                       equipment at the intersection with Lorenzo Road and Graaskamp Boulevard.
Res. 10-303  9-16-2010 Intergovernmental agreement for the installation and maintenance of flashing
                       school zone signs at Troy Crossroads Elementary School on Black Road.
Res. 10-306  9-16-2010 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Strand Associates
                       for construction engineering.
Res. 10-307  9-16-2010 Agreement for the maintenance of the storm sewer system at Ridge Logistics Park
                       accepting draining from Lorenzo Road.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with Troy
Res. 10-318  9-16-2010 Township for a permanent residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables
                       drop-off.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with the
Res. 10-319  9-16-2010 Village of Bolingbrook for a permanent residential electronics and/or
                       traditional recyclables drop-off.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with
Res. 10-320  9-16-2010 Washington Township for a permanent residential electronics and/or traditional
                       recyclables drop-off.
Res. 10-321  9-16-2010 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with
                       Plainfield Township for a permanent traditional recyclables drop-off.
                       Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with
Res. 10-322  9-16-2010 Channahon Township for a permanent electronics and/or traditional recyclables
                       drop-off.
Res. 10-324  9-16-2010 Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute a professional services
                       agreement with URL Integration for the integrated criminal justice project.
Res. 10-339  10-21-    Extended license agreement between the county and the Illinois Department of
             2010      Natural Resources for property along Renwick Road.
Res. 10-340  10-21-    Intergovernmental agreement for the installation of traffic signals at the
             2010      intersection with Lorenzo Road and Graaskamp Boulevard.
Res. 10-341  10-21-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Polach Appraisal
             2010      Group Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 10-342  10-21-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
             2010      Engineering Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 10-343  10-21-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Santacruz
             2010      Associates, Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 10-344  10-21-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Polach Appraisal
             2010      Group, Inc. for right-of-way acquisitions services.
             10-21-    Authorizing approval of a supplemental joint agreement with the Illinois
Res. 10-345  2010      Department of Transportation for the improvement of County Highway 24 (Indiana
                       Avenue) over Trim Creek.
Res. 10-346  10-21-    Supplemental agreement with Willett, Hofmann and Associates, Inc. for design
             2010      engineering services (Phase II).
Res. 10-348  10-21-    Authorizing approval of agreement between the county and Towpath Joint Venture
             2010      for the purchase of wetland banking site credits.
Res. 10-356  10-21-    Adopting the Equal Employment Opportunity Plan 2010.
             2010
             10-21-    Authorizing County Executive to negotiate and execute a professional services
Res. 10-361  2010      agreement with Pacific Technologies, Inc. (PTI) for an IT assessment of the
                       executive branch.
             10-21-    Renewing/extending agreement with OAN Risk Services, Inc. as broker/consultant
Res. 10-362  2010      for property and casualty, general liability, workers compensation and related
                       professional services.
Res. 10-364  10-21-    Renewing agreement with RTW, Inc. for third party administration of workers’
             2010      compensation claims and services.
Res. 10-387  11-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with AECOM
             2010      Technical Services, Inc. for engineering services.
Res. 10-388  11-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with A.
             2010      Epstein and Sons International, Inc. for engineering services.
Res. 10-389  11-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement with
             2010      Christopher B. Burke Engineering, Ltd. for design engineering services.
Res. 10-390  11-18-    Authorizing approval of county joint agreement with the Illinois Department of
             2010      Transportation for high improvements.
Res. 10-391  11-18-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with HDR Engineering,
             2010      Inc. for design engineering.
Res. 10-394  11-18-    Authorizing adoption of Illinois Department of Transportation county maintenance
             2010      contract.
Res. 10-402  11-18-    Authorizing execution of agreement with Joliet/Will County Center for Economic
             2010      Development (CED) and Will County Chamber of Commerce for professional services.
Res. 10-404  11-18-    Renewing of consultant agreement with Mack Communications, Inc.
             2010
Res. 10-405  11-18-    Authorizing execution of modification #10 to agreement with Kerber, Eck &
             2010      Braeckel LLP for Workforce Investment Board.
Res. 10-416  12-16-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement Civiltech Engineering,
             2010      Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 10-417  12-16-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
             2010      Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 10-418  12-16-    Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
             2010      Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 10-422  12-16-    Amending ordinance establishing and designating an enterprise zone for a portion
             2010      of the former Joliet Arsenal.
Res. 10-423  12-16-    Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with the City of Wilmington for the
             2010      expansion of the Joliet Arsenal Enterprise Zone.
Res. 10-424  12-16-    Authorizing execution of supplemental agreement with Legislative Lobbyist
             2010      William F. Mahar for professional services.
Res. 10-425  12-16-    Authorizing renewal of consultant agreement with Farnsworth Group, Inc. for the
             2010      development of aviation services.
                       Authorizing agreement with the Village of Bolingbrook, Wheatland Township Road
Res. 11-15   1-20-2011 District and the Plainfield Community Consolidated School District No. 202 for
                       the highway improvements.
Res. 11-16   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Willett, Hofmann &
                       Associates, Inc. for engineering services.
Res. 11-17   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Civiltech
                       Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 11-18   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Polach Appraisal
                       Group, Inc. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 11-19   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of an addendum to the Illinois Department of Transportation
                       county joint agreement.
Res. 11-20   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hutchison
                       Engineering, Inc. for engineering services.
Res. 11-21   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Hutchison
                       Engineering, Inc. for engineering services.
Res. 11-22   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of agreement with Brent Hassert Consulting, LLC.
Res. 11-23   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with Baxter & Woodman,
                       Inc. for right-of-way project management services.
Res. 11-24   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with First Group
                       Engineering, Inc. for right-of-way management services.
Res. 11-25   1-20-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services agreement with “T” Engineering
                       Services, Ltd. for right-of-way acquisition services.
Res. 11-27   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Channahon for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-28   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Elwood
                       for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-29   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Manhattan for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-30   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the Village of New
                       Lenox for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-31   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Plainfield for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-32   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the Village of
                       Symerton for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-33   1-20-2011 Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement with the City of Wilmington
                       for the provision of animal control services.
                       Authorizing execution of grant agreement with HUD, the State of Illinois
Res. 11-43   1-20-2011 Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity and other cooperation agreements
                       with subrecipients in connection with the county’s flood related “IKE” grant
                       application.
                       Authorizing execution of agreement with Duncan Associates, with Primera and the
Res. 11-44   1-20-2011 Lakota Group, for consulting services for revisions to the zoning and building
                       ordinances to encourage energy efficiency and conservation practices.
Res. 11-71   2-17-2011 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with the
                       Village of Godley for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-72   2-17-2011 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with the
                       Village of Homer Glen for the provision of animal control services.
Res. 11-73   2-17-2011 Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreement with the
                       City of Braidwood for the provision of animal control services.
                       Authorizing the execution of an amendment to the intergovernmental cooperation
Res. 11-111  3-17-2011 agreement with the Village of Homer Glen for the construction and sharing of
                       costs of roadway improvements to the intersection of 143rd Street and Lemont
                       Road and acquisition of property by eminent domain.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement with
Res. 11-120  3-17-2011 the City of Napierville for the operation of a household hazardous waste
                       collection facility.
Res. 11-126  4-21-2011 Accepting planning staff assistance services delivered by the Chicago
                       Metropolitan Agency for Planning for a Fairmont area sub-area plan.
Res. 11-178  5-19-2011 Authorizing approval of a State Department of Transportation and county joint
                       agreement.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute an intergovernmental
Res. 11-186  5-19-2011 agreement with the Village of New Lenox regarding commercial benefit based
                       special service area.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement with
Res. 11-190  5-19-2011 the Village of Homer Glen and Homer Township Road District for a permanent
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
                       Authorizing the County clerk to apply for and accept help America Vote Act Grant
Res. 11-200  6-16-2011 Funds and voting access for individuals with disabilities grant funds from the
                       State Board of Elections.
Res. 11-205  6-16-2011 Authorizing the expenditure of the county’s motor fuel tax funds for the County
                       Maintenance Program.
                       Amendment to intergovernmental agreement for engineering services, and
Res. 11-206  6-16-2011 construction of roadway improvements, and traffic signal modifications at the
                       intersection with Weber Road and Gaskin Drive in the county.
Res. 11-207  6-16-2011 Authorizing approval of professional services supplemental agreement for
                       engineering services.
Res. 11-208  6-16-2011 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County Joint
                       Agreement.
Res. 11-227  6-16-2011 Establishing a pharmaceutical take-back program between Will County and the
                       Village of Plainfield.
Res. 11-229  6-16-2011 Authorizing the County Executive to execute renewal of EDACS FX Agreement with
                       Harris Corporation.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate a professional services agreement
Res. 11-236  7-21-2011 for broker/consultant for property and casualty, general liability, workers’
                       compensation and professional services.
Res. 11-242  7-21-2011 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County Joint
                       Agreement.
                       Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program Approval of fiscal year 2011 application
Res. 11-243  7-21-2011 and allocation and authorizing execution of the memorandum of understanding with
                       the City of Joliet.
                       Adopting the Will County PY 2011 Action Plan for the Community Development Block
Res. 11-250  7-21-2011 Grant and Home Investment Partnership Grant Programs for the period of October
                       1, 2011 through September 30, 2012.
                       Authorizing the Will County Executive to process Illinois Department of Commerce
Res. 11-254  7-21-2011 and Economic Opportunity Grant for feasibility study for inland port authority
                       or transportation district.
Res. 11-276  8-18-2011 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of
                       Joliet for the improvement of County Highway 5 (Caton Farm Road).
Res. 11-277  8-18-2011 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County Joint
                       Amended Agreement.
Res. 11-278  8-18-2011 Authorizing additional engineering services by the county under the Illinois
                       Highway Code.
Res. 11-279  8-18-2011 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County Joint
                       Agreement.
Res. 11-318  8-18-2011 Amending an enterprise zone, established in Res. 82-158, encompassing contiguous
                       portions of the county, Joliet, Lockport and Rockdale.
Res. 11-319  8-18-2011 Amending the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone intergovernmental
                       agreement established in Res. 84-73.
Res. 11-322  8-18-2011 Establishing a pharmaceutical Take-Back Program between the county and the
                       Village of Mokena.
                       Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Homer Glen and
Res. 11-323  8-18-2011 the county for a one-day household hazardous waste collection event for fall
                       2011.
Res. 11-324  8-18-2011 Authorizing the acquisition of an emergency management mobile emergency command
                       center.
Res. 11-340  9-15-2011 Granting county aid in reconstruction of bridge over a branch of Prairie Creek
                       on Gougar Road as petitioned by Manhattan Road District.
Res. 11-341  9-15-2011 Granting county aid in reconstruction of bridge over Plum Creek on Richton Road
                       as petitioned by Crete Road District.
Res. 11-344  9-15-2011 Transfer of jurisdiction of County Highway 3 (McDonough Street) to the city of
                       Joliet.
Res. 11-386  10-20-    Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - County Joint
             2011      Agreement.
Res. 11-429  11-17-    Amending Res. 11-250 adopting the Will County 2011 Action Plan for the Community
             2011      Development Block Grant and Home Investment Partnership Grant Programs.
                       Intergovernmental agreement for the engineering services and construction of
Res. 12-44   2-16-2012 railroad quiet zones on the Canadian National Railroad (intersections with CH 4-
                       Cedar Road and CH 52-Gougar Road).
Res. 12-73   3-15-2012 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - Will County
                       Joint Agreement.
Res. 12-79   3-15-2012 Intergovernmental agreement for traffic signals at the intersection of Laraway
                       Road and Center Road.
Res. 12-80   3-15-2012 Intergovernmental agreement for emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment at the
                       intersection of Laraway Road and Center Road.
Res. 12-92   3-15-2012 Intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Romeoville and the County of
                       Will extending the Marquette TIF District.
Res. 12-113  4-19-2012 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
                       agreement for the improvement of County Highway 17.
Res. 12-132  4-19-2012 Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Godley Park District for a
                       permanent residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 12-133  4-19-2012 Intergovernmental agreement between the City of Naperville and Will County for
                       the operation of household hazardous waste collection facility.
Res. 12-159  5-17-2012 Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
                       amended agreement for the improvement of County Highway 23.
Res. 12-167  5-17-2012 Intergovernmental agreement for traffic signals at the intersection of
                       Manhattan- Monee Road and Central Avenue/Egyptian Trail.
Res. 12-168  5-17-2012 Intergovernmental agreement for emergency vehicle pre-emption equipment at the
                       intersection of Manhattan-Monee Road and Central Avenue/Egyptian Trail.
Res. 12-172  5-17-2012 Authorizing the County Executive to execute a mutual aid agreement with the
                       Illinois Emergency Management Mutual Aid System.
Res. 12-173  5-17-2012 Authorizing the County Executive to execute a mutual aid agreement with the
                       Illinois Coroners and Medical Examiners Association.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between Will County and the Naperville Park District
Res. 12-203  6-21-2012 for the design, construction and reconstruction of Park District property as
                       part of the 95th Street Bridge Extension Project.
Res. 12-240  7-19-2012 Intergovernmental agreement with New Lenox Township for a one-day household
                       hazardous waste collection event for fall 2012.
Res. 12-263  8-16-2012 Intergovernmental agreement with IDOT for the construction of traffic signals at
                       the intersection of 143rd Street and Will-Cook Road.
Res. 12-264  8-16-2012 Intergovernmental agreement with Cook County for the construction of traffic
                       signals at the intersection of 143rd Street and Will-Cook Road.
Res. 12-265  8-16-2012 Intergovernmental agreement with Forest Preserve District of Will County
                       regarding 95th Street improvements.
                       Authorizing approval of an intergovernmental agreement between Will County, the
Res. 12-292  9-20-2012 Village of Shorewood and the City of Joliet for the future jurisdictional
                       transfer of the County Highway 86 (Black Road) over the DuPage River Bridge.
                       Authorizing entering into a joint agreement with the Village of Bolingbrook for
Res. 12-302  9-20-2012 the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Development Block
                       Grant and Home Investment Partnership Grant Programs.
                       Authorizing the County Executive to negotiate and execute an agreement with the
Res. 12-315  9-20-2012 City of Joliet granting to the City of Joliet a temporary license to use county
                       parking facilities.
             10-18-    Intergovernmental agreement for the engineering services and construction of
Res. 12-325  2012      railroad quiet zones on the Canadian National Railroad (intersections with CH
                       51-Mills Road).
Res. 12-335  10-18-    Authorizing the County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
             2012      provide the Village of Crete access to the county radio system.
Res. 12-336  10-18-    Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental agreement to
             2012      provide the Village of University Park access to the county radio system.
Res. 12-349  11-15-    Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
             2012      agreement.
Res. 12-351  11-15-    Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
             2012      agreement.
Res. 12-352  11-15-    Authorizing approval of an Illinois Department of Transportation - county joint
             2012      agreement.
Res. 12-362  11-15-    Establishing a pharmaceutical take-back program between Will County and the
             2012      Village of Shorewood.
Res. 12-388  12-20-    Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between Will County and Cook County
             2012      for the construction of traffic signals.
Res. 13-11   1-17-2013 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement for traffic signals at the
                       intersection of Hassert Boulevard and Chokeberry Drive.
                       Joint agreement between the Village of Bolingbrook and Will County for the U.S.
Res. 13-13   1-17-2013 Department of Housing and Urban Development CDBG and Home Investment Partnership
                       Grant Programs.
Res. 13-39   2-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with Washington Township for the Will County
                       Mobility Management Project.
Res. 13-42   2-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with Channahon Township for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-43   2-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with Washington Township for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-44   2-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Romeoville for a permanent
                       residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-76   3-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with Lockport Township for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-77   3-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Bolingbrook for a permanent
                       residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-78   3-21-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with Troy Township for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-80   3-21-2013 Intergovernmental sponsorship participation agreement with Washington Township
                       for the Will County Mobility Management Project.
Res. 13-81   3-21-2013 Intergovernmental sponsorship participation agreement with Monee Township for
                       the Will County Mobility Management Project.
Res. 13-91   4-18-2013 Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the City of Joliet for the
                       improvement of County Highway 3 (McDonough Street).
Res. 13-103  4-18-2013 Intergovernmental agreement for ombudsman services for Illiana Expressway.
Res. 13-108  4-18-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with the City of Naperville for the operation of a
                       household hazardous waste collection facility.
Res. 13-109  4-18-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with New Lenox Township for a one-day household
                       hazardous waste collection event for fall 2013.
Res. 13-122  5-16-2013 Authorizing an Illinois Department of Transportation - Will County joint
                       agreement for improvements.
Res. 13-124  5-16-2013 Authorizing an Illinois Department of Transportation - Will County joint
                       agreement for improvements.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the Chicago Metropolitan
Res. 13-126  5-16-2013 Agency for planning for the completion of the 2040 Will County transportation
                       plan.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between the county and New Lenox Township for the
Res. 13-127  5-16-2013 improvement of County Highway 74 (Laraway Road) at the Spencer Road
                       intersection.
Res. 13-164  6-20-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with the City of Lockport for a permanent
                       residential electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
Res. 13-169  6-20-2013 Approving an amendment to the Des Plaines River Valley Enterprise Zone
                       intergovernmental agreement.
Res. 13-189  7-18-2013 Intergovernmental agreement with New Lenox Township for a permanent residential
                       electronics and/or traditional recyclables drop-off.
                       Intergovernmental agreement for westbound right turn lane at the intersection of
Res. 13-203  8-15-2013 Illinois Route 53 and Wilmington-Peotone Road/Kankakee River Drive in Will
                       County.
Res. 13-236  9-19-2013 Approving an Illinois Department of Transportation - Will County joint
                       agreement.
Res. 13-255  9-19-2013 Authorizing County Executive to execute third renewal of intergovernmental
                       agreement for ombudsman services for South Suburban Airport.
Res. 13-257  9-19-2013 Authorizing County Executive to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with
                       the City of Joliet for parking lot exchanges in downtown Joliet.
Res. 13-261  9-19-2013 Authorizing County Executive to execute an intergovernmental cooperation
                       agreement between the City of Joliet and Will County (Port of Will County).
Res. 13-293  10-17-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental service provider
             2013      agreement with PACE for the Will County Mobility Management Project.
             10-17-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental sponsorship
Res. 13-294  2013      participation agreement with Monee Township for the Will County Mobility
                       Management Project.
             11-21-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental agreements with
Res. 13-310  2013      various Township Road Districts within Will County for performance of highway
                       and easement maintenance and other services.
             11-21-    Authorizing County Executive to execute intergovernmental sponsorship
Res. 13-322  2013      participation agreement with Peotone Township for the Will County Mobility
                       Management Project.
                      
 
TABLE XI: PLAT APPROVALS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./Ord.               Date Description
1944, p. 169                 - -  Lidice, a subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 222, p. 178)
1953, p. 55                  - -  Unit No. 1 of Raynor Hills Estates.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 393A)
1953, p. 56                  - -  Marycrest, a subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 393B)
1953, p. 200                 - -  Unit No. 2 of Raynor Hills Estates.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 487)
1956, p. 133                 - -  One block in Stern Park, Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 230, p. 75)
1957, p. 33                  - -  Marybrook II subdivisions.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 230, p. 347)
                                 
 
TABLE XII: PURCHASES AND ACQUISITIONS OF REAL ESTATE
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date Description
Ord.
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Purchase of Caswell Yellow Cab property.
418
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Purchase of Fraternal Order of Eagles property.
40
1905, p. 16  - -  Purchase right-of-way across courthouse
(Sup. Rec.
Bk. 202, p.      square from Chicago, Rock Island, & Pacific R.R. Co.
316)
1969, p. 542 - -  Purchase approximately 17 acres in Joliet Township.
1969, p. 943 - -  Purchase of property at Route 52 and Laraway Road.
1971, p. 258 - -  Purchase of 23.662 acres in Joliet Township adjacent to the county highway
                  garage on Route 52 and Cherry Hill Road.
1976, p. 441 - -  Purchase of city-owned lot at northwest corner of Scott and Washington Streets.
1976, p. 445 - -  Right-of-way acquisition for bridge construction.
1976, p. 581 - -  Purchase of city-owned lot at northwest corner of Scott and Washington Streets.
             2-
k.   , p. 23-  Acquisition of parcels of right-of-way along County Highway 3, Houbolt Road.
             1977
k.   , pp.3-
106—107    30-  Purchase of right-of-way from Helene S. Hoburg.
             1977
k.   , p. 9-
471          13-  Highway right-of-way (along Peotone-Beecher Road in Will Township).
             1977
k.   , p. 9-
472          13-  Highway right-of-way (along Weber Road in DuPage Township).
             1977
k.   , pp.10-  One acre from Village of Bolingbrook for Northern Branch Office of the County
524—525    19-  Health Department.
             1977
k.   , pp.10-
549—550    19-  Purchase of federal surplus property.
             1977
             1-
Hwy. Res. 1  18-  Highway right-of-way (along Weber Road in DuPage Township).
             1978
             8-
Hwy. Res. 1  24-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road in Lockport Township).
             1978
             11-
Hwy. Res. 1  30-  Highway right-of-way (McDonough Street).
             1978
             11-
Hwy. Res. 2  30-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road).
             1978
             5-
Hwy. Res. 3  18-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road in DuPage Township).
             1978
             8-
Hwy. Res. 5  29-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road in Lockport Township).
             1979
             8-
Hwy. Res. 11 24-  Highway right-of-way (along Weber Road and County Highway 88).
             1978
             8-
Hwy. Res. 12 24-  Highway right-of-way (Peotone-Beecher Road).
             1978
             10-
Hwy. Res. 7  26-  Highway right-of-way (along Weber Road and County Highway 88).
             1978
             10-
Hwy. Res. 1  29-  Highway right-of-way (along Briggs Street).
             1980
             10-
Hwy. Res. 2  29-  Highway right-of-way (along Briggs Street).
             1980
             10-
Hwy. Res. 3  29-  Highway right-of-way (along Caton Farm Road).
             1980
             1-
Hwy. Res. 3  22-  Highway right-of-way (Briggs Street).
             1981
             5-
Hwy. Res. 3  28-  Highway right-of-way (Briggs Street).
             1981
             6-
Hwy. Res. 4  25-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road).
             1981
             8-
Hwy. Res. 4  27-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road).
             1981
             10-
Hwy. Res. 5  22-  Highway right-of-way (Weber Road).
             1981
             1-
Hwy. Res. 2  28-  Highway right-of-way (Briggs Street).
             1982
Hwy. Res.    4-7- Sears building and grounds for use as county office building.
82-41        1982
             11-  Accepting lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 in Uri Osgood’s Re Subdivision of lots 6 and
Res. 83-141  17-  7 in Block l of School Section addition to Joliet, commonly known as 27 South
             1983 Chicago Street, donated by the South Chicago Street Investment Corporation.
Ord. 85-91   8-8- Accepting as part of a land exchange with the City of Joliet, certain real
             1985 estate upon which will be constructed a county jail. (See also T.S.O. XIII.)
             1-
Res. 88-9    21-  Acquisition of property for highway right- of-way.
             1988
             2-   Conveyance of land in Thorn Creek Woods Nature Preserve to the Forest Preserve
Res. 88-25   18-  District.
             1988
             4-
Res. 88-41   21-  Acquisition of property for highway right- of-way.
             1988
             7-
Res. 88-96   21-  Acquisition of property for highway right- of-way.
             1988
             8-
Res. 88-108  19-  Land donation by the White Eagle Club.
             1988
             10-
Res. 89-280  19-  Highway right-of-way (Bell Road).
             1989
             5-
Res. 90-103  17-  Refusal to accept conveyance of property commonly known as the “Wasteland” site.
             1990
             5-
Res. 95-109  18-  304 N. Scott Street of Joliet, Illinois.
             1995
             12-
Res. 95-286  21-  806 Nicholson Street of Joliet, Illinois.
             1995
             5-
Res. 99-217  20-  Acceptance of property at 304 Bass Street of Wilmington.
             1999
             7-   Authorizing the purchase of the southwest corner of Naperville Road and 11th
Res. 99-271  15-  Street in Wheatland Township for highway expansion.
             1999
             9-   Authorizing negotiations for the acquisition of property to provide a new four-
Res. 99-359A 16-  lane arterial extending 95th Street to Boughton Road southerly.
             1999
             12-
Res. 99-476  16-  Accepting property from the State Department of Corrections.
             1999
             3-   Accepting property commonly known as 119 Patterson Road from the owner, David L.
Res. 00-129  16-  Papendick.
             2000
             10-
Res. 00-420  19-  Authorizing sale of parcel #23-15-19-300-016-0000.
             2000
             11-
Res. 00-474  16-  Acceptance of donation of property located at 815 Vine Street.
             2000
             4-   Purchase of 121 North Chicago Street, Joliet, Illinois from First Midwest
Res. 01-171  19-  Bancorp, Inc.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing acquisition through condemnation of approximately .783 acres located
Res. 01-247C 16-  at 27W233 95th Street.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing acquisition through negotiation of approximately 4.8 acres located
Res. 01-346A 16-  at 27W585 95th Street.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing acquisition through negotiation of approximately 3.595 acres located
Res. 01-346B 16-  at 27W233 95th Street.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing acquisition through negotiation of approximately .783 acres located
Res. 01-346C 16-  at 327S233 95th Street.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing acquisition through condemnation of approximately 4.8 acres located
Res. 01-347A 16-  at 27W585 95th Street.
             2001
             8-   Authorizing acquisition through condemnation of approximately 3.595 acres
Res. 01-347B 16-  located at 27W233 95th Street.
             2001
             9-   Authorizing contract purchases of approximately 9.83 acres for the 95th Street
Res. 01-390  20-  extension.
             2001
             11-  Purchase of 57 North Ottawa and 57 West Jefferson from Emco Plaza Limited
Res. 01-436  15-  Partnership.
             2001
             11-  Authorizing the County Executive to accept a quit claim deem of conveyance for a
Res. 01-496  15-  455 acre parcel of property at the Joliet Arm and Ammunition Plant from the
             2001 United States Department of the Army, to be used as a landfill for the county.
             4-
Res. 02-190  18-  Purchase of 16 Marion Street.
             2002
             11-
Res. 02-524  21-  Right-of-way acquisition services by the county for street improvements.
             2002
             11-
Res. 02-526  21-  Right-of-way acquisition services by the county for street improvements.
             2002
             2-
Res. 03-87   20-  Purchase of South Chicago Street vacant property.
             2003
             3-   Authorizing negotiation of the purchase of certain real property located at the
Res. 03-134  20-  southwest corner of Chicago and Washington Streets.
             2003
             6-   Purchase of property at the southwest corner of Chicago and Washington Streets
Res. 03-284  19-  in Joliet, Illinois.
             2003
             8-   Authorizing application for a State Department of Natural Resources grant to
Res. 04-382  19-  acquire property located in Homer Township for future flood damage mitigation.
             2004
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-13   20-  acquisition along County Highway 58 (County Line Road), County Board District
             2005 #1.
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-14   20-  acquisition along County Highway 5 (Canton Farm Road) from Drauden Road to
             2005 Illinois Route 59, County Board District #5.
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-15   20-  acquisition along County Highway 5 (Canton Farm Road) from County Line Road to
             2005 Drauden Road, County Board District #5.
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-16   20-  acquisition along County Highway 14 (Plainfield-Napierville Road) from 111th
             2005 Street to 95th Street, County Board Districts #3 and #4.
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-17   20-  acquisition along County Highway 26 (Zilm Road) over a tributary to Horse Creek,
             2005 County Board District #6.
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-18   20-  acquisition along County Highway 49 (Exchange Street) at Klemme Road, County
             2005 Board District #1.
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-19   20-  acquisition along County Highway 52 (Gougar Road), County Board District #6.
             2005
             1-   Purchase of various parcels required for improvement to and right-of-way
Res. 05-20   20-  acquisition along County Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road) from U.S. Route 30 to
             2005 Illinois Route 59, County Board District #5.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-21   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 5
             2005 (Canton Farm Road) from Drauden Road to Illinois Route 59, County Board District
                  #5.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-22   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 5
             2005 (Caton Farm Road) from County Line Road to Drauden Road, County Board District
                  #5.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-23   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 14
             2005 (Plainfield-Napierville Road) from 111th St. to 95th St., County Board Districts
                  #3 and #4.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-24   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 19
             2005 (Center Road) over Forked Creek, County Board District #1.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-25   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 37
             2005 (143rd Street) at Golden Oak Drive, County Board District #7.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-26   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 37
             2005 (143rd Street) from Bell Road to Will- Cook Road, County Board District #7.
             1-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-27   20-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 11
             2005 (Veterans Parkway) from 115th Street to Illinois Route 53, County Board District
                  #3.
             1-   Declaring intent to acquire the South Chicago Street crossover site for
Res. 05-43   20-  expansion of the adult detention facility.
             2005
             2-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-76   17-  related to improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 6
             2005 (Manhattan-Monee Road) and 88th Avenue, County Board District #1.
             2-   Authorizing agreement with Cornerstone Services, Inc., in support of acquisition
Res. 05-88   17-  of property for group home construction in order to meet H.U.D. mandatory 15 set
             2005 aside of the HOME Investment Partnership Grant Program for a Community Housing
                  Development Organization.
             3-   Providing title commitment reports needed for the acquisition of various parcels
Res. 05-111  17-  required for improvement to and right-of-way acquisition along County Highway 76
             2005 (Gin Mill Road) from U.S. Route 30 to Illinois Route 59, County Board District
                  #5.
             3-   Authorizing purchase of right-of-way for improvements to County Highway 74
Res. 05-122  17-  (Laraway Road) at County Highway 52 (Gougar Road), County Board District #6.
             2005
             5-   Authorizing the purchase of a right-of-way for county improvements to County
Res. 05-210  19-  Highway 74 (Laraway Road) at County Highway 52 (Gougar Road), County Board
             2005 District #6.
             5-   Authorizing the purchase of a right-of-way for county improvements to County
Res. 05-211  19-  Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road) from U.S. Route 30 to Illinois Route 59, County
             2005 Section 01-00152-06-LA, County Board District #5.
             6-   Authorizing the purchase of an additional right-of-way for county improvement
Res. 05-260  16-  utilizing motor fuel tax funds and matching tax funds.
             2005
             3-   Authorizing the purchase of a right-of-way for county improvement utilizing
Res. 06-96   16-  motor fuel tax funds and matching tax funds.
             2006
             3-   Authorizing the purchase of a right-of-way for county improvement utilizing
Res. 06-109  16-  motor fuel tax funds and matching tax funds.
             2006
             5-   Authorizing the purchase of a right-of-way for county improvement utilizing
Res. 06-211  18-  motor fuel tax funds.
             2006
             5-
Res. 06-239  18-  Authorizing acquisition of property at 121 N. Chicago Street by condemnation.
             2006
             6-   Authorizing the purchase of a right-of-way for county improvement utilizing
Res. 06-249  15-  motor fuel tax funds.
             2006
             3-   Authorizing acquisition of right-of-way, 191st Street between Route 45 and
Res. 07-100  15-  Harlem Avenue in Frankfort Township.
             2007
             4-
Res. 07-169  19-  Authorizing acquisition of right-of-way, 143rd Street at Golden Oak Drive.
             2007
             4-
Res. 07-170  19-  Authorizing the purchase of right-of-way, Black Road at Bronk Road.
             2007
             5-   Authorizing purchase of right-of-way for improvements along County Highway 6
Res. 07-201  17-  (Manhattan-Monee Road).
             2007
             6-
Res. 07-240  21-  Authorizing purchase of right-of-way for 143rd Street improvement.
             2007
             8-   Determining the fair market value of an improved acre within each school
Res. 07-304  16-  district in the county.
             2007
             11-  Authorizing purchase of right-of-way for improvement on Laraway Road and Cherry
Res. 07-443  15-  Hill Road intersection.
             2007
             11-
Res. 07-488  15-  Approving sale or transfer of Woodlands of Crest Hill.
             2007
             1-   Authorizing purchase of right-of-way at County Highway 23 (Pauling/Goodenow
Res. 08-27   17-  Road) at Kedzie Avenue intersection.
             2008
             5-   Authorizing purchase of right-of-way at County Highway 4 (Cedar Road) over
Res. 08-207  15-  Jackson Creek bridge.
             2008
             1-   Authorizing purchase of right-of-way for county improvement for Cedar Road at
Res. 09-14   15-  Division Street.
             2009
             5-   Authorizing execution of purchase contracts for eligible foreclosed upon
Res. 09-161  21-  property in accordance with NSP program regulations.
             2009
             7-
Res. 09-219  16-  Authorizing acquisition of property (Pauling-Goodenow Road) by condemnation.
             2009
             8-
Res. 09-238  20-  Authorizing acquisition of property (143rd Street) by condemnation.
             2009
             9-
Res. 09-289  17-  Authorizing purchase of real estate located at 212 Frank Avenue, Joliet.
             2009
             10-  Conveyance, without cost, of Joliet Arsenal Development Authority property to
Res. 09-364  15-  county for Highway Department salt storage and distribution.
             2009
             2-   Authorizing the County’s State’s Attorney’s office to proceed with a
Res. 10-59   18-  condemnation case regarding the county’s County Highway 35 (135th Street)
             2010 project.
             4-   Authorizing the County’s State’s Attorney’s office to proceed with a
Res. 10-106  15-  condemnation case regarding work to be done under permit A-84-0003 along County
             2010 Highway 84 (191st Street).
             4-   Authorizing the County’s State’s Attorney’s office to proceed with a
Res. 10-107  15-  condemnation case regarding work to be done under permit A-84-0003 along County
             2010 Highway 84 (191st Street).
             7-   Determining the fair market value of an improved acre within each school
Res. 10-224  15-  district.
             2010
             2-   Authorizing the County’s State’s Attorney’s office to proceed with a
Res. 11-67   17-  condemnation cases regarding the county’s County Highway 8 (DeSelm Road)
             2011 project.
             2-   Authorizing the County’s State’s Attorney’s office to proceed with a
Res. 11-68   17-  condemnation cases regarding the county’s County Highway 35 (135th Street)
             2011 project.
             2-   Requesting quick take powers for the acquisition of highway right-of-way at and
Res. 11-70   17-  near the Weber Road and Renwick Road intersection, County Sec. No. 01-00170-26-
             2011 TL County Board Districts #7 and #9.
             2-
Res. 11-84   17-  In support of property acquisition for Sheriff Department Headquarters.
             2011
             2-   Authorizing the County’s State’s Attorney’s office to proceed with a
Res. 11-85   17-  condemnation case regarding the highway access entrance location at 12008
             2011 Laraway Road, near Scheer Road and Laraway Road intersection.
             6-   Authorizing the Will County’s State’s Attorney’s Office to proceed with
Res. 11-210  16-  condemnation cases regarding the county’s county highway 24 (Indiana Avenue over
             2011 Trim Creek) Project.
             7-   Determination fo the fair market value of an improved acre within each school
Res. 11-232  21-  district in the county.
             2011
             7-
Res. 11-252  21-  Declaring vehicles and boat surplus and authorizing their sale.
             2011
             9-   Authorizing the state’s Attorney’s Office to proceed with condemnation cases
Res. 11-345  15-  regarding the county’s County Highway 8 (DeSelm Road) Project.
             2011
             9-   Authorizing the state’s Attorney’s Office to proceed with condemnation cases
Res. 11-346  15-  regarding the county’s County Highway 14 (Plainfield-Naperville Road) Project.
             2011
             9-
Res. 11-354  15-  Authorizing the sale of surplus vehicles and boat/trailer.
             2011
             9-   Affirming the execution of a contract for the purchase of real estate located at
Res. 11-367  15-  311 Lime Street and authorizing the county executive to consummate the purchase
             2011 of said real estate (Drug Court Recovery Home).
             10-  Authorizing purchase of squad cars under non-competitive procurement and
Res. 11-379  20-  appropriating funds.
             2011
             10-  Authorizing the state’s Attorney’s Office to proceed with condemnation cases
Res. 11-389  20-  regarding the county’s County Highway 49 (Exchange Street) Project.
             2011
             10-
Res. 11-401  20-  Declaring seized vehicles surplus and authorizing sale.
             2011
             11-  Proceeding with condemnation cases regarding the county’s county highway 88
Res. 11-439  17-  (Weber Road) and county Highway 36 (Renwick Road) Intersection Project).
             2011
             12-  Proceeding with condemnation cases regarding the County’s County Highway 49
Res. 11-476  15-  (Exchange Street) Project.
             2011
             9-
Res. 12-301  20-  Purchase of 158 Scott Street, Joliet, Illinois.
             2012
             6-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute and administer all documents related
Res. 13-163  20-  to the transfer of ownership for the IKE Buyout Grant properties.
             2013
             9-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute real estate contract for the
Res. 13-259  19-  purchase of the First Midwest Bank Building located at 50 West Jefferson Street.
             2013
                 
 
TABLE XIII: RAILROAD CROSSING AGREEMENTS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date Description
Ord.
1903, p. 81
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Joliet to Northwestern R.R. Co.
Bk. 186, p.
460)
1913, p. 188
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Deed to trustees of University of Illinois with reverter clause concerning
Bk. 206, p.       agricultural experiment station.
483)
1925, p. 170
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Deed land to cemetery trustees.
Bk. 211, p.
456)
1947, p. 175
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Deed to Barnett Cemetery.
Bk. 223, p.
492)
1948, p. 170

(Sup. Rec.   - -  Deed Forest Preserve land to state for road.
Bk. 224, p.
384)
1949, p. 373
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Chicago to Eastern Illinois R.R.
Bk. 225, p.
496)
1950, p. 123
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Elgin, Joliet, and Eastern Railway Co.
Bk. 225, p.
594)
1950, p. 201
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Wabash Railroad Co.
Bk. 226, p.
45)
1955, p. 211
(Sup. Rec.   - -  A.T. & S.F. R.R. and G.M. & O.
Bk. 229, p.
102)
1955, p. 319
(Sup. Rec.   - -  G.M. & O.
Bk. 229, p.
158)
1955, p. 376
(Sup. Rec.   - -  A.T. & S.F. R.R. and G.M. & O.
Bk. 229, p.
191)
1956, p. 360
(Sup. Rec.   - -  G.M. & O.
Bk. 230, p.
199)
1956, p. 366
(Sup. Rec.   - -  A.T. & S.F. R.R. and G.M. & O.
Bk. 230, p.
202)
1956, p. 511
(Sup. Rec.   - -  E.J. & E.
Bk. 230, p.
299)
1956, p. 517
(Sup. Rec.   - -  E.J. & E.
Bk. 230, p.
301)
1956, p. 524

(Sup. Rec.   - -  Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad Co.
Bk. 230, p.
305)
1957, p. 82
(Sup. Rec.   - -  G.M. & O.
Bk. 230, p.
376)
1957, p. 533
(Sup. Rec.   - -  New York Central R.R. Co.
Bk. 231, p.
316)
1958, p. 190
(Sup. Rec.   - -  A.T. & S.F.
Bk. 231, p.
441)
1959, p. 588
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Wabash Railroad Co.
Bk. 233, p.
57)
1960, p. 514
(Sup. Rec.   - -  E.J. & E.
Bk. 233, p.
318)
1961, p. 610
(Sup. Rec.   - -  G.M. & O.
Bk. 234, p.
193)
1961, p. 616
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Wabash Railroad Co.
Bk. 234, p.
196)
1963, p. 329
(Sup. Rec.   - -  E.J. & E.
Bk. 235, p.
240)
1964, p. 16
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Conveyance to Public Building Commission for new courthouse.
Bk. 235, p.
460)
1965, p. 72
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific R.R.
Bk. 236, p.
332)
1965, p. 175
(Sup. Rec.   - -  E.J. & E.
Bk. 236, p.
388)
1965, p. 785
(Sup. Rec.   - -  E.J. & E.
Bk. 237, p.
59)
1965, p. 789
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific R.R. (supplemental agreement).
Bk. 237, p.
59)
1965, p. 906
(Sup. Rec.   - -  Wabash and Norfolk and Western.
Bk. 237, p.
81)
1968, p. 67
(Sup. Rec.   - -  A.T. & S.F. R.R.
Bk. 237, p.
418)
1970, p.     - -  Authorized sale of surplus property; Lot 282, Arthur T. McIntosh and
1309              Company’s New Lenox Estates.
1970, p.     - -  Authorized sale of surplus property; Parcel II Lot 282, Arthur T. McIntosh
1521              and Company’s New Lenox Estates, Unit #5.
1974, p. 575 - -  Scavenger property to Jesse Chandler, deceased.
1974, p. 577 - -  Installment contract to Earl and Anna Chandler and Loretta Woods
1975, p. 19  - -  Scavenger property to Albert Berard.
1975, p. 21  - -  Scavenger property to Salvatore Casciato.
1975, p. 109 - -  Scavenger property to Salvatore Casciato.
1975, p. 266 - -  Scavenger property to Donald H. Deel.
1975, p. 267 - -  Scavenger property to Salvatore Casciato.
1975, p. 378 - -  Scavenger property to Signola Drane.
1975, p. 444 - -  Scavenger property to Robert M. Steger.
1975, p. 445 - -  Scavenger property to Salvatore Casciato.
1975, p. 446 - -  Scavenger property sale.
1976, p. 52  - -  Sale of property to Salvatore Casciato.
1976, p. 118 - -  Scavenger property to Salvatore Casciato.
1976, p. 171 - -  Scavenger property to Larry L. Quick.
1976, p. 172 - -  Scavenger property to Donald Deel.
1976, p. 173 - -  Scavenger property to Roy C. and Olivia Hester.
1976, p. 293 - -  Scavenger property to Albert H. Wheaton.
1976, p. 346 - -  Scavenger property to Joseph and Margaret Peraud.
1976, p. 346 - -  Scavenger property to Janice L. Shiner.
1976, p. 347 - -  Scavenger property to Rev. Aloysius Sinsky.
1976, p. 403 - -  Scavenger property to Richard Rydberg.
1976, p. 409 - -  Right-of-way parcel sale to highest bidder.
1976, p. 489 - -  Scavenger property to George Spanos.
1976, p. 490 - -  Scavenger lots rescind the sale of two.
1976, p. 490 - -  Scavenger property to Kenneth Carlton.
1976, p. 530 - -  Scavenger property to Johnnie Herod.
1976, p. 578 - -  Scavenger property to Raymond Simmons.
1976, p. 579 - -  Scavenger property to Keck Building Corporation.
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 239, p.  - -  Sale of property to Catholic Diocese of Joliet.
439
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 239, p.  - -  Sale of property to Bibleway Church of Jesus Christ.
440
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 239, p.  - -  Sale of property to City of Lockport.
440
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 239, p.  - -  1970 scavenger sale property; extension of time to perfect title.
496
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 239, p.  - -  Sale of scavenger property to Talman Federal Savings & Loan.
496
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Sale of scavenger property to Joliet Park District.
87
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240,p.   - -  Scavenger property sale to Charles Ampele.
165
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property sale to William R. Harrigan.
191
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property sale to Glenn Carlson.
191
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Deeding of cemetery to DuPage Township.
206
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Joliet Park District.
298
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Rodney Wedwick.
298
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Cleotha Trace, Jr.
299
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Van Dwyne Bros., Inc.
300
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Village of Steger.
300
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Leslie Marjai, Jr.
301
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Charles Bottens.
334
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to John Jimenez.
335
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Sale of certificate of purchase No. 816A to Frank Tile Co.
335
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property Joseph Honzik.
369
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to David Horne.
409
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 240, p.  - -  Scavenger property to City of Crest Hill.
454
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Raymond Lewis.
50
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to William Parker.
82
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Nina Johnson.
83
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Devise from Emma Sommerfeld.
98
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Michael Arbanas.
113
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Edward F. Etheridge
114
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to City of Braidwood.
150
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to County Listing Board.
151
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Larry L. Quick.
247
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to County Listing Board.
248
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to School District No. 204.
292
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to County Listing Board.
292
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Lots in Spring Creek to Forest Preserve District.
293
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to County Listing Board.
319
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to County Listing Board.
361
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to Charles F. Bohac.
365
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to Edwin B. Tarquinio.
366
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to County Listing Board.
403
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger properties to William Ricci.
404
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Isidoro Grammarco.
440
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 241, p.  - -  Scavenger property to John J. Armellino.
442
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Isidoro Ciammarco.
19
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Angelo A. Ciambrone.
19
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger properties appraisals and sales.
20
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Giammarco Construction Co.
75
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to James and Essie Sykes.
119
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to George Frankovich.
119
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to George Spanos.
120
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Dorthy Smith.
150
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger properties appraisals and sales.
193
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Vincent and Sharon Sylvester, Jr.
194
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Gerald and Linda Zeman.
265
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Mary Jane and Glen Boehrnsen.
299
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Sale of scavenger property to Adam Gatson.
332
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property sale.
333
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Mamie Sims.
394
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Mrs. Wayne Sims.
461
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Rev. and Mrs. Walton.
461
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Isidoro Giammarco.
462
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Lee Alexander.
463
Co. Bd. Rec.
Bk. 242, p.  - -  Scavenger property to Ridgewood Homeowners Assn. and City of Joliet.
534
             8-
Res. 80-136  27-  Scavenger property to Lee Oldfield.
             1970
k.   , p. 12-  Concurring in jurisdictional transfer east and west frontage roads along I-55
642          22-  between the access control line and right- of-way line from Arsenal Road to
             1976 Blodgett Road.
             1-
k.   , p. 26-  Sale of scavenger property to Dorothy Fortner.
             1977
k.   , pp.4-
145—146    20-  Sale of scavenger property to George Spanos.
             1977
k.   , p. 5-
180          18-  Scavenger property to the Village of Steger.
             1977
k.   , p. 5-
181          18-  Scavenger property to Village of Shorewood.
             1977
k.   , p. 5-
182          18-  Scavenger property to John E. Freberg.
             1977
k.   , p. 6-
244          13-  Scavenger property to R.G. & Betty L. Herbst.
             1977
k.   , p. 6-
245          13-  Scavenger property to Elcor Bolz.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-
318          13-  Scavenger property to Lee Alexander.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-
319          13-  Scavenger property to Peter Polesel.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-
387          17-  Scavenger property to Lee Alexander.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-
388          17-  Scavenger property to Peter Polesel; amending resolution passed 7-13-1977.
             1977
k.   , pp.8-
388—389    17-  Scavenger property to Gregory Spiess.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-
389          17-  Scavenger property to Stephen E. Lacey.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-
390          17-  Scavenger property to Esther Dieringer.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-
39l          17-  Sale of scavenger property to Edna and Donald Pennington.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-
390          17-  Scavenger property to Roger and Barbara Rolando.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-
526          19-  Scavenger property to G. Leslie Armstrong.
             1977
k.   , pp.10-
526—527    19-  Scavenger property to Gerald Marshall.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-
527          19-  Scavenger property to Houston Allen.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-
528          19-  Correction of scavenger sale to Stephen Lacey.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-
528          19-  Rescission of sale of scavenger property to Esther Dieringer.
             1977
k.   , p. 11-
571          16-  Scavenger property to Frank Zeman.
             1977
k.   , p. 11-
635          30-  Sale of scavenger property to Jay H. Honrud.
             1977
             3-
Res. 7       23-  Scavenger property to Clarence McDowell and Bessie Hench
             1978
             4-
Res. 7       21-  Scavenger property to George Spanos.
             1978
             3-
Res. 8       23-  Scavenger property to Timothy McPartlin.
             1978
             3-
Res. 9       23-  Scavenger property to Cleven Harden.
             1978
             3-
Res. 10      23-  Scavenger property to Isadore Adams.
             1978
             3-
Res. 11      23-  Scavenger property to James Langford.
             1978
             3-
Res. 12      23-  Scavenger property to Verdell Triebold.
             1978
             5-
Res. 12      18-  Scavenger property to Etha and Winston Jones.
             1978
             3-
Res. 13      23-  Scavenger property to James Schrementi.
             1978
             3-
Res. 14      23-  Scavenger property to George Spanos.
             1978
             1-
Res. 18      18-  Scavenger property to Frank W. Fouts.
             1978
             6-
Res. 78-11   20-  Scavenger property to Trinedad Lopez.
             1978
             6-
Res. 78-12   20-  Scavenger property to Bob Ybearra.
             1978
             7-
Res. 78-31   20-  Scavenger property to Robert Winfrey.
             1978
             8-
Res. 78-52   24-  Scavenger property to Robert Keyman.
             1978
             9-
Res. 78-75   14-  Scavenger property to Robert Winfrey.
             1978
             11-
Res. 78-105  30-  Scavenger property to Wilma Macdonald.
             1978
             4-
Res. 79-66   25-  Scavenger property to Richard Blievernicht.
             1979
             4-
Res. 79-67   25-  Scavenger property to Robert Ybearra.
             1979
             4-
Res. 79-68   25-  Scavenger property to Harry G. Eitel.
             1979
             4-
Res. 79-69   25-  Scavenger property to Karen Parks.
             1979
             5-
Res. 79-84   23-  Scavenger property to S-M-D Realty (see Res. 79-112, adopted 6-20-1979).
             1979
             5-
Res. 79-85   23-  Scavenger property to Steven Blievernicht.
             1979
             5-
Res. 79-86   23-  Scavenger property to Charles Guiliani and Earl Fornera.
             1979
             5-
Res. 79-87   23-  Scavenger property to Gene Heitman.
             1979
             5-
Res. 79-88   23-  Scavenger property to Herford Corp.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-108  20-  Scavenger property to Louise and Barbara Michalek.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-109  20-  Scavenger property to Edward and Elain Cook.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-110  20-  Scavenger property to Ronald and Corinne Butts.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-111  20-  Scavenger property to Ethel Stewart.
             1979
             6-
Res. 79-112  20-  Amendment of Res. 79-84, adopted 5-23-1979.
             1979
             7-
Res. 79-134  25-  Scavenger property to Mr. and Mrs. Wardell J. Schultz.
             1979
             7-
Res. 79-135  25-  Scavenger property to Charles A. Waller.
             1979
             8-
Res. 79-155  29-  Scavenger property to Gilbert Willoughby.
             1979
             9-
Res. 79-178  26-  Scavenger property to Harry L. Quick.
             1979
             9-
Res. 79-179  26-  Scavenger property to Lincolnshire Country Club.
             1979
             10-
Res. 79-192  24-  Scavenger property to Steven Blievernicht.
             1979
             11-
Res. 79-196  14-  Scavenger property to John and Lorie Norman.
             1979
             11-
Res. 79-197  14-  Scavenger property to Edward Pena.
             1979
             11-
Res. 79-198  14-  Scavenger property to Gorgonio Garcia.
             1979
             12-
Res. 79-214  19-  Scavenger property to Lawson Ware.
             1979
             12-
Res. 79-215  19-  Scavenger property to Irene Steger.
             1979
             12-
Res. 79-216  19-  Scavenger property to Anthony Bravo.
             1979
             12-
Res. 79-217  19-  Scavenger property to Mr. and Mrs. William Ricci.
             1979
             12-
Res. 79-218  19-  Scavenger property to Marco and Mildred Uzelak.
             1979
             1-
Res. 80-8    23-  Scavenger property to Village of Steger.
             1980
             1-
Res. 80-9    23-  Scavenger property to Village of Steger.
             1980
             1-
Res. 80-10   23-  Scavenger property to Evon Butcher.
             1980
             2-
Res. 80-22   20-  Scavenger property to Christ Meneghin.
             1980
             2-
Res. 80-30   20-  Scavenger property to Village of Steger.
             1980
             3-
Res. 80-42   26-  Scavenger property to the City of Joliet.
             1980
             4-
Res. 80-59   23-  Scavenger property to Will County.
             1980
             4-
Res. 80-60   23-  Scavenger property to Tom Gulley.
             1980
             5-
Res. 80-84   21-  Scavenger property to Gerald and Nancy Keene.
             1980
             6-   Scavenger property to Union National Bank and Trust Co. as Trustee, Trust
Res. 80-109  25-  #3221.
             1980
             7-
Res. 80-125  23-  Scavenger property to Daniel and Sally Boyle.
             1980
             7-
Res. 80-126  23-  Scavenger property to James Gierczyk.
             1980
             9-
Res. 80-162  24-  Scavenger property to Herman Dent.
             1980
             10-
Res. 80-173  29-  Scavenger property to William Lesnick.
             1980
             10-
Res. 80-174  29-  Scavenger property to William Lesnick.
             1980
             10-
Res. 80-175  29-  Scavenger property to Paul and Phyllis Ledesma.
             1980
             10-
Res. 80-176  29-  Scavenger property to Charles Scheidt.
             1980
             10-
Res. 80-178  29-  Scavenger property to heirs of A.J. Berard; repealed by Res. 88-85.
             1980
             11-
Res. 80-185  28-  Scavenger property to David Wallace.
             1980
             11-
Res. 80-186  28-  Scavenger property to Charles Rufo.
             1980
             1-
Res. 81-7    22-  Scavenger property to Andrew Hinch.
             1981
             2-   Authorizing the sale of certain county owned land along State Route 52 to the
Res. 81-35   26-  State Department of Transportation.
             1981
             4-
Res. 81-59   23-  Scavenger property to Ben and Barbara Washington.
             1981
             5-
Res. 81-83   28-  Scavenger property to the county.
             1981
             5-
Res. 81-84   28-  Scavenger property to Constance Hernandez.
             1981
             8-
Res. 81-137  27-  Scavenger property to Martin Doyle.
             1981
             9-
Res. 81-170  24-  Scavenger property to James Gierczyk.
             1981
             9-   Rescinding sale of scavenger property to Mrs. Dorothy Smith if purchase not
Res. 81-172  24-  completed within 30 days.
             1981
             12-
Res. 81-225  17-  Scavenger property to Mamie Stokes.
             1981
             3-
Res. 82-33   25-  Scavenger property to Mark Kroll.
             1982
             4-
Res. 82-44   22-  Scavenger property to George Lopez.
             1982
             5-
Res. 82-63   27-  Scavenger property to Gwendolyn Dillon.
             1982
             8-
Res. 82-99   26-  Scavenger property to Moses Avalos.
             1982
             8-
Res. 82-100  26-  Scavenger property to Fred Bates.
             1982
             8-
Res. 82-101  26-  Scavenger property to Cornelius Harris.
             1982
             1-
Res. 83-1    20-  Scavenger property to Andrew Shelby.
             1983
             1-
Res. 83-2    20-  Scavenger property to John Legan.
             1983
             3-
Res. 83-20   17-  Scavenger property to Naomi Onnie M. O’Bryant.
             1983
             4-
Res. 83-27   21-  Scavenger property to Thomas A. Boersema.
             1983
             5-
Res. 83-38   19-  Scavenger property to Warren Dorris, Sr.
             1983
             6-
Res. 83-42A  16-  Scavenger property to Manley and Marjorie Hall.
             1983
             6-
Res. 83-43A  16-  Scavenger property to Paul Vanderaa.
             1983
             8-
Hwy. Res. 6  18-  Authorizing the transfer of land from the county to the state.
             1983
             8-   Approving the execution of a quitclaim deed to enable the improvement of U.S.
Res. 83-79   18-  Route 30 at the intersection of Cass Street and Bodio Place.
             1983
             9-   Authorizing the State’s Attorney’s office to secure sale of county owned
Res. 83-93   15-  lands to Forest Preserve District.
             1983
             10-
Res. 83-126  20-  Scavenger property to Elizabeth Hazelhurst.
             1983
             3-
Hwy. Res. 5  15-  E.J. & E.
             1984
             9-
Res. 84-112  20-  Scavenger property to William Hines; rescinded by Res. 87-114.
             1984
             9-
Res. 84-113  20-  Scavenger property to Willie Pitts.
             1984
             10-
Res. 84-130  18-  Scavenger property to Ronald Williams.
             1984
             12-
Res. 84-162  20-  Scavenger property to William Reichert.
             1984
             3-
Res. 85-16   21-  Scavenger property to Calvin Luckett.
             1985
             4-
Res. 85-37   18-  Scavenger property to Esther Abernathy.
             1985
             6-
Res. 85-60   20-  Scavenger property to Mary Brzeczk.
             1985
             6-
Res. 85-61   20-  Scavenger property to Leonard White.
             1985
             6-
Res. 85-62   20-  Scavenger property to Eddie Dorris.
             1985
             6-
Res. 85-63   20-  Scavenger property to Mark and Beverly Shell.
             1985
             6-
Res. 85-64   20-  Sale of property to John Walsh.
             1985
             7-
Res. 85-78   18-  Scavenger property to the City of Joliet.
             1985
Ord. 85-91   8-8- Granting as part of a land exchange with the City of Joliet certain real
             1985 estate for the Union Station renovation and restoration project.
             9-
Res. 85-111  19-  Scavenger property to John Gilkison, Jr.
             1985
             10-
Res. 85-132  17-  Scavenger property to Gilbert E. Mitchell.
             1985
             12-
Res. 85-185  19-  Scavenger property to the following grantees:
             1985
                Daniel Huml
                David Sullivan
                Ted Blackman
                Kenneth McFarland
Res. 85-185  12-
(Cont’d)   19-  Casimer Kocielko
             1985
                Eugene McDaniel
                Cornelius Harris
                Hosea Reliford
                Lawrence Tague
                John McCormick
                Grady and Nancy Williams
                Jacquelyn Barnes
                James Noblitt
                Helen Gibson
                Dewitt and Ollie Kimble
                Dennis Ashbaugh
                William Lesnick
                Dennis King
                Kenneth Leroy
                Elmyria Toombs
                Jose S. Ruiz
                Eugene Kibbey
                Richard Sweeder
                John Dugan
                David Wallace
                Martin Bucholz
                Margaret Kallio (on behalf of Crete Park district)
                Donald Deel
                Carl Prince
             2-   Scavenger property to Deborah Reliford (Rescinding previous transaction
Res. 86-15   20-  effectuated by Res. 85-185).
             1986
             3-
Res. 86-33   20-  Scavenger property to Clyde N. Wirgler.
             1986
             10-
Res. 86-124  16-  Scavenger property to Christine Winfrey and Dorothy Thompson.
             1986
             10-
Res. 86-125  16-  Scavenger property to Marion Fuller.
             1986
             10-
Res. 86-126  16-  Scavenger property to Wallace Gray.
             1986
             10-
Res. 86-127  16-  Scavenger property to Delores King
             1986
             1-
Res. 87-1    15-  Scavenger property to Joseph A. Cusimano.
             1987
             2-
Res. 87-14   19-  Scavenger property to D.L. Ashbaugh.
             1987
             5-   Sale of scavenger property located in the Rest Haven Beach Subdivision to
Res. 87-48   21-  Preston Ambrose.
             1987
             7-   Sale of scavenger property located in the part of Lot 1 Line north of the
Res. 87-68   16-  creek in Lot 2 line north of the creek, except the west 43.75 feet of
             1987 Norton’s Subdivision to Arthur and Chari Tarlini.
             7-   Sale of scavenger property, Lot 65 in George Monroe’s Addition to Ridgewood
Res. 87-69   16-  to James W. Taylor.
             1987
             7-   Sale of scavenger property, Lots 2 and 3 in Forest Park to John and Novella
Res. 87-70   16-  Pearson.
             1987
             8-   Sale of scavenger property, Lot 5 in Block 2 in Forest Park Subdivision to
Res. 87-85   20-  Johnnie Fant.
             1987
             8-   Sale of scavenger property, Lot 46 in Oakville Subdivision to Davis and
Res. 87-86   20-  Nadean Sims.
             1987
             8-   Sale of scavenger property, Lot 136 in Pleasant View Park Subdivision to
Res. 87-87   20-  Curlie Craig.
             1987
             8-   Sale of scavenger property, 513 Eastern Avenue, Joliet, Illinois to Antonio
Res. 87-88   20-  Luna.
             1987
             8-   Sale of scavenger property, Ontario Street near Superior, two blocks off of
Res. 87-89   20-  McKinley, Joliet, Illinois to Johnnie Ellis.
             1987
             9-   Rescinding the sale of scavenger property in Joliet Township to William
Res. 87-114  17-  Hines; Res. 84-112.
             1987
             11-
Res. 87-156  19-  Sale of scavenger property to Kathi Richardson.
             1987
             11-
Res. 87-157  19-  Sale of scavenger property to Robert Gant.
             1987
             11-
Res. 87-158  19-  Sale of scavenger property to M.J. and Lillie Jones.
             1987
             11-
Res. 87-159  19-  Sale of scavenger property to Johnnie A. Ellis.
             1987
             12-
Res. 87-178  17-  Sale of scavenger property to Lillian Dillon.
             1987
             7-   Repealing prior sale of scavenger property to the heirs of A.J. Berard (Res.
Res. 88-85   21-  80-178) and accepting bid by Derald Whiteford.
             1988
             7-   Repealing prior sale of scavenger property to Arthur and Elsie Petersen and
Res. 88-86   21-  accepting bid by Lillie N. Dillon.
             1988
             9-
Res. 88-119  15-  Sale of scavenger property to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Joliet.
             1988
             8-
Res. 89-188  17-  Scavenger property to Robert Gant.
             1989
             8-
Res. 89-189  17-  Scavenger property to Macio S. Edwards.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-239  21-  Scavenger property to Monica Forster.
             1989
             9-
Res. 89-257  21-  Scavenger property to Jerome Blackmon.
             1989
             6-
Res. 91-142  20-  Scavenger property to J.C. Hinton & L. Muwwakkil.
             1991
             7-
Res. 91-176  18-  Scavenger property to Lillian Fowlkes.
             1991
             6-
Res. 92-124  18-  Scavenger property to Esequiel Morales.
             1992
             8-
Res. 93-188  19-  Scavenger property to Norris E. Ammons.
             1993
             2-
Res. 94-34   17-  Scavenger property to Roger Rolando.
             1994
             6-
Res. 94-149  16-  Scavenger property to Russell King.
             1994
             6-
Res. 94-150  16-  Scavenger property to Roger Rolando.
             1994
             8-
Res. 94-218  18-  Scavenger property to Vicente Munoz.
             1994
             11-  Improvement of railroad crossings at Peotone/Wilmington Road (County Highway
Res. 94-294  17-  25).
             1994
             2-
Res. 95-34   16-  Scavenger property to Endor, Inc.
             1995
             4-   Modernizing signals and widening lanes on the crossing at Wolf Road (County
Res. 95-84   20-  Highway 2) for the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway Company.
             1995
             5-
Res. 95-98   18-  Scavenger property to Habitat for Humanity, Inc.
             1995
             6-
Res. 95-113  15-  Scavenger property to David and Sandra Jones.
             1995
             9-
Res. 95-194  21-  Scavenger property to Joe M. Davis.
             1995
             2-   Authorizing intergovernmental agreement for railroad at-grade crossing
Res. 04-73   19-  improvements with Commuter Rail Division of METRA.
             2004
             8-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement with the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern
Res. 05-369  18-  Railway Company for the railroad at-grade crossing improvements on County
             2005 Highway 76 (Gin Mill Road).
                 
 
TABLE XIV: SALE OF REAL ESTATE
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./Ord. Date       Description
Res. 02-09     1-17-2002  Authorizing the sale of 304 Bass Street.
                          Authorizing execution of quitclaim deed for FAA Radar
Res. 03-29     1-16-2003  Communication Link property located in Frankfort
                          Township.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 03-257    6-19-2003  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 03-353    8-21-2003  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 03-398    9-18-2003  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 03-447    10-16-2003 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
Res. 03-479    11-20-2003 Authorizing transfer of Laughton Cemetery to Forest
                          Preserve District.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 03-506    11-20-2003 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 03-544    12-18-2003 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 04-390    9-16-2004  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 04-446    10-21-2004 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 04-495    11-18-2004 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 04-532    12-16-2004 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-103    12-16-2004 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-206    5-19-2005  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-244    6-16-2005  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-322    7-21-2005  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-394    9-15-2005  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-424    10-20-2005 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-468    11-17-2005 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 05-507    12-15-2005 cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
Res. 06-11     1-19-2006  Transfer of property at 15059 South Bell Road to the
                          Village of Homer Glen.
                          Authorizing execution of deeds for conveyance or
Res. 06-93     3-16-2006  cancellation of certificates of purchases for
                          delinquent tax program.
                          Authorizing execution of sales contracts to eligible
Res. 09-161    5-21-2009  buyers in accordance with the NSP program
                          regulations.
Res. 09-229    7-16-2009  Authorizing documents necessary to transfer the
                          Calumet Gardens property to Aqua Illinois.
                          Support for purchase agreement between Village of
Res. 09-451    12-17-2009 Tinley Park and Lincoln-Way Community School District
                          210 regarding the southwest corner of Harlem Avenue
                          and 191st Street.
 
TABLE XV: VACATIONS
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./Ord.                     Date Description
1928, p. 28                        - -  Jay Street in Sunnyland Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 213, p. 15)
1934, p. 125                       - -  North part of South Park and addition to South Park.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 216, pp. 285—286)
1935, p. 59                        - -  Plat of Arden, a Subdivision (Plat Book 16, pp. 58—59).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 216, p. 561)
1936, p. 301                       - -  Plat of Lockport Highlands, a Subdivision reconsidered (Plat Book 23, pp.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 217, p. 344)             10—13).
1938, p. 54                        - -  Plat of the Townsite of Andres (Plat Book 15, p. 37).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 219, pp. 53—54)
1941, p. 111                       - -  Plat of the Lockport Highlands (Plat Book 23, pp. 10—13).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 220, p. 404)
1943, p. 263                       - -  Manhattan Terrace, a subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 221, p. 566)
1944, p. 284                       - -  Lidice, a subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 222, pp. 277-278)
1946, p. 62                        - -  Henry Street, Archer’s addition to Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 89)
1946, p. 173                       - -  Alley in Bush’s addition to Joliet.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 187)
1947, p. 59                        - -  Streets and alleys in Jessup’s addition to Channahon.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 389)
1947, p. 148                       - -  Evergreen Hill Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 458)
1947, p. 149                       - -  Part of Prairie Avenue East (Cockle and Greenwood’s addition to Manhattan).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 459)
1947, p. 150                       - -  Lots in Cockle and Greenwood’s addition to Manhattan.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 460)
1947, p. 154                       - -  Streets and alleys in plat of Custer Park.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 223, p. 464)
1949, p. 199                       - -  Segment of Richmont Avenue and unnamed alley.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 225, p. 266)
1950, p. 64                        - -  Portion of Russell Avenue in Town of Joliet.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 225, p. 549)
1950, p. 68                        - -  Parts of Main Street and alleys in Runyan’s addition to Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 225, p. 552)
1951, p. 125                       - -  Plat of Parkside Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 226, p. 306)
1951, p. 237                       - -  Alley in George H. Monroe’s addition to Ridgewood.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 226, p. 377)
1951, p. 342                       - -  Alleys in Hills Brothers Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 226, p. 444)
1952, p. 450                       - -  Street in Crystal Lawns Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 353)
1953, p. 47                        - -  Part of Canal Street in South Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 390)
1953, p. 50                        - -  Part of North Street in Runyan’s addition to Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 227, p. 392)
1954, p. 54                        - -  Portion of town plat.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 228, p. 257)
1954, p. 143                       - -  Part of Gross Street.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 228, p. 306)
1954, p. 182                       - -  Alley in Western Stone Company’s Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 228, p. 328)
1955, p. 52                        - -  Portion of Oakdale Avenue in Cherry Hill Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 229, p. 17)
1955, p. 365                       - -  Alley in Highland Parkside Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 229, p. 184)
1955, p. 518                       - -  Alley in Cutter Hill Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 229, p. 409)
1955, p. 520                       - -  Alley in Block 16 of Lewistown.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 229, p. 410)
1957, p. 32                        - -  Alley in James C. Johnson’s Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 230, p. 346)
1957, p. 332                       - -  Alley in Lewistown Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 57)
1957, p. 474                       - -  Part of Cherry Street, Channahon Township.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 283)
1957, p. 479                       - -  Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation land.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 284)
1957, p. 483                       - -  Part of Henry Street, Archer’s addition to Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 286)
1958, p. 248                       - -  Area in First Unit of Cherry Hill Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 470)
1958, p. 252                       - -  Joliet Street between Blocks 33 and 38 in DuPage Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 231, p. 473)
1959, p. 16                        - -  Barry Avenue, Arthur Avenue and certain alleys in Morris Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 232, p. 159)
1959, p. 503                       - -  Alley in George H. Monroe’s addition to Ridgewood.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 18)
1960, p. 103                       - -  Mannheim Heights Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 114)
1960, p. 208                       - -  Roadway in Lakewood Shores.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 170)
1960, p. 414                       - -  Certain streets and alleys in Runyan’s addition to Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 277)
1960, p. 578                       - -  Portion of Clydell Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 377)
1961, p. 50                        - -  Portion of Clydell Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 233, p. 449)
1961, p. 715                       - -  Part of Joliet Street between Center Street and Chicago Street in Jessup’s
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 244)             addition to Channahon.
1962, p. 81                        - -  Drive in Spring Banks Subdivision, Plainfield Township.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 307)
1962, p. 285                       - -  Street in Wood Hill’s Ridgeview Subdivision, second addition.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 234, p. 414)
1963, p. 35                        - -  Alley in H.H. Songer’s Subdivision, Parcel No. 3.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 84)
1963, p. 171                       - -  Part of Miramar Avenue in Unit No. 1 of Sunny Acres.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 154)
1963, p. 281                       - -  Patrick Court in Rolling Heights Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 215)
1963, p. 457                       - -  Olin Mathieson Chemical Corp., Commonwealth Edison Co., G.M. & O. R.R., A.T.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 235, p. 310)             & S.F. R.R. subdivided property.
1964, p. 659                       - -  Street adjacent to Lot 273, Unit No. 7, Kelvin Grove Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p. 280)
1965, p. 244                       - -  Portion of Arbury Hills, second addition.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p. 430)
1965, p. 266                       - -  Shady Hollow Subdivision.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 236, p. 442)
1965, p. 831                       - -  Alley in Block 11 in Runyan’s addition to Lockport.
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 237, p. 68)
1969, p. 229                       - -  Right-of-way for public road (County Highway 67).
(Sup. Rec. Bk. 238, p. 119)
1969, p. 294                       - -  Rixon Coal Company Subdivision.
1971, p. 143                       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes (former County Highway 64).
1973, p.                             Alley bounded on the south by Washington Street, on the west by Chicago
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 448)            - -  Street, on the north by Jefferson Street, on the east by a north-to-south
                                        alleyway running between Jefferson Street and Washington Street.
1974, p.                       - -  Part of County Highway 42.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 48)
1974, p.                       - -  Delete a certain road from the County Highway System.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 47)
1975, p.                       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes - County Highway 11.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 165)
1975, p.                       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes - County Highway 64.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 167)
1975, p.                       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes - County Highway 17.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 168)
1975, p.                       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes - County Highway 23.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 169)
1975, p.                       - -  Right-of-way for highway construction.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 210)
1976, p.                       - -  Vacate certain alleyways on county-owned property.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 448)
1977, p.                       - -  Vacate Chicago Street.
(Sup. Rec. Bk., p. 272)
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 357       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes; part of County Highway 36 (Renwick
                                        Road).
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 429       - -  Right-of-way for public road purposes; part of County Highway 6.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 240, p. 495       - -  Parts of County Highways 30 and 21.
Co. Bd. Rec. Bk. 241, p. 55        - -  Parts of County Highway 6.
                                   6-
Hwy. Res. 2                        20-  Right-of-way for public road purposes; part of County Highways 51 and 55.
                                   1978
                                   1-   Vacation of right-of-way by Penn Central, and amending county land use plan
Res. 82-14                         28-  by designation of this area as open space.
                                   1982
                                   9-   Delete a portion of Center Road, County Highway 47 from the County Highway
Hwy. Res. 4                        20-  System.
                                   1984
                                   11-  Deleting a portion of Thornton Street (County Highway 68), from Eliot Street
Res. 96-280                        21-  to Illinois Route 7, from the County Highway System.
                                   1996
                                   11-  Deleting a portion of Thornton Street (County Highway 68), from Madison
Res. 96-281                        21-  Street to Eliot Street, from the County Highway System.
                                   1996
                                   11-  Deleting a portion of Washington Street (County Highway 11), from county
Res. 96-282                        21-  line to east branch of the DuPage River, from the County Highway System.
                                   1996
                                   11-  Deleting a portion of 135th Street (County Highway 35), from Illinois Route
Res. 96-283                        21-  53 to New Avenue, from the County Highway System.
                                   1996
                                   11-  Deleting a portion of Tryon-Bluff-Fryer Street (County Highway 32), from
Res. 96-284                        21-  Illinois Route 6 to Bridge Street, from the County Highway System.
                                   1996
                                   2-   Vacating a right-of-way for a public road located on County Highway 67 in
Res. 97-31                         20-  the Village of Monee.
                                   1997
                                   10-  Deleting a portion of Symerton Road (County Highway 73) from Commercial
Res. 03-456                        16-  Street to Wilmington-Peotone Road from the County Highway System.
                                   2003
                                   12-  Deleting a portion of Crete-Monee Road (County Highway 21) near Will-Center
Res. 03-567                        18-  Road to near Old Monee Road from the County Highway System.
                                   2003
                                   10-  Vacating right-of-way to property east of Monee Road and North of Exchange
Res. 04-456                        21-  Street for public road purposes and deeding the property to the County
                                   2004 Forest Preserve District.
                                   10-  Vacating a segment of Brandon Road from existing Laraway Road northward to
Res. 08-394                        16-  proposed relocated Laraway Road for public road purposes.
                                   2008
                                   5-   Authorizing the County Executive to execute the Fairway Lakes Estates
Res. 11-154                        19-  planned unit development vacation agreement.
                                   2011
                                       
 
TABLE XVI: VARIANCES
Res./Ord. Date Description
Res./  Date Description
Ord.
Res.   4-
79-58  18-  Street lights for Jacob Woods subdivision in Crete Township.
       1979
Res.   7-
79-123 25-  Sidewalks for Chickasaw Hills, 5th Addition, a subdivision of Homer Township.
       1979
Res.   4-
80-46  23-  Frankfort Square No. 18, a subdivision of Frankfort Township.
       1980
Res.   4-
80-47  23-  Variance to Old Oak Estates East for subdivision entrances of 1,053 feet.
       1980
Res.   5-
80-72  21-  Variance to Crescenzo Acres to allow a private entrance onto a state highway.
       1980
Res.   5-
80-73  21-  Variance to Crescenzo Acres to allow subdivision entrances of 649 feet.
       1980
Res.   9-
80-149 24-  Lake Side Drive entrance onto Francis Road in New Lenox Valley Subdivision.
       1980
       5-
-      28-  Front yard variance for case no. 80-24.
       1981
       7-
-      23-  Lot frontage variances for Parcels II and III in zoning amending case 2384-C.
       1981
       7-
-      23-  Lot frontage variances for Parcels I and II in zoning amending case 2386-C.
       1981
       9-
-      24-  Lot frontage variance in zoning amending case 2398-C.
       1981
       9-
-      24-  Fence height variance in zoning amending case 2403-C.
       1981
       10-
-      22-  Variance for front yard setback in zoning amending case 2415-C.
       1981
       10-
-      22-  Variance from the front yard setback requirements in zoning amending case 2432-C.
       1981
       12-
-      17-  Lot frontage and front yard setback variances in zoning amending case 2438-C.
       1981
Res.   1-
82-1   28-  Subdivision variances to Fritz Subdivision, New Lenox Township.
       1982
       6-
-      24-  Variance from Subdivision Ordinance § 7.6-1(f), Lasser subdivision.
       1982
Res.   7-
82-79  22-  Variance from Subdivision Ordinance § 7.6-8, Knox subdivision
       1982
Res.   8-
82-104 26-  Variance from § 4.4(3), Marley Acres, New Lenox Township.
       1982
Res.   3-
83-19  17-  Variance from §§ 6.5(4) and 7.5 (5), Acorn Hills, Wheatland Township.
       1983
Res.   7-   Variance of § 4.4(3), extension of preliminary plat, Ridgefield Subdivision, Crete
83-61  21-  Township.
       1983
Res.   7-   Variance of § 4.4(3), extension of preliminary plat, Highlands of Frankfort
83-62  21-  Subdivision, Frankfort Township.
       1983
Res.   9-
83-87  15-  Subdivision variance from § 7.6(7) to Rivendell #2 New Lenox Township.
       1983
Res.   10-
83-123 20-  Subdivision variance from § 7.6(7) to Winterset Haven Green Garden Township.
       1983
Res.   12-  Subdivision variances from §§ 6.1(4), 6.5(4) and 6.2(9) for Jackman’s Subdivision in
83-152 15-  New Lenox Township.
       1983
Res.   1-   Subdivision variance from §§ 6.1(4), 6.5(4) and 7.6(4)b, 7.6(6)a, and 7.6(8) for
84-1   19-  Texaco Subdivision in Lockport Township.
       1984
Res.   1-
84-2   19-  Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Old Oak Estates #3, Homer Township.
       1984
Res.   5-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Frankfort Square #18, a preliminary plat in
84-40  17-  Frankfort Township.
       1984
Res.   5-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Chickasaw Hills #5, a preliminary plat in
84-41  17-  Homer Township.
       1984
Res.   6-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Stone Ridge #3, a preliminary plat in Crete
84-60  21-  Township.
       1984
Res.   6-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) to Spring Lake Woods, a preliminary plat in Homer
84-93  21-  Township.
       1984
Res.   6-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) to Weniver Heights, a preliminary plat in Custer
84-94  21-  Township.
       1984
Res.   9-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) to Springbrook Estates, a preliminary plat in
84-110 20-  Homer Township.
       1984
Res.   9-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Jacobs Woods, a preliminary plat in Crete
84-111 20-  Township.
       1984
Res.   10-  Subdivision variance from § 7.5-4 for Wheatland Heights, a subdivision of Wheatland
84-124 18-  Township.
       1984
Res.   3-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Cedar Glen, a preliminary plat in Homer
85-14  21-  Township.
       1985
Res.   5-   Subdivision variance from § 8.12-1 for Lichtenwalter Resubdivision, a site in
85-47  16-  Plainfield Township.
       1985
Res.   6-   Subdivision variance from § 6.5(4) for Irene Estates, a subdivision in Jackson
85-58  20-  Township.
       1985
Res.   8-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Ridgefield No. 2, a preliminary plat in Crete
85-94  15-  Township.
       1985
Res.   9-
85-109 19-  Subdivision variance from § 7.5-4 for Erin Hills, a subdivision in Homer Township.
       1985
Res.   10-  Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Spring Lake Woods, a preliminary plat in Homer
85-130 17-  Township.
       1985
Res.   2-   Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for the preliminary plat of Chickasaw Hills 5th
86-13  20-  Addition, a subdivision in Homer Township.
       1986
Res.   2-   Subdivision variance from § 7.6-7(a) for Woodhaven Estates, a subdivision in New
86-14  20-  Lenox Township.
       1986
Res.   5-
86-61  15-  Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Stone Ridge in Crete Township.
       1986
Res.   8-
86-96  21-  Subdivision variance from § 4.4(3) for Ridgefield in Crete Township.
       1986
Res.   10-
87-134 15-  Variance of sidewalks for Wooded Oaks Subdivision.
       1987
Res.   11-
87-151 19-  Variance of sidewalks for Harmoni Heights, New Lenox Township.
       1987
Res.   6-
88-69  16-  Variance for White Eagle Club, Unit 12.
       1988
Res.   6-
88-69  16-  Variance for White Eagle Club, Unit 14.
       1988
Res.   9-
89-221 21-  Subdivision variance from § 6.5-4 to lot 4 in Country Estates Unit 2.
       1989
Res.   8-   Ravines Subdivision is granted a waiver to allow construction of subdivision with
91-201 15-  sidewalks on one side of the street only.
       1991
Res.   3-   Granting all variances approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission from 1978 to
95-48  16-  July 6, 1994.
       1995
4049-  4-
RE     20-  Granting a variance for frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet on a dedicated street.
       1995
4250-  2-   Granting a variance from frontage from 150 feet to 100 feet on property in Homer
RM     15-  Township.
       1996
4254-  3-
RMV    21-  Granting a variance from frontage 180 feet to 0 feet in New Lenox Township.
       1996
       3-   Granting a variance from the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to allow for the
-      21-  construction of a 1,400 square feet storage building using floodproofing techniques.
       1996
       10-
-      17-  Granting a variance for a 1,500 foot long cul-de-sac to Twelve Mile Grove.
       1996
       2-   Granting a variance from the Subdivision Ordinance to waive the sidewalk requirement
-      20-  for Plum Grove Subdivision.
       1997
Res.   6-   Granting a variance to allow block length over 1,500 feet for Saddle Ridge Estates
97-116 19-  Subdivision in Green Garden Township.
       1997
4663-  7-
SV2    15-  Granting a variance for stream setback from 75 feet to 64.7 feet.
       1999
4664-  7-
SV2    15-  Granting a variance for stream setback from 75 feet to 45 feet.
       1999
4668-  8-   Granting a variance for rear yard setback from 40 feet to 29 feet, for side yard
V2     19-  setback from 15 feet to 10 feet.
       1999
CT-99- 9-
12     16-  Granting a height variance from 75 feet not to exceed 257 feet with one condition.
       1999
CT-99- 10-  Granting variance for height from 200 feet not to exceed 257 feet for wireless
13V    21-  telecommunication tower with one condition.
       1999
CT-99- 10-
14V    21-  Granting variance for cul-de-sac length from 1,200 feet to 1,600 feet.
       1999
CT-99- 12-
15V    16-  Granting height variance from 200 feet with one condition.
       1999
CT-99- 1-
17V    20-  Granting height variance from 200 feet up to, but not to exceed, 257 feet.
       2000
CT-00- 7-
13V    20-  Granting height variance from 200 feet up to 300 feet.
       2000
CT-00- 7-
14V    20-  Granting variance for height from 200 feet up to but not to exceed 250 feet.
       2000
       8-
4832-V 17-  Granting variance from the County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
       2000
CT-00- 10-
33V2   19-  Granting variance for setback (north side) from 10 feet to 5.6 feet.
       2000
       12-
4781-V 21-  Variance for front yard setback from 30 feet to 17 feet.
       2000
CT-00- 1-   Granting height variance from 75 feet to 145 feet on a proposed cellular tower in an
39-V   18-  A-1 Zoning District.
       2001
       3-
-      15-  Variance of the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance with one condition listed.
       2001
Res.   6-   Granting variance for block length for Valley Farm Estates Subdivision in Green
01-217 21-  Garden Township from 1,500 feet to 2,000 feet.
       2001
Res.   8-   Granting variance for block length for South Branch III Subdivision in Green Garden
01-319 16-  Township from 1,500 feet to 2,000 feet.
       2001
Res.   8-   Granting variance for horizontal curves for the Old Plank Center Subdivision in New
01-321 16-  Lenox Township from a radius of 300 feet to 150 feet.
       2001
5022-  3-
V2     21-  Granting variance for wetland buffer (stream setback) from 75 feet to 25 feet.
       2002
Res.   3-
02-91  21-  Granting variance for letter of credit expiration for the Reliant Group.
       2002
Res.   4-   Granting variance for street radius of a horizontal curve from 300 feet to 100 feet
02-139 18-  for Rolling Acres Subdivision.
       2002
Res.   5-   Granting variance for development within the minimum setback of a wetland one- third
02-192 16-  of an acre or larger for Links Edge Subdivision in Green Garden Township.
       2002
Res.   8-   Granting variance for lot coverage from 20 to 30 for Canterbury Lakes Subdivision
02-346 15-  Phase I in Green Garden Township.
       2002
Res.   8-   Granting variance for lot coverage from 20 to 30 for Canterbury Lakes Subdivision
02-347 15-  Phase II in Green Garden Township.
       2002
Res.   8-   Granting variance for lot coverage from 20 to 30 for Canterbury Lakes Subdivision
02-348 15-  Phase III in Green Garden Township.
       2002
Res.   8-   Granting variance for lot coverage from 20 to 30 for Canterbury Lakes Subdivision
02-349 15-  Phase IV in Green Garden Township.
       2002
Res.   8-   Granting variance for lot coverage from 20 to 30 for Canterbury Lakes Subdivision
02-350 15-  Phase V in Green Garden Township.
       2002
5086-  9-   Granting variance to the Stream and Wetlands Protection Ordinance for office
SV     19-  condominiums in the existing C-3 zoning district.
       2002
Res.   6-   Granting a variance for accessory structure height from 20 feet to 22 feet, 4-1/
03-242 19-  2 inches, for a residential lot in the R-2 District, identified by permanent index
       2003 number 05-06-102-011.
       8-   Granting variance to the Stream and Wetlands Protection Ordinance to allow for
5199-V 21-  construction of single-family residence in New Lenox Township.
       2003
CT-03- 10-
05-V   16-  Granting variance for cellular site tower height for two parcels in Crete Township.
       2003
Res.   10-
03-    16-  Granting variance for rear yard setback for Canterbury Lakes Subdivision.
435.5  2003
5233-  4-   Granting variance to allow underground blating or other use of explosives on Parcels
MS2V   15-  2 through 8 and 11 in Joliet Township.
       2004
5273-  6-
MV     17-  Granting variance for lot frontage in Frankfort Township.
       2004
5274-  6-
MV     17-  Granting variance for lot frontage in Frankfort Township.
       2004
Res.   12-
04-528 16-  Granting variance for accessory structure height from 20 feet to 24 feet.
       2004
5356-  1-   Granting variance for installation of seven foot fence on front property line in
SV     20-  Joliet Township.
       2005
Res.   1-   Granting variance in the minimum separation distance between mobile homes from 30
05-01  20-  feet to 24 feet to Pheasant Lakes Estates in Crete Township.
       2005
       3-   Granting variance from the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance for property in
5385-V 17-  Frankfort Township.
       2005
Res.   3-   Extending effective period of special use permit and variance granted by Case No.
05-93  17-  5233-MSV.
       2005
5384-  5-
V2     19-  Granting a variance for accessory structure height from 20 feet to 26 feet.
       2005
Res.   5-   Appeal of decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Ord. 5384- V2,
05-192 19-  hereby granting a variance from the maximum square footage for accessory structures
       2005 from 1,800 square feet to 2,160 feet.
Res.   6-   Appeal of decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Ord. 5374- V6
05-237 16-  initially denying certain variances. The County Board hereby grants variances for two
       2005 lots identified as 04-35-326-004 and 04-35-326-005.
5418-  7-
SV     21-  Granting a variance for lot width (frontage) from 120 feet to zero feet.
       2005
Res.   7-   Appeal of decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Ord. 5413- V2
05-313 21-  initially denying certain variances. The County Board hereby grants variances for a
       2005 lot identified as 04-35-111-006.
Res.   7-   Appeal of decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Ord. 5415- V4
05-314 21-  initially denying certain variances. The County Board hereby grants variances for
       2005 three lots identified as 04-34-416-007, 04-34-416-008 and 04-34-416-009.
Res.   8-   Appeal of decision of Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Ord. 5425-V4 initially
05-351 18-  denying certain variances. The County Board hereby grants variances for a lot
       2005 identified as 04-34-210-015.
       12-  Granting a variance from the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance for culvert in
5461-V 15-  driveway.
       2005
5489-  2-
V3     16-  Granting a variance for the lot area from 10,000 square feet to 6,852 square feet.
       2006
Res.   2-   Appeal of decision of Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Ord. 5489-V3 initially
06-43  16-  denying certain variances. The County Board hereby grants variances for a lot
       2006 identified as 07-12-126-001.
Res.   3-   Granting a variance to Red River Enterprises, L.L.C. on Plainfield- Naperville Road-
06-94  16-  County Highway 14.
       2006
Res.   3-   Granting a variance to ILS Properties, L.L.C. for Van Dyke Center on Gin Mill Road
06-101 16-  (143th Street) County Highway 76.
       2006
Res.   4-
06-132 20-  Granting an extension of effective period of a SUP Case 5401-S.
       2006
Res.   4-
06-133 20-  Appealing the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission Case 5475-MV2.
       2006
Res.   4-
06-135 20-  Appealing a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission Case 5495-V4.
       2006
       5-   Granting a variance to the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance in Frankfort
5521-V 18-  Township.
       2006
Res.   5-   Appeal of decision of Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Case 5502-V2 (Lockport
06-184 18-  Township).
       2006
Res.   5-   Appeal of decision of Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Case 5503-V2 (Joliet
06-185 18-  Township).
       2006
Res.   5-   Granting a variance to Rubloff Development Group in the northeast corner of Weber
06-198 18-  Road and Airport Road.
       2006
Res.   6-   Granting a variance to Weber-Canton, LLC in the northeast corner of Weber Road and
06-245 15-  Caton Farm Road.
       2006
Res.   7-   Granting a variance, permanent and temporary ingress and egress to a development on
06-311 20-  Laraway Road.
       2006
Res.   7-
06-312 20-  Granting a variance for a development on Mills Road.
       2006
Res.   7-
06-313 20-  Granting a variance and ingress and egress to a development on Laraway Road.
       2006
Res.   8-
06-333 17-  Appealing a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission Case 5533-V.
       2006
       10-  Granting a variance from minimum buffer requirements of Stream and Wetland Protection
5565-V 19-  Ordinance in Wilmington Township.
       2006
Res.   10-
06-412 19-  Granting a variance for a development on Laraway Road.
       2006
Res.   12-  Granting a variance and ingress and egress to a development, Sky Harbor Town Center,
06-524 21-  on Laraway Road.
       2006
Res.   1-
07-09  18-  Granting a variance for a development on Mills Road.
       2007
Res.   2-   Granting variances for various developments on Weber Road north and south of Airport
07-53  15-  Road.
       2007
       4-
5617-V 19-  Granting a variance for addition accessory storage space in Joliet Township.
       2007
Res.   4-   Granting a variance for a development in the southwest corner of Cherry Hill Road and
07-133 19-  New Lenox Road.
       2007
Res.   4-   Granting a variance for various developments on Weber Road north and south of Airport
07-136 19-  Road.
       2007
5637-  5-   Granting variance to increase maximum accessory storage space from 1,800 square feet
SV     17-  to 6,506 square feet.
       2007
Res.   5-   Granting ingress and egress to county freeway and variance from one-quarter mile
07-195 17-  spacing requirement to Hartz Construction for Nueva Vista Development on Laraway
       2007 Road-County Highway 74 west of Gougar Road.
5634-  6-   Granting variance to increase maximum accessory structure square footage from 1,800
SV     21-  square feet to 9,440 square feet.
       2007
5639-  6-   Granting variance for maximum accessory storage space from 1,800 square feet to 3,064
SV     21-  square feet.
       2007
Res.   6-   Granting variance to Spring Creek Investment LLC for Copperleaf Subdivision in the
07-225 21-  southwest corner of Peotone-Beecher Road-County Highway 24 and Ridgeland Avenue.
       2007
Res.   6-   Granting ingress and egress to W-T Civil Engineering for Lincoln-Way West High School
07-228 21-  on Gougar Road (County Highway 32).
       2007
Res.   6-   Granting temporary access permit to W-T Civil Engineering for Lincoln-Way West High
07-229 21-  School on Gougar Road (County Highway 32).
       2007
Res.   6-   Granting variances to Aetna Development Corporation for a Wal-Mart development on the
07-230 21-  southwest corner of 191st (County Highway 84) and Harlem Avenue.
       2007
5639-  7-   Granting variance for maximum accessory storage space from 1,800 square feet to 3,064
SV     19-  square feet in Peotone Township.
       2007
5644-  7-   Granting variance for accessory structure from 1,500 square feet to 3,100 square feet
V2     19-  in Joliet Township.
       2007
5650-  7-   Granting variance of Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance for property located in
SV     19-  Wheatland Township.
       2007
Res.   7-   Granting variance for Ridgeport Logistics Center on Lorenzo Road (County Highway 80)
07-280 19-  west of I-55.
       2007
5642-  8-   Granting variances for front yard setback and accessory structures from 1,800 to
MV2    16-  1,878.4 square feet for property located in Green Garden Township.
       2007
5658-  8-   Granting variances from Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance and site yard setback
V5     16-  for property located in Crete Township.
       2007
Res.   8-   Granting extension to temporary entrance permit E7488 for Brookmeadow Estates on
07-310 16-  Laraway Road.
       2007
Res.   8-   Granting extension to temporary entrance permit E0664 for Lake Charlevoix on
07-311 16-  Mantatan-Monee Road.
       2007
Res.   8-   Granting variance to M. Gingerich, Gereaux & Associates for South Point Business Park
07-312 16-  to waive construction of left turn lane requirement.
       2007
Res.   8-   Granting variance to SJS Builders and Developers for development in the southeast
07-313 16-  corner of North Briggs Street to waive right-of-way dedication requirement.
       2007
Res.   8-
07-337 16-  Granting freeway access and variances for GV Development-Village Station.
       2007
Res.   8-   Granting temporary access permit to Crete-Monee School District for access to new
07-351 16-  Crete-Monee High School on Exchange Street.
       2007
       9-   Granting variance for maximum accessory storage space from 1,800 square feet to 2,648
5657-V 20-  square feet in Lockport Township.
       2007
5660-  9-   Granting variance for maximum accessory structure size from 1,800 square feet to
SV2    20-  7,980 square feet in Monee Township.
       2007
5662-  9-   Granting variance for accessory storage square footage from 1,800 square feet to
SV2    20-  5,609.3 square feet in Wilton Township.
       2007
5666-  9-   Granting variance for sign size from 32 square feet to 40 square feet and sign height
V2     20-  from 10 feet to 14 feet, 9 inches.
       2007
Res.   9-   Granting extension to temporary entrance permit for Weber Canton LLC at Weber Farm
07-367 20-  Crossings.
       2007
Res.   9-
07-368 20-  Granting variance to W-T Civil Engineering for Lincoln-Way High School.
       2007
Res.   9-   Granting ingress and egress to GV Development for Westbury Subdivision on Center
07-370 20-  Road.
       2007
Res.   10-  Granting variance to Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for Emerald Crossing/Crete
07-394 18-  Township storm sewer.
       2007
Res.   10-
07-400 18-  Granting extension to temporary access permit at Butternut Ridge on Cedar Road.
       2007
Res.   10-
07-401 18-  Granting extension to temporary access permit at Hanover Estates on Cedar Road.
       2007
Res.   11-
07-438 15-  Granting extension to temporary entrance permit at Weber Farm Crossing on Weber Road.
       2007
Res.   11-  Granting ingress and egress to Green Garden Baptist Church on Center Road and
07-439 15-  deferment of roadway widening improvements.
       2007
Res.   11-  Granting variance for Laraway Construction, Inc. with regard to 125 letter of credit
07-442 15-  requirements for improvements on Laraway Road.
       2007
5668-  12-  Granting variance to increase the maximum structure square footage from 1,800 square
SV2    20-  feet to 2,853 square feet.
       2007
5692-  12-  Granting variance for accessory structures from 1,800 square feet to 2,287 square
SV     20-  feet.
       2007
5682-  1-   Granting variance for accessory storage from 3,000 square feet to 13, 745 square
MV2    17-  feet.
       2008
5698-  1-
SV     17-  Granting variance of the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance.
       2008
5699-  1-
SV     17-  Granting variance of the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance.
       2008
5712-  1-   Granting variance for accessory structure requirement from 1,800 square feet to 3,150
SV     17-  square feet.
       2008
Res.   2-   Granting extension of temporary entrance permit at Brookmeadow Estates on Laraway
08-59  21-  Road.
       2008
Res.   2-   Granting extension of temporary entrance permit at Lake Charlevoix on Manhattan-
08-60  21-  Monee Road.
       2008
Res.   2-   Granting variance to Village of New Lenox on Gougar Road at intersection of Haven
08-61  21-  Avenue.
       2008
Res.   2-
08-62  21-  Granting freeway access and variances for Ruane Construction (Bronson Square).
       2008
Res.   3-   Granting variance to Watermark Investment, LLC on Center Road for its Veridian
08-105 20-  Subdivision development.
       2008
Res.   3-   Granting variance to Ridge Property Trust on Lorenzo Road for Ridgeport Logistics
08-106 20-  development.
       2008
       4-
5711-V 17-  Granting variance for accessory structure in Chartwell Downs, New Lenox Township.
       2008
5719-  4-   Granting variances from Stream and Wetland Resource Ordinance and AM broadcast
SV     17-  facility with height variance.
       2008
5727-  4-
V2     17-  Granting variance for accessory structure and accessory structure height.
       2008
Res.   6-   Granting variances to Sky Harbor, LLC on Laraway Road at the southeast corner of
08-236 19-  Schoolhouse Road.
       2008
Res.   6-
08-237 19-  Granting variance to Panduit Corp. on 191st Street for new world headquarters.
       2008
5735-  7-   Granting variance to remove requirements of parking bumpers and for landscaping along
MV3    17-  north property line.
       2008
5745-  7-
MV2    17-  Granting variance for lot coverage from 20 to 50.
       2008
5756-  8-
MV2    21-  Granting variance for accessory structure size on Parcels 1 and 2.
       2008
5757-  8-
MV3    21-  Granting variance for accessory structure size.
       2008
5769-  10-
V2     16-  Granting variance for accessory storage structure size.
       2008
       10-
5770-V 16-  Granting variance for accessory structure size.
       2008
5784-  11-
V3     20-  Granting variance for swimming pool setback requirements.
       2008
Res.   12-  Granting variances and temporary access to Meijer, Inc. on Weber Road and Renwick
08-490 18-  Road.
       2008
Res.   4-   Granting an extension to the temporary access permit A-04-0003 at Hanover Estates on
09-93  16-  Cedar Road-County Highway 4.
       2009
5754-  5-   Granting variance to eliminate parking bumpers and variance to eliminate five- foot
V3     21-  pedestrian access strip when more than 12 contiguous parking spaces are provided
       2009 affecting property in New Lenox Township.
5755-  5-   Granting variances to eliminate off-street parking screening requirement; for width
V5     21-  and length of off-street parking spaces; to eliminate parking bumpers; to eliminate
       2009 five-foot pedestrian access strip for certain property in Frankfort Township.
5815-  5-
M2V2   21-  Granting variance for pool setback for property located in Manhattan Township.
       2009
5824-  5-   Granting variance to eliminate off-street parking screening requirement; increase
SV5    21-  fence height; and remove bumper guard installation requirement for property in Homer
       2009 Township.
5825-  5-
MS2V8  21-  Granting variances for property in Wesley Township.
       2009
5833-  5-   Granting variance from the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance, 30 parcels, 38
SV38   21-  crossings, in Florence, Manhattan, Wilmington and Wilton Townships.
       2009
5838-  6-   Granting variances for existing swimming pool setback and for rear yard setback for
V2     18-  existing swimming pool for Lot 25 in Frankfort Square Unit No. 8.
       2009
Ord.   6-   Granting variance to the County Subdivision Ordinance for parcel of land on north
09-169 18-  side of Hill Avenue in Frankfort Township.
       2009
5844-  6-
SV2    18-  Granting variance for accessory structure storage space in Wilton Township.
       2009
5849-  6-   Granting variance from the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance for part of three
SV3    18-  parcels in Florence and Wilmington Townships.
       2009
Res.   7-   Granting temporary access permit and variance for TCB Development on behalf of Cross
09-204 16-  Point Church situated within the Fox Hollow Subdivision on N. Briggs Street.
       2009
Res.   7-   Granting freeway access and variances to Frankfort Fire Protection District on Center
09-205 16-  Road at the souteast corner of Stuenkel Road.
       2009
5735-  8-
MV3    20-  Extension of an effective period of variances.
       2009
Res.   8-
09-231 20-  Variance to the County Stormwater Management Ordinance (Lenwood Estates PUD).
       2009
Res.   9-   Granting right-of-way acquisition variance at Panduit World Headquarters on 191st
09-265 17-  Street.
       2009
       10-  Granting variance for existing swimming pool in front yard setback from 30 feet to 16
-      15-  feet on Old Coach Trail. Also granting variance for existing privacy fence within the
       2009 front yard setback on Old Coach Trail.
Res.   10-  Granting a variance for the proposed Goich Subdivision on Parker (Hadley) Road
09-348 15-  (County Highway 1).
       2009
Res.   11-  Granting and extension to the temporary access permit A-04-0003 at Hanover Estates on
09-393 19-  Cedar Road (County Highway 4).
       2009
Res.   11-  Granting variances for the proposed Centerpoint North (Joliet) Development on Arsenal
09-394 19-  Road (County Highway 17).
       2009
5884-  12-
V3     17-  Variances granted for existing swimming pools.
       2009
Res.   12-  Granting an access variance to WRJ Development for the Crest Hill Business Center Lot
09-439 17-  3 on Weber Road (County Highway 88).
       2009
5886-  1-
V2     21-  Granting a variance for fence height and privacy fence in front yard.
       2010
Res.   3-
10-71  18-  An extension of an effective period of variances Case No. 5735-MV3.
       2010
       4-   Granting a variance for maximum accessory structure size from 1,800 square feet to
5901-V 15-  2,436 square feet.
       2010
Res.   4-
10-113 15-  Granting a temporary access permit for Hope Lutheran Church on Black Road - C.H. 56.
       2010
5897-  5-   Granting a variance for privacy fence heights from six feet to either feet on Route
V2     20-  171 and Cliff Street.
       2010
5898-  5-
SV     20-  Granting a variance of the stream and wetland protection ordinance.
       2010
       5-
5904-V 20-  Granting a variance for accessory storage space from 1,800 feet to 2,400 square feet.
       2010
       5-   Granting a variance for maximum accessory structure size from 1,800 square feet to
5907-V 20-  2,289 square feet.
       2010
5908-  5-   Granting a variance to the stream and wetland protection ordinance (part of pin #04-
S2V2   20-  10-01-300-002-0000 and 04-10-02- 400-002-0000).
       2010
       5-   Granting a variance for maximum accessory structure size from 1,800 square feet to
5909-V 20-  3,089.55 square feet.
       2010
5919-  5-   Granting a variance for maximum number of horses allowed on the subject property from
SV     20-  ten horses to 23 horses.
       2010
CT-    5-   Granting a variance for wireless telecommunications facility height from 75 feet to
2009-  20-  144 feet.
03V    2010
Res.   7-   Granting variances to Homer Community Consolidated School District 33C for the
10-234 15-  proposed addition to Luther J. Schilling Elementary School on Cedar Road (C.H. 4).
       2010
5914-  8-   Granting a variance from the stream and wetland protection ordinance (part of pin
SV     19-  #16-08-300-020, 15-08-300-021, 16-08- 300-022, 16-17-100-018).
       2010
5922-  8-   Granting variance from the stream and wetland protection ordinance (part of Pin #01-
S3V3   19-  17-500-02, 01-20-500-002, 01-20- 500-002.
       2010
5936-  8-   Granting a variance from the stream and wetland protection ordinance in the northwest
SV     19-  quarter of the northwest quarter, Section 3, Township 33 North, Range 9 East.
       2010
5932-  10-  Granting a variances for side yard setback from 50 feet to 12 feet and for rear yard
SV2    21-  setback from 50 feet to 39.43 feet.
       2010
       11-  Granting a variance for maximum accessory structure from 3,000 square feet to 38,703
5941-V 18-  square feet.
       2010
5947-  11-  Granting a variance for accessory structure size from 1,800 square feet to 2,753.08
V2     18-  square feet.
       2010
Res.   12-
10-419 16-  Granting a temporary access permit for Ridgeport Logistics on Lorenzo Road - C.H. 80.
       2010
5948-  1-
SV3    20-  Granting a variance for Section 7.2-4(7)(b) separation distance to zero feet.
       2011
5949-  1-   Granting a variance from the stream and wetland protection Ordinance 04-20-200- 01,
SV7    20-  04-20-200-002, 04-20-400-001, 04-20- 400-001, 04-21-100-004, 04-21-300-001.
       2011
Res.   1-   Granting a variance for full access spacing on a SRA route for a business on Bell
11-26  20-  Road - C.H. 16.
       2011
Res.   2-   Granting a variance for the north side yard setback from 50 feet to 25 feet for 25400
11-49  17-  South LaGrange Road for Aladdin Landscaping.
       2011
       3-   Granting a variance for accessory storage from 1,500 square feet to 2,100 square feet
5960-  17-  and for accessory height from 15 feet to 21 feet for Lots 125, 126, 127 and 128 in
V2     2011 Charles M. Fish’s Addition to Belmont, a subdivision of part of the northwest quarter
            of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5961-  3-   Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition and a variance from
SV     17-  stream and wetlands protection regulations.
       2011
5962-  3-   Granting a variance for maximum height of small wind energy system from 80 feet to
V2     17-  155 feet affecting property in Crete Township.
       2011
Res.   3-
11-88  17-  Extending the effective period for a special use permit and variance (5840-SV).
       2011
Res.   3-   Granting a temporary access permit for a natural gas pipeline on Channahon- Minooka
11-112 17-  Road (County Highway 32).
       2011
5965-  4-   Granting a variance to allow a reduced detention volume, to stabilize the
V2     21-  environmentally contaminated site in Joliet Township.
       2011
Res.   4-   Granting a temporary access permit for Norco pipeline on Cedar Road (County Highway
11-139 21-  4).
       2011
Res.   5-
11-180 19-  Granting a variance for a number of access points on Bell Road and 143rd Street.
       2011
Res.   6-   Granting a variance for Mistwood Golf Course on Renwick Road (C.H. 36) east and west
11-212 16-  of Gaylord Road.
       2011
       8-   Granting a variance for side yard setback for stabling of animals from 50 feet to
5984-V 18-  11.1 feet.
       2011
       8-
11-286 18-  Granting a variance for Hanover Estates on Cedar Road (C.H. 4) south of Baker Road.
       2011
5989-  9-
V3     15-  Granting a variance for screening of outdoor storage located in Crete Township.
       2011
5995-  11-
S3V2   17-  Variance from screening requirements of Sections 6.1-9-6 (Parcel 1 and 2).
       2011
5996-  9-   Granting a variance for recycling and outdoor storage of clean wood and wood products
MS3SV3 15-  and to use the existing six foot fence with one foot of barbed wire on top, along the
       2011 perimeter of pin 01-26-100-008, and in the front yard located in Wheatland Township.
5997-  9-   Granting a variance for six feet opaque fence with one foot of barbed wire in front
MSV    15-  yard located in Wheatland Township.
       2011
6015-  11-  Variance for end to end grouping from 2 to 6 and to eliminate the 30 feet paved
V2     17-  access requirement for any side adjacent to pipeline easements.
       2011
6025-  12-
V2     15-  Variance for maximum accessory structure from 1800 square feet to 4340 square feet.
       2011
Res.   12-  Granting a variance and ingress and egress to a development (Taco Bell) on Manhattan-
11-477 15-  Monee Road.
       2011
Res.   12-
11-478 15-  Granting a variance for Lincoln Stone Quarry on Brandon Road south of Zurich Road.
       2011
Res.   1-
12-01  19-  Extension of an effective period of a variance (5941-V Schaaf, Frankfort Township).
       2012
       6-   Variance for maximum height of wall sign from 40 feet to 140 feet; variance for
6047-  21-  maximum number of square feet of all signs from 800 square feet to 1224 square feet;
V4     2012 variance for parking space length from 19 feet to 18 feet; variance for no parking
            lot wheel guards or bumper guards to be installed.
6055-  7-   Variance to permit a maximum of 12 adult guests with more than two adults per bedroom
SV2    19-  in a bed and breakfast facility.
       2012
6056-  7-
MSV2   19-  Variance for outdoor storage screening: Section 6.2-9(6).
       2012
6058-  7-   Variance from Section 12.1-5(9) parking space length from 19 feet to 17 feet and
V3     19-  variance from Section 12.1-5(13) screening.
       2012
6033-  9-   Variance from Section 12.1-5-4 to not provide landscape screening of off-street
SV     20-  parking.
       2012
6073-  10-  Variance for front yard fence height from 4 feet to 7 feet (6 foot fence with 1 foot
V4     18-  barbed wire on top).
       2012
Res.   1-
13-10  17-  Granting variances and ingress and egress to a development on Gougar Road - C.H. 52.
       2013
Res.   3-
13-68  21-  Granting a variance to a development on Mills Road - C.H. 51.
       2013
            Variance for separation distance from a property zoned residential or used for
            residential purposes from 1,000 feet to 400 feet; variance for separation distance
       3-   from environmentally sensitive land from 1,000 feet to ten feet; variance for cargo
6090-  21-  container storage and maintenance facility visibility from a historically sensitive
SV9    2013 site; variance for end to end grouping of cargo containers from two containers in
            length to 20 containers in length; variance from the requirements for a ten foot
            screening buffer strip that includes a berm and fence around the entire perimeter of
            a cargo container storage and maintenance facility.
Res.   5-   Granting a variance for improvements to 143rd Street for the Greek Orthodox Church of
13-135 16-  the Assumption of the Virgin Mary.
       2013
Res.   5-
13-136 16-  Granting a variance to Future Environmental on Center Road.
       2013
Res.   9-
13-238 19-  Granting a variance to James Hogan on Marley Road.
       2013
Res.   11-  Granting a variance to John R. Tierney, Jr. for a variance for Lot 2, street
14-296 24-  frontage.
       2014
6147-V 1-9- Granting a variance to John R. Winkler for accessory building area from 3,000 square
       2014 feet to 4,034 square feet.
6151-  2-4- Granting variances to Roberto Zavala for front yard setback from 30 feet to 19 feet
V2     2014 and for north side yard setback from 5 feet to 3 feet.
6154-  2-4- Granting variances to Grundy County Land Trust Agreement for lot area from 10 acres
V2     2014 to 6.48 acres and for north side yard setback from 50 feet to 8.92 feet.
6156-V 3-4- Granting a variance to First National Bank of Manhattan, Trust 481, for lot area from
       2014 10 acres to 4 acres.
6159-  4-1- Granting variances to Bruce and Krista Young for accessory building area from 1,800
V2     2014 square feet to 2,284 square feet and for south side yard setback from 10 feet to 6
            feet.
6160-  3-4- Granting variances to Brett Borrelli for lot area from 10 acres to 5.772 acres; for
V3     2014 side yard setback from 50 feet to 7.63 feet on the north property line; for side yard
            setback from 50 feet to 35.74 feet on the northeast property line.
6161-V 3-4- Granting a variance to Jay Danner for south side yard setback from 5 feet to 1.83
       2014 feet.
6162-  5-6- Granting variances to Enrique and Adriana Lopez for front yard setback from 30 feet
V3     2014 to 7.5 feet; for east side yard setback from 10 feet to 9.7 feet; for west side yard
            setback from 10 to 8 feet.
6164-V 3-4- Granting a variance to Ken Sahly for north front yard setback from 47 feet to 22
       2014 feet.
6165-V 6-3- Granting a variance to Mary A. Tryner for south side yard setback from 50 feet to
       2014 1.07 feet.
6166-V 4-1- Granting a variance to Donald R. and Susan M. Nugent for lot area from 10 acres to
       2014 2.5 acres.
6168-V 6-3- Granting a variance to Christopher and Keri Spotofora for accessory building area
       2014 from 1,800 square feet to 2,318.85 square feet.
6169-V 5-6- Granting a variance to Benjamin T. and Rachel P. Bierly for lot frontage from 300
       2014 feet to 97.87 feet.
6170-V 7-1- Granting a variance to Debra Ann Knoll for front yard setback from 30 feet to 15 feet
       2014 on Oak Avenue.
6173-  6-3- Granting variances to Edward A. Muhr for side yard setback from 50 feet to 42 feet
V2     2014 and for setback from pool from 8 feet to 6 feet/10 inches.
6174-V 6-3- Granting a variance to Aurijus Bakutis for rear yard setback from 40 feet to 30 feet.
       2014
6175-V 7-1- Granting a variance to Thomas and Marilyn Collins for the rear yard setback from 20
       2014 feet to 13.5 feet.
6177-  6-3- Granting a variance to Leslie Hencinski for front yard setback from 20 feet to 18.68
MV     2014 feet for existing garage.
6178-V 8-5- Granting a variance to Kelly & Matthew Pawlowski for side yard setback from 20 feet
       2014 to 16 feet.
6179-V 8-5- Granting a variance to Daniel and Tricia Knowles to exceed the maximum accessory
       2014 structure size from 1,800 square feet to 3,772 square feet.
            Granting variances to Michael Tattersall to the minimum lot area from 10 acres to 2
6180-  8-5- acres; for south front yard setback from 100 feet to 92 feet; for east front yard
V5     2014 setback from 100 feet to 72 feet; for west side yard setback from 50 feet to 9 feet;
            for north side yard setback from 50 feet to 23 feet.
6181-V 7-1- Granting a variance to John Turrisi for side yard setback on south property line from
       2014 10 feet to 2.3 feet for existing garage.
6182-  6-3- Granting variances to Enbridge Pipelines for north side yard setback from 50 feet to
V2     2014 2 feet and for front yard setback from 100 feet to 84 feet.
6183-  8-5- Granting variances to Arthur and Deborah Alling for front yard setback from 100 feet
MV2    2014 to 76.73 feet and for rear yard setback from 20 feet to 18.93 feet.
6187-V 8-5- Granting a variance to Michael Flanagan for front yard setback from 100 feet to 31.5
       2014 feet.
6188-  8-5- Granting a variance to Ronald and Gale Ann O’Meara for west side yard setback from 10
V2     2014 feet to 5 feet.
6189-V 9-8- Granting a variance to Edward and Lindsey Schmidt for the west side yard setback from
       2014 50 feet to 20 feet.
6192-V 9-8- Granting a variance to Michael Waleski for front yard setback from 47 feet to 33
       2014 feet.
6195-V 9-8- Granting a variance to Joanne Blazejewski for rear yard setback from 20 feet to 12
       2014 feet.
6196-  10-  Granting variances to Margaret Uthe- Fruendt for rear yard setback 80 feet to 45.91
MV2    7-   feet and for lot area from 2.41 acres to 1.49 acres.
       2014
       10-
6197-V 7-   Granting a variance to Jarrod Briscoe for front yard setback from 100 feet to 78.19.
       2014
6199-  9-8- Granting a variance to Raymond and Janet Zarack for front yard setback from 67 feet
MV     2014 (100 feet from centerline of non- dedicated road) to 45.9 feet.
       10-
6202-V 7-   Granting a variance to Dale Cooper for front yard setback from 100 feet to 80.8 feet.
       2014
       10-  Granting a variance to Robert Breitbarth for rear yard setback from 30 feet to 22
6203-V 7-   feet.
       2014
6204-  10-  Granting variances to James F. Haley, Sr. for lot area from 10 acres to 5.122 acres
V2     7-   and for lot frontage from 300 feet to 70 feet.
       2014
6205-  11-  Granting a variance to Sunlight Farms, Inc. for accessory building area from 3,000
MV     5-   square feet to 11,063 square feet.
       2014
       11-  Granting a variance to Russ Triner for accessory building area from 1,800 square feet
6206-V 5-   to 2,411.6 square feet.
       2014
6207-  12-  Granting variances to Thomas Lorenz for side yard setback from 20 feet to 11.97 feet
V2     2-   and for rear yard setback from 50 feet to 4.75 feet.
       2014
6209-  12-  Granting variances to Thomas J. Scholtes for front yard setback from 40 feet to 0
V3     2-   feet and for rear yard setback from 39.1 feet to 0 feet.
       2014
6212-  11-  Granting variances to John R. Tierney for maximum height from 200 feet to 310 feet
V2     5-   and for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet.
       2014
6214-  2-3- Granting variances to Sergio Barboza for variances for lot area from 20,000 square
V2     2015 feet to 11,595.5 square feet and for lot width from 90 feet to 80.01 feet.
6215-V 1-6- Granting a variance to Tomas Sanchez for front yard setback from 30 feet to 9.92
       2015 feet.
6218-  1-6- Granting variances to William and Julia Forrest for side yard setback 50 feet to 5
V2     2015 feet and for rear yard setback from 50 feet to 5 feet.
       5-   Granting a variance to Donald and Sue Nugent for wireless telecommunications facility
6219-V 21-  maximum height from 200 feet to 254 feet.
       2015
6224-V 3-3- Granting a variance to Joseph Zarlengo for lot area from 10 acres to 7.76 acres.
       2015
6225-  4-8- Granting a variance to Alejandro and Maricela Alvarado for accessory building area
V2     2015 from 1,500 square feet to 2,200 square feet and for side yard setback from 5 feet to
            3.40 feet.
6229-V 4-8- Granting a variance to George J. and Maria L. Lamoureaux for side yard setback from
       2015 10 feet to 4 feet.
6231-V 4-8- Granting a variance to AC & ME Holdings, Inc. for rear yard setback from 40 feet to
       2015 22.95 feet.
6234-V 5-5- Granting a variance to Jill Jenson-Dunn for northeast side yard setback from 10 feet
       2015 to 4 feet.
6235-V 5-5- Granting a variance to Jacek NyKaza and Marta Nykaza for lot frontage from 150 feet
       2015 to 0 feet.
6237-V 5-5- Granting a variance to Maurice and Fiona Walsh for accessory building area from 3,000
       2015 square feet to 6,211.43 square feet.
6238-  6-2- Granting variances to Birute Mateliene and Enrikas Matelis for front yard setback
V3     2015 from 100 feet to 71.5 feet; for south side yard setback from 50 feet to 0.5 feet; for
            rear yard setback from 50 feet to 0.2 feet.
6243-  6-2- Granting variances to Yelana Bowes and Michael Moylan for front yard setback from 100
V3     2015 feet to 42.97 feet; for north side yard setback from 50 feet to 40 feet; for south
            side yard setback from 50 feet to 27.18 feet.
       6-   Granting a variance to Thomas and Michele Vana for maximum accessory storage area
6247-V 16-  from 1,800 square feet to 4,966 square feet.
       2015
       6-   Granting a variance to Vincent DiFiore for maximum accessory storage area from 2,160
6248-V 16-  square feet to 2,688 square feet.
       2015
6250-V 7-7- Granting a variance to Wolverine Pipe Line Company for rear setback from 40 feet to
       2015 21 feet.
       6-   Granting a variance to Mary Stephens and Edward Walkowiak for north side yard setback
6251-V 16-  from 5 feet to 4 feet.
       2015
6254-V 8-4- Granting a variance to Richard Harding for side yard setback from 50 feet to 8 feet.
       2015
6255-V 9-1- Granting a variance to Richard and Beverly Shew for front yard setback from 47 feet
       2015 to 28 feet.
6256-V 8-4- Granting a variance to Daniel Grunert for lot area from 10 acres to 6.43 acres.
       2015
6257-V 8-4- Granting a variance to Matt Pehr for front yard setback from 30 feet to 21 feet.
       2015
6258-V 9-1- Granting a variance to Patrick and Deanna Peterson for maximum accessory area from
       2015 3,000 square feet to 5,928.06 square feet.
6259-V 8-4- Granting a variance to James and Kathleen Grant for south side yard setback from 20
       2015 feet to 7 feet.
6260-V 8-4- Granting a variance to Homestar Bank TR 1417 for maximum accessory building area from
       2015 1,800 square feet to 1,996 square feet.
6265-  9-1- Granting variances to Thomas G. Keaveney for lot area from 2.5 acres to 2.33 acres;
V3     2015 for lot frontage from 300 feet to 193 feet; for maximum accessory building area from
            3,000 square feet to 3,246 square feet.
       10-  Granting a variance to James J. Stadler for side yard setback from 10.0 feet to 1.0
6266-V 6-   feet.
       2015
       10-  Granting a variance to Sean McCann for maximum accessory building area from 1,800
6268-V 6-   square feet to 3,800 square feet.
       2015
6271-  2-2- Granting variances to Brian White for maximum accessory building area from 3,000
V2     2016 square feet to 4,581.65 square feet and for building height 20 feet to 21 feet 6
            inches.
6274-  2-2- Granting variances to Robert E. Sefcik for maximum accessory building area from 1,500
V3     2016 square feet to 2,368.44 square feet; for side yard setback (north side) from 5.0 feet
            to 2.0 feet; for rear yard setback from 5.0 feet to 1.1 feet.
       12-  Granting a variance to Robert Crawford for maximum accessory building area from 1,800
6275-V 1-   square feet to 2,960 square feet.
       2015
6276-V 1-5- Granting a variance to Peter Onnink for lot area from 10 acres to 5.02 acres.
       2016
6278-  12-  Granting variances to Betty Weishaar for ECHO housing unit size from 1,200 square
V2     1-   feet to 2,432 square feet and for number of ECHO housing unit bedrooms from 2
       2015 bedrooms to 5 bedrooms.
       12-  Granting a variance to Michael and Tracy Woodman for accessory building area from
6279-V 15-  1,800 square feet to 2,288 square feet.
       2015
       4-5- Granting variances to Librado Barraza and Armida Barraza for ECHO housing unit size
6282-V 2016 from 1,200 square feet to 1,560 square feet and for number of ECHO housing unit
            bedrooms from 2 bedrooms to 3 bedrooms.
6284-V 2-2- Granting a variance to Charles Stoltz for maximum accessory building area from 3,000
       2016 square feet to 4,536 square feet.
6286-V 2-2- Granting a variance to Joseph and Kyong Mazzone for maximum accessory building area
       2016 from 1,800 square feet to 2,176 square feet.
6287-  5-3- Granting variances to Ronald Martineau and Paula Martineau for lot area from 10 acres
MV2    2016 to 9.18 acres and for lot frontage from 300 feet to 290.64 feet.
6288-  3-1- Granting variances to Douglas and Emily Kuypers for lot frontage from 300 feet to
V3     2016 257.50 feet; for south side yard setback from 50 feet to 44 feet; for east side yard
            setback from 50 feet to 8.95 feet.
            Granting variances to Chicago Title Land Trust Company Trust 1933 for front yard
6289-  3-1- setback from 100 feet to 91 feet; for south side yard setback from 50 feet to 16.11
V5     2016 feet; for north side yard setback from 50 feet to 4 feet; for lot area from 10 acres
            to 36,700 square feet.
6290-V 3-1- Granting a variance to Joseph Rozak for east side yard setback from 5 feet to 4.4
       2016 feet.
6291-  4-5- Granting variances to Varian Philip Keller and Marsh Keller for front yard setback
V2     2016 from 100 feet to 80 feet (Resthaven Road) and for front yard setback from 100 feet to
            35 feet (Thelma Road).
6292-  4-5- Granting variances to Matthew Czyz for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet and for
V2     2016 side yard setback from 20 feet to 2 feet.
6293-  3-1- Granting two variances to Midwest Generation, LLC for lot area from 10 acres to 5.97
V2     2016 acres and for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet.
            Granting four variances to Jeffrey Travis for lot area from 10 acres to 7.023 acres;
6297-  4-5- for side yard setback (west) from 50 feet to 15.82 feet; for rear yard setback from
V4     2016 50 feet to 5.78 feet; for minimum animal confinement structure setback from 50 feet
            to 39 feet.
6300-V 5-3- Granting a variance to Rick A. Falaschetti for maximum accessory storage area from
       2016 3,000 square feet to 3,978 square feet.
6301-V 5-3- Granting a variance to William Bond Trust for maximum accessory storage area from
       2016 1,800 square feet to 2,236 square feet.
6309-V 6-7- Granting a variance to Steven E. and Cari A. Lauffer for maximum accessory building
       2016 area from 1,800 square feet to 2,328.86 square feet.
6310-  6-7- Granting four variances to Steven A. and Tammy M. Hoffman for lot area from 10 acres
V4     2016 to .997 acres; for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet; for east side yard setback
            from 50 feet to 13.15 feet; for south side yard setback from 50 feet to 8 feet.
6307-  7-5- Granting two variances to Leonard Branchaw, Jr. and Colleen G. Kestel-Branchaw for
V2     2016 east side yard setback from 50 feet to 25 feet and for lot area from 10 acres to
            4.106 acres.
6312-  7-5- Granting a variance to Jack and Lisa Behnke for animal exercise area setback from 500
SV     2016 feet to 200 feet.
6313-V 7-5- Granting a variance to Piotr and Sandra Rogalski for lot frontage from 300 feet to
       2016 98.38 feet.
6314-  7-5- Granting two variances to Brook and Nancy Gidley for maximum accessory area from
SV2    2016 3,000 square feet to 3,905 square feet and for north side yard setback from 20 feet
            to 5 feet.
TUP-   8-2- Granting a temporary use permit to Bruce and Lee Ann Bultema for a fall festival to
16-09  2016 include a pumpkin patch, corn maze, hay rides and petting zoo with 7 conditions.
            Granting three variances to Celso and Sofia Serrano for maximum accessory building
            area from 1,800 square feet to 4,000 square feet; for maximum of 1 commercial motor
ZC-16- 8-2- vehicle to be parked on a constructed driveway within a residential zoning district
002    2016 to a total of 6 commercial motor vehicles to be parked on a construction driveway
            within a residential zoning district; for maximum vehicle weight limit from 8,000
            pounds to 25,000 pounds.
ZC-16- 12-  Granting a variance to McDonough Street Properties for street setback from centerline
003    6-   of non-dedicated road from 80 feet to 32.97 feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 8-2- Granting a variance to Robert and Kathleen George for accessory use structure from
008    2016 1,800 square feet to 2,401 square feet.
ZC-16- 9-6- Granting two variances to Raymond Peel for lot area from 10 acres to 2.5 acres and
013    2016 for lot frontage from 300 feet to 250 feet.
6303-V 9-6- Granting a variance to Loriena C. Piepenbrink Trust for south side yard setback from
       2016 50 feet to 22.76 feet.
ZC-16- 1-3- Granting a variance to Todd Jongen for maximum accessory building area from 1,800
015    2017 square feet to 2,268 square feet.
ZC-16- 12-  Granting variances to Byron Sharer Robertson for lot size for parcel 1 from 10,000
017    6-   square feet to 9,193.392 square feet and for lot size for parcel 2 from 10,000 square
       2016 feet to 9,180.296 square feet.
ZC-16- 10-
020    4-   Granting a variance to Lynn Hankins for front yard setback from 30 feet to 22 feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 11-  Granting a variance to August and Andrea Garritano for fence height from 4 feet to 8
021    1-   feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 11-
024    1-   Granting a variance to Anthony Smith for side yard setback from 50 feet to 15 feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 12-  Granting a variance to Brian Parker to increase the maximum accessory building area
025    6-   from 1,800 square feet to 3,125 square feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 11-  Granting variances to Randy Domagalla for south side yard setback from 50 feet to 30
026    1-   feet and for east side yard setback from 50 feet to 30 feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 12-  Granting a variance to OAM’s Estate, LLC for maximum accessory building area from 480
028    6-   square feet to 3,600 square feet on parcel identified as 35017-35021 S. Peterson
       2016 Lane.
ZC-16- 12-  Granting a variance to Apostolic Tabernacle of Joliet from street setback from 30
029    6-   feet to 17.10 feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 12-  Granting a variance to Gregory and Kristen Zigtema for lot size from 10 acres to 6.78
030    6-   acres.
       2016
ZC-16- 12-  Granting variances to Thomas and Sherri Lensing for lot size from 10 acres to 2.5
031    6-   acres and for lot frontage from 300 feet to 180 feet.
       2016
ZC-16- 1-3- Granting variances to Joseph L. and Kristina Rodawold for variances for minimum lot
032    2017 area from 10 acres to 3 acres; for street setback from 100 feet to 59 feet; for side
            setback from 50 feet to 45.26 feet; for rear setback from 50 feet to 39.20 feet.
ZC-16- 2-7- V-16-033 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 3.29 acres; V-16-034 variance
033    2017 for minimum lot frontage from 300 square feet to 244 square feet; V-16-035 variance
            for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 13.46 feet.
ZC-16- 3-7- V-16-036 variance for minimum rear yard setback from 25 feet to 11.65 feet.
039    2017
ZC-16- 2-7- V-16-037 variance for lot frontage from 60 feet to 0 feet.
041    2017
ZC-17- 3-7- V-17-001 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres
002    2017
ZC-17- 3-7- V-17-005 variance for minimum north side yard setback from 50 feet to 20 feet.
006    2017
ZC-17- 7-
011    11-  V-17-009 variance for maximum animal units allowed from 4 units to 17 units.
       2017
ZC-17- 10-  Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 on Parcel B commonly known as 22712 S. Pfeiffer Road,
012    19-  Frankfort, IL.
       2017
ZC-17- 7-   V-17-024 variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 5,440
020    11-  square feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 8-1- V-17-025 variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 2.77 feet; V-17-026 variance
021    2017 for rear yard setback from 5 feet to 2.02 feet.
ZC-17- 9-   V-17-027 variance for lot area from 10 acres to 2.5013 acres; V-17-028 variance for
022    12-  lot frontage from 300 feet to 207.75 feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 7-   V-17-029 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 4 acres; V-17-030 variance
023    11-  for minimum north side yard setback from 50 feet to 0 feet (garage); V-17-031
       2017 variance for minimum north side yard setback from 50 feet to 27.7 (residence).
ZC-17- 7-
024    11-  V-17-032 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 215 feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 9-   V-17-033 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,931
025    12-  square feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 9-   V-17-034 variance for lot area from 20,000 square feet to 12,428.00 square feet; V-
026    12-  17-035 variance for lot frontage from 90 feet to 0 feet; V-17-036 variance for west
       2017 side street setback from 30 feet to 10 feet.
ZC-17- 7-   V-17-038 variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to
028    11-  11,000 square feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 8-1- V-17-040 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 15 feet.
030    2017
ZC-17- 8-1- V-17-041 variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 5 feet.
032    2017
ZC-17- 8-1- V-17-042 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 4.71 acres; V-17-043 variance
033    2017 for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet.
ZC-17- 10-
037    17-  V-17-046 variance for side yard setback from 50 feet to 10 feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 10-
038    17-  V-17-047 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 4.226 acres.
       2017
ZC-17- 10-
041    17-  V-17-049 variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 7 feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 10-
042    17-  V-17-050 variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 4.2 feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 10-  V-17-051 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,675
043    17-  square feet.
       2017
ZC-17- 10-  V-17-052 variance for minimum lot area from 20,000 square feet to 11,130 square feet;
044    3-   V-17-053 variance for minimum lot frontage 90 feet to 0 feet; V-17-054 variance for
       2017 minimum west side yard setback from 10 feet to 3 feet.
ZC-17- 2-   V-17-067 variance for minimum side yard setback from 20 feet to 9.13 feet; V-17-068
050    20-  variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to +/- 4,505
       2018 square feet.
ZC-17- 6-   V-17-071 variance for lot size from 10,000 square feet to 6,308 square feet; V-17-072
054    21-  variance for lot frontage from 70 feet to 46.54 feet; V-17-084 variance for rear yard
       2018 setback from 25 feet to 11.4 feet.
            V-17-073 variance for lot size from 10,000 square feet to 6,225 square feet; V-17-074
ZC-17- 6-5- variance for street setback from 30 feet to 18.8 feet; V-17-075 variance for side
056    2018 yard setback from 5 feet to 0.8 feet; V-17-076 variance for lot frontage from 70 feet
            to 46.54 feet.
ZC-17- 2-
058    20-  V-17-077 variance for maximum animal units from 2.5 units to 4 units.
       2018
ZC-17- 2-
059    20-  V-17-078 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 7 acres.
       2018
ZC-17- 2-   V-17-079 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 6.019 acres; V-17-082
063    20-  variance for side yard setback from 50 feet to 26.63 feet.
       2018
ZC-17- 3-6- V-17-081 variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
065    2018
ZC-17- 2-   V-17-089 variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet; V-17- 088 variance for
067    20-  maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,150 square feet.
       2018
ZC-17- 2-
068    20-  V-17-091 variance for minimum lot frontage from 60 feet to 30 feet.
       2018
ZC-17- 3-6- V-17-092 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres; V-17-094 variance
069    2018 for minimum street setback from 100 feet to 65 feet.
ZC-17- 2-
070    20-  V-17-093 variance for minimum lot frontage from 180 feet to 52.84 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 3-6- V-18-001 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 6.007 acres; V-18-003
001    2018 variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 21 feet.
ZC-18- 8-6- V-18-004 variance for maximum number of commercial vehicles parked on a constructed
003    2018 driveway from 1 to 4 and V-18-005 variance for maximum gross weight of commercial
            motor vehicles from 8,000 pounds to 24,000 pounds.
ZC-18- 3-6- V-18-006 variance for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
004    2018
ZC-18- 4-3- V-18-008 variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
007    2018
ZC-18- 4-3- V-18-010 variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 32.5 feet; V- 18-011 variance for
008    2018 side yard setback from 20 feet to 1.8 feet.
ZC-18- 4-3- V-18-012 variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 66 feet.
012    2018
ZC-18- 5-1- V-18-013 variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,085
014    2018 square feet.
ZC-18- 4-3- V-18-014 variance for maximum animal units from 5 to 15.
017    2018
ZC-18- 5-1- V-18-015 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,265
018    2018 square feet.
ZC-18- 4-3- V-18-016 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 4,064
019    2018 square feet.
ZC-18- 7-5- V-18-017 variance for maximum accessory storage area from 1,800 square feet to 2,149
020    2018 square feet.
ZC-18- 5-1- V-18-018 variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to
021    2018 1,395 square feet.
ZC-18- 5-1- V-18-019 variance for minimum street setback from 30 feet to 25.2 feet.
024    2018
ZC-18- 7-5- V-18-020 variance for maximum accessory storage area from 1,800 square feet to 3,108
027    2018 square feet; V-18-021 variance for the accessory storage unit height from 20 feet to
            24 feet.
ZC-18- 6-
028    19-  V-18-022 variance from minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 20 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 6-   V-18-023 variance for fence height within street setback from 4 feet to 6 feet on
031    19-  Briggs Street; V-18-024 variance for fence height within street setback from 4 feet
       2018 to 6 feet on Bruce Road.
ZC-18- 6-   V-18-026 variance for minimum rear yard setback from 50 feet to 25 feet; V-18-031
033    19-  variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 25 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 7-5- V-18-025 variance for street setback from 100 feet to 67 feet from the centerline of
034    2018 the road (Eunice Avenue).
ZC-18- 7-5- V-18-027 variance for minimum west side yard setback from 22.86 feet to 16 feet; V-
035    2018 18-028 variance for minimum east side yard setback from 22.19 feet to 16 feet; V-18-
            029 variance for minimum rear yard setback from 50 feet to 20 feet.
ZC-18- 7-5- V-18-032 variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
038    2018
ZC-18- 7-
039    17-  V-18-033 variance for accessory storage from 1,500 square feet to 1,960 square feet.
       2018
       7-   V-18-034 variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to
ZC-18- 17-  8,204.8 square feet; V-18-035 variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from
041    2018 650 square feet to 2,520 square feet; V-18-036 variance for maximum accessory
            building height from 25 feet to 28 feet.
VEXT-  8-7- Extension for variances for ZC-17-026.
18-001 2018
TUP-   9-4- TUP-18-011 for fall festival activities for PIN #21-14-23-200- 009-0000, in Monroe
18-011 2018 Township, commonly known as 3450 W. Crete-Monee Road, Monee, IL.
ZC-18- 9-4- V-18-037 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 264.30 feet and V-18-038
045    2018 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 7.433 acres.
ZC-18- 8-6- V-18-041 variance for street setback from 30 feet to 28.1 feet and V-18-042 variance
049    2018 for side yard setback from 10 feet to 2.6 feet.
ZC-18- 9-4- V-18-045 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 196 feet and V-18-046
053    2018 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 5.01 acres.
ZC-18- 10-  V-18-047 variance for front yard setback from 80 feet to 73.5 feet; V-18-048 variance
054    2-   for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 10-
057    2-   V-18-050 variance for rear yard setback from 30 feet to 18 feet.
       2018
            V-18-053 variance for minimum side yard setback (south side) from 50 feet to 0 feet;
ZC-18- 1-3- V-18-054 variance for minimum side yard setback (north side) from 50 feet to 1.5
059    2019 feet; V-18-060 variance for location of off-site parking area from 600 feet radius to
            700 feet radius.
ZC-18- 11-  V-18-051 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,800
060    8-   square feet; V-18-060 variance for maximum height of an accessory building from 20
       2018 feet to 21 feet.
ZC-18- 11-  V-18-052 variance for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet; V-18-073 variance
061    8-   for side yard setback from 10 feet to 2.8 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 12-  V-18-056 variance for side yard setback from 20 feet to 11.91 feet; V-18-074 variance
062    4-   for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 11,249.22 square feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 11-
063    8-   V-18-058 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 221.26 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 12-  V-18-061 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 10 feet; V-18-075
064    4-   variance for minimum lot area from 215,000 square feet to 109,371 square feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 11-
065    8-   V-18-063 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 221.26 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 11-  V-18-065 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 7.01 acres; V-18-066 variance
066    8-   for side yard setback from 50 feet to 0.83 feet; V-18-067 variance for street yard
       2018 setback from 100 feet to 41.25 feet.
ZC-18- 1-3- V-18-068 variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 6.96 acres; V-18-069 variance
067    2019 for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 140 feet; V-18-070 variance for minimum
            side yard setback from 50 feet to 28.98 feet.
ZC-18- 11-
069    8-   V-18-072 variance for minimum street yard setback from 100 feet to 78 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 12-
071    4-   V-18-085 variance for front yard set back from 30 feet to 17.34 feet.
       2018
ZC-18- 12-  V-18-079 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,220
075    4-   square feet; V-18-083 variance for street yard setback from 47 feet to 33 feet from
       2018 Burger Avenue.
ZC-18- 1-3- V-18-082 variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet.
076    2019
ZC-18- 1-3- V-18-081 variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 3.22 feet.
078    2019
ZC-18- 3-5- Variance for north side yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet; variance for maximum
084    2019 accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,550 square feet.
ZC-18- 1-3- V-18-087 variance for the number of animal units allowed in the A-2 zoning district
085    2019 from four to five.
ZC-18- 2-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,081.42
089    26-  square feet; variance for maximum accessory building height from 20 feet to 23 feet.
       2019
ZC-18- 2-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 5,081 square
090    26-  feet; variance for lot frontage from 180 feet to 23 feet; variance for maximum
       2019 accessory building height from 20 feet to 21 feet.
ZC-18- 4-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,200 square
092    2019 feet.
ZC-18- 3-5- Variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 33.95 feet; variance for side yard setback
093    2019 from 50 feet to 14.21 feet.
VEXT-  4-4- Extension for approved zoning case ZC-17-026 for variance for lot area from 20,000
19-001 2019 square feet to 12,428 square feet; variance for lot frontage from 90 feet to 0 feet;
            variance for west side setback from 30 feet to 10 feet.
ZC-19- 3-5- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 4,400 square
002    2019 feet; variance for maximum height of an accessory building from 20 feet to 25 feet.
ZC-19- 4-4- Variance for fence height within the street setback from 4 feet to six feet.
004    2019
ZC-19- 4-
005    16-  Variance for west side yard setback from 10 feet to 8 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 4-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,775 square
006    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 5-
012    16-  Variance for wireless telecommunications tower height from 200 feet to 310 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 4-
013    16-  Variance for minimum street yard setback from 30 feet to 26 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 5-   Variance for the maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,250
014    21-  square feet; variance for maximum accessory building height from 20 feet to 30 feet.
       2019
            Variance for minimum setback from a street right-of- way for a freestanding sign from
            10 feet to 5 feet (East Burville Road); variance for maximum height of a freestanding
ZC-19- 5-7- sign from 8 feet to 11 feet 11 inches; variance for minimum setback from a street
015    2019 right-of- way for a freestanding sign from 10 feet to 7 feet (Exchange Street);
            variance for minimum setback of a dynamic display sign face from a residential
            structure from 300 feet to 220 feet (east sign face); variance for dynamic display
            portion of a sign from 50% to 75% of the total area of the sign.
ZC-19- 5-7- Variance for the minimum setback of a freestanding sign from the back of the curb of
016    2019 a driveway from 10 feet to 4 feet.
VEXT-  5-   Variance extension (180 days) for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650
19-002 21-  square feet to 1,395 square feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 5-   Variance for the maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 1,248
019    21-  square feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 6-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 6,750 square
021    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 5-   Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 247.59 feet; variance for side
022    21-  yard setback from 50 feet to 19 feet (east side).
       2019
ZC-19- 6-4- Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 7.308 acres.
023    2019
ZC-19- 9-3- Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 9.7392 acres; variance for minimum
027    2019 side yard setback from 50 feet to 39.77 feet (south); variance for minimum side yard
            setback from 50 feet to 11.68 feet (north).
ZC-19- 6-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,788 square
028    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 7-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,565 square
030    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 9-3- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,505 square
031    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 7-2- Variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 5 feet.
032    2019
ZC-19- 8-6- Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 35 feet (north side).
033    2019
ZC-19- 8-6- Variance for dynamic display portion of a sign from 50% to 69.3% of the total area of
034    2019 the sign.
ZC-19- 7-2- Variance for minimum north side yard setback from 10 feet to 5 feet.
035    2019
ZC-19- 8-6- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,032 square
037    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 8-6- Variance for street setback from the right-of-way from 30 feet to 23.91 feet;
038    2019 variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 7.48 feet (east side); variance for
            side yard setback from 10 feet to 8 feet (west side).
ZC-19- 9-3- Variance for side yard setback from 5 feet to 2 feet; variance for rear yard setback
040    2019 from 5 feet to 2 feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square
            feet to 1,305 square feet.
ZC-19- 8-6- Variance for minimum side yard setback for an animal confinement building from 50
041    2019 feet to 41 feet.
ZC-19- 11-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 20 feet to 10.6 feet (west side) and
042    5-   variance for minimum side yard setback from 20 feet to 13.6 feet (east side).
       2019
ZC-19- 10-  Variance for minimum setback for an animal confinement building from 50 feet to 20
044    1-   feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,734
       2019 square feet.
ZC-19- 9-3- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,500 square
045    2019 feet.
ZC-19- 8-6- Variance for north street yard setback from 80 feet to 42 feet.
046    2019
ZC-19- 10-  Variance for the minimum street setback from Elmwood Avenue (unimproved) from 30 feet
048    1-   to 10 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 10-
054    1-   Variance for the minimum side yard setback (east) from 50 feet to 6 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 11-
055    5-   Variance for minimum street yard setback from 40 feet to 20 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 10-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,819 square
58     1-   feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 11-  Variance for minimum street yard setback from 30 feet to 21.88 feet and variance for
062    5-   maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,509.25 square feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 11-  Variance for lot frontage from 90 feet to 32.57 feet for Lot 2 and variance for south
063    19-  side yard setback from 10 feet to 6.2 feet for Lot 2.
       2019
ZC-19- 1-7- Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 20 feet (north); variance for
065    2020 lot frontage from 300 feet to 166.14 feet.
ZC-19- 11-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 20 feet and variance for
068    19-  minimum rear yard setback from 50 feet to 30 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 12-
069    3-   Variance for minimum west side yard setback from 10 feet to 4.7 feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 1-7- Variance for maximum number of animal units allowed in the A- 2 zoning district from
074    2020 6 to 18.
ZC-19- 12-  Variance for minimum south side yard setback from 20 feet to 12 feet; variance for
076    3-   maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 9,160 square feet.
       2019
ZC-19- 2-4- Variance for minimum setback of a dynamic display sign face from a residential
080    2020 structure from 300 feet to 296 feet.
ZC-19- 5-5- Variance for fence height within setback from 5 feet to 7 feet; variance for fence
083    2020 height within setback from 5 feet to 7 feet.
ZC-19- - -  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 80 feet to 33 feet.
084
ZC-19- - -  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 80 feet to 33 feet.
085
ZC-19- - -  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 80 feet to 0 feet.
086
ZC-19- - -  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,678 square
087         feet.
ZC-19- 3-3- Variance for minimum rear yard setback for animal confinement building from 50 feet
088    2020 to 42 feet.
ZC-19- - -  Variance for minimum street yard setback from 30 feet to 11.17 feet (Route 59).
089
ZC-19- 5-5- Variance for fence height within street setback from 5 feet to 7 feet.
090    2020
ZC-20- 5-5- Variance for minimum street yard setback from 57 feet to 20.71 feet.
001    2020
ZC-20- 5-5- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 sq. ft. to 4,340 sq. ft.
003    2020
ZC-20- 6-2- Variance for minimum lot size from 10 acres to 8.33 acres; variance for minimum lot
006    2020 frontage from 300 feet to 273.16 feet.
ZC-20- 5-5- Variance for animal confinement setback from 50 feet to 26 feet.
007    2020
            Variance for minimum lot area from 20,000 sq. ft. to 13,050 sq. ft.; variance for
ZC-20- 5-   minimum lot frontage from 90 feet to 0 feet; variance for minimum rear yard setback
008    19-  for accessory structures from 5 feet to 1.65 feet; variance for minimum side yard
       2020 setback from 10 feet to 4.20 feet (south side); variance for minimum side yard
            setback from 10 feet to 9.58 feet (north side).
ZC-20- 6-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 sq. ft. to 3,788 sq. ft.;
015    2020 variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 9.71 feet (north side);
            variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 4.33 (west side).
ZC-20- 6-2- Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 33 feet.
019    2020
ZC-20- 6-
028    16-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 3 feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 9-
029    17-  Variance for east side setback from 10 feet to 3 feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 7-7- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,116 square
032    2020 feet; variance for minimum lot area from 40,000 square feet to 29,273 square feet;
            variance for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 100 feet.
ZC-20- 8-4- Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 3,700
033    2020 square feet; variance for maximum building height from 25 feet to 26.5 feet.
ZC-20- 9-1- Variance for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
034    2020
ZC-20- 8-4- Variance for minimum lot area from 105,000 square feet to 87,120 square feet.
037    2020
ZC-20- 9-1- Variance for minimum west side yard setback from 10 feet to 8 feet; variance for
039    2020 minimum east side yard setback from 10 feet to 7.7 feet.
ZC-20- 9-1- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,736 square
041    2020 feet.
ZC-20- 9-1- Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit floor area from 650 square feet to 2,000
044    2020 square feet.
            Variance for buildings, enclosures and animal run/exercise area setback from 500 feet
ZC-20- 10-  to 2 feet from all R-zoned lots; variance for animal care area from 500 feet to 175
047    20-  feet to the nearest dwelling unit; variance for maximum animal units allowed from
       2020 11.68 units to 14 units; variance for maximum accessory building height from 25 feet
            to 32 feet.
ZC-20- 10-  Variance for minimum side yard setback (west) from 50 feet to 12 feet; variance for
050    20-  minimum rear yard setback from 50 feet to 5 feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 11-  Variance for side yard setback (south) from 10 feet to 5 feet; variance for maximum
051    17-  accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,625 square feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 2-2- Variance for maximum number of freestanding signs per lot from 1 to 2.
053    2021
ZC-19- 12-  Variance for maximum accessory building are from 3,000 square feet to 4,000 square
20-054 1-   feet.
       2020
            Variance for an adult-use cannabis craft grower from 2,500 feet to 502 feet from a
ZC-20- 10-  property line of an area zoned for residential use; variance for an adult-use
056    20-  cannabis infuser from 1,000 feet to 0 feet from a property line of an area zoned for
       2020 residential use; variance for an adult-use cannabis processor from 1,000 feet to 0
            feet from a property line of area zoned for residential use.
ZC-20- 12-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,604.42
058    1-   square feet.
       2020
       10-  Variance for minimum east side yard setback from 20 feet to 2.3 feet; variance for
ZC-20- 20-  minimum west side yard setback from 20 feet to 6 feet; variance for maximum accessory
059    2020 building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,888 square feet; variance for maximum
            accessory building height from 25 feet to 30 feet.
ZC-19- 11-  Variance for minimum street yard setback from the centerline of a non-dedicated road
20-060 17-  from 80 feet to 67.70 feet; variance for minimum rear yard setback from 10 feet to
       2020 2.34 feet.
ZC-20- 1-5- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,888 square
061    2021 feet; variance for minimum lot frontage from 90 feet to 85.10 feet.
ZC-20- 11-
063    17-  Variance for minimum side yard setback (east) from 50 feet to 30.497 feet.
       2020
            Variance for minimum street yard setback from 100 feet to 58.87 feet; variance for
       12-  minimum side yard setback (south side) from 50 feet to 30 feet; variance for minimum
ZC-20- 1-   rear yard setback from 50 feet to 2 feet; variance for minimum side yard setback
064    2020 (north side) from 50 feet to 3 feet; variance for maximum building coverage from 20%
            to 32.3%; variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 0.69 acres; variance for
            minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 150 feet.
ZC-20- 12-
067    1-   Variance for minimum west side yard setback from 50 feet to 19.70 feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 12-  Variance for minimum street yard setback from 67 feet to 27 feet; variance for
068    1-   maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,869 square feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 1-5- Variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 ft. to 7.51 ft. (west side); variance
070    2021 for minimum street yard setback from 20 ft. to 0 ft. (S. Naperville Rd.).
ZC-20- 1-5- Variance for drive-up style self-service storage building height from 12 ft. to 16
074    2021 ft.; variance for drive-up style individual storage unit floor area from 600 sq. ft.
            to 735 sq. ft.
ZC-20- 1-5- Variance for minimum side yard setback (east) from 20 feet to 15 feet.
075    2021
ZC-20- 1-5- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 4,450 square
076    2021 feet.
            Variance for minimum street yard setback from the centerline of the road from 100
            feet to 94.7 feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square
ZC-20- 2-2- feet to 11,098 square feet; variance for maximum floor area of an accessory dwelling
077    2021 unit, detached, from 650 square feet to 2,283 square feet; variance for maximum
            accessory building height from 25 feet to 27 feet - 4 inches; variance for minimum
            lot frontage from 300 feet to 165.42 feet.
ZC-20- 12-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 21.90 feet; variance for minimum
078    1-   north side yard setback from 20 feet to 13.6 feet.
       2020
ZC-20- 2-2- Variance for side yard setback (south) from 10 feet to 3 feet; variance for side yard
079    2021 setback (west) from 10 feet to 2.2. feet.
ZC-20- 3-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,775 square
086    2021 feet.
ZC-21- 3-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,800 square
004    2021 feet.
ZC-21- 4-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,314.76
005    20-  square feet.
       2021
ZC-21- 4-   Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 22.8 feet (east); variance for
006    20-  minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 42 feet (west).
       2021
ZC-21- 7-6- Variance for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 106.65 feet; variance for maximum
007    2021 accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,422.12 square feet; variance for
            minimum side yard setback (west) from 10 feet to 4 feet.
            Variance for side yard setback from 50 ft. to 25 ft. (north); variance for side yard
ZC-21- 4-   setback from 50 ft. to 3.7 ft. (east); variance for side yard setback from 50 ft. to
008    20-  1.5 ft. (south); variance for lot area from 10 acres to 5.095 acres; variance for lot
       2021 frontage from 300 ft. to 146.87 ft.; variance for fence height in the street setback
            from 5 ft. to 6 ft.; variance for side yard setback from 50 ft. to 25.9 ft. (west).
ZC-21- 6-   Variance for street yard setback (Valley View Place) from 30 feet to 15 feet;
013    15-  variance for street yard setback (North Briggs Street) from 30 feet to 9.68 feet.
       2021
ZC-21- 4-   Variance for minimum street yard setback from 30 feet to 8.95 feet; variance for
014    20-  minimum side yard setback from 5 feet to 0.60 feet (north side).
       2021
ZC-21- 5-
020    18-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 17.74 feet (north side).
       2021
ZC-21- 6-   Variance for minimum side yard setback (south) from 10 feet to 6.5 feet; variance for
023    15-  maximum accessory structure height from 25 feet to 32 feet.
       2021
ZC-21- 5-
026    18-  Variance for side yard setback from 20 feet to 10 feet.
       2021
ZC-21- 7-6- Variance for minimum side yard setback (west) from 50 feet to 11 feet; variance for
028    2021 minimum rear yard setback from 50 feet to 20 feet.
ZC-21- 6-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,518.6 square
031    15-  feet.
       2021
       6-   Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 4 acres; variance for minimum front
ZC-21- 15-  yard setback from 100 feet to 83 feet; variance for maximum accessory building height
034    2021 from 25 feet to 27 feet; variance for minimum east side yard setback from 50 feet to
            42 feet.
ZC-21- 7-6- Variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 20.23 feet.
041    2021
ZC-21- 9-7- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,359 square
043    2021 feet.
ZC-21- 8-3- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,321 square
044    2021 feet.
ZC-21- 8-3- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,569 square
050    2021 feet.
ZC-21- 11-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,272 square
051    2-   feet; variance for minimum side yard setback (south) from 15 feet to 12.75 feet.
       2021
ZC-21- 9-7- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,248 square
052    2021 feet.
ZC-21- 9-7- Variance for pool setback from rear lot line from 5 feet to 3 feet; variance for
055    2021 minimum rear yard setback from 5 feet to 4.94 feet.
ZC-21- 8-3- Variance for street setback from 100 feet to 84 feet; variance for side yard setback
058    2021 (east side) from 50 feet to 14.75 feet; variance for lot area from 10 acres to 9.48
            acres.
ZC-21- 8-3- Variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 86.6 feet; variance for minimum side yard
061    2021 setback from 10 feet to 5.7 feet (west side).
ZC-21- 9-7- Variance for minimum lot frontage from 90 feet to 0 feet; variance for minimum side
062    2021 yard setback (south) from 10 feet to 3.6 feet.
ZC-21- 11-  Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 0.85 acres; variance for minimum lot
066    2-   frontage from 300 feet to 130 feet; variance for minimum side yard setback from 50
       2021 feet to 5 feet; variance for minimum rear yard setback from 50 feet to 30 feet.
       11-  Variance for minimum animal confinement setback from 50 feet to 4.36 feet (west
ZC-21- 2-   side); variance for minimum animal confinement setback from 50 feet to 31.81 feet
071    2021 (north side); variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 3.5 acres; variance for
            minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 274.4 feet.
       10-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 3.03 feet (north side);
ZC-21- 5-   variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 16.82 feet (south side);
073    2021 variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 133.3 feet; variance for minimum
            lot area from 10 acres to 2.188 acres.
ZC-21- 3-1- Variance for minimum street setback from 10 feet to 1 feet (Woodland Circle);
090    2022 variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 sq. ft. to 1,680 sq. ft.
ZC-21- 3-
093    15-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 sq. ft. to 2,210 sq. ft.
       2022
ZC-21- 5-
102    19-  Variance for wireless telecommunications tower height from 200 feet to 259 feet.
       2022
ZC-21- 3-
104    15-  Variance for side yard setback from 50 feet to 41.9 feet.
       2022
            Variance drive-up style self-service storage building height from 12 feet to 18 feet;
ZC-21- 5-3- variance for fence height within a street setback from 4 feet to 6 feet (New Lenox
106    2022 Rd.); variance for fence height within a street setback from 4 feet to 6 feet (Carey
            St.).
ZC-21- 5-3- Variance for maximum number of 1 swine to 2 swine; variance for side yard setback
107    2022 (east) from 10 feet to 7.35 feet.
ZC-22- 3-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,637 square
001    15-  feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 3-
006    15-  Variance for fence height within the street setback from 4 feet to 6 feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 5-3- Variance for maximum number of animal units allowed from 1 to 3; variance for maximum
008    2022 accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 1,826 square feet.
ZC-22- 5-
012    17-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 5 feet to 2.90 feet (south side).
       2022
ZC-22- 5-   Variance for minimum street yard setback from 30 feet to 24 feet; variance for
021    17-  minimum side yard setback (east) from 10 feet to 4 feet.
       2022
            Variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 100 feet; variance for minimum lot size
ZC-22- 5-   from 10 acres to .9985 acres; variance for side (east) setback from 50 feet to 6.64
023    17-  feet; variance for side (west) setback from 50 to 14.60 feet; variance for the
       2022 maximum floor area of an accessory dwelling unit from 650 square feet to 980 square
            feet.
ZC-22- 9-   Variance for minimum setback of a dynamic display sign face from a residential
026    20-  structure from 300 feet to 112 feet.
       2022
            Variance for minimum lot size from 10 acres to 3 acres; variance for minimum lot
ZC-22- 6-7- frontage from 300 feet to 154.26 feet; variance for minimum north side yard setback
029    2022 from 50 feet to 4 feet; variance for minimum south side yard setback from 50 feet to
            8.5 feet.
ZC-22- 6-7- Variance for minimum animal confinement setback (west) from 50 feet to 7 feet.
032    2022
ZC-22- 9-6- Variance for minimum street setback from 30 feet to 18 feet; variance for minimum lot
044    2022 frontage from 90 feet to 87.10 feet.
ZC-22- 9-6- Variance for minimum side yard setback (north) from 10 feet to 5.67 feet.
048    2022
ZC-22- 9-
055    20-  Variance for minimum side yard (north side) setback from 50 feet to 9.45 feet.
       2022
ZC-20- 9-
060    20-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 220.66 feet.
       2022
            Variance for minimum setback from public street (southside Pauling Rd.) from 50 feet
       10-  to 30 feet; variance for minimum setback from public street (southside Pauling-
ZC-22- 4-   Goodenow Rd. (CH-23)) from 50 feet to 23 feet; variance for minimum setback from
020    2022 public street (northside Pauling-Goodenow Rd. (CH-23)) from 50 feet to 23 feet;
            variance for minimum setback from public street (westside Nacke Rd.) from 50 feet to
            30 feet.
ZC-22- 10-
034    4-   Variance for minimum street setback from 100 feet to 60 feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 3-   Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit from 650 sq. ft. to 1,392 sq. ft.;
037    21-  variance for maximum number of cargo containers from 1 to 6.
       2023
ZC-22- 11-  Variance for fence height within a street setback from 4 feet to 8 feet; variance for
041    1-   minimum street setback from 30 feet to 16.40 feet; variance for minimum side yard
       2022 setback from 10 feet to 7.58 feet (northeasterly side).
ZC-22- 10-  Variance for side yard setback (west side) from 10' to 5'; variance for maximum
051    4-   accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,975 square feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 12-  Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 12.4 feet (east side);
052    20-  variance for maximum accessory building height from 25 feet to 27 feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 3-
086    21-  Variance for accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,720 square feet.
       2023
ZC-22- 3-7- Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 198.43 feet.
095    2023
            Variance for lot area from 2.5 acres to 34,215 square feet; variance for side yard
ZC-22- 3-   (east side) from 20 feet to 15.80 feet; variance for street (Spencer Road) setback
100    21-  from 100 feet to 75.86 feet; variance for street (Burger Avenue) setback from 100
       2023 feet to 56.85 feet.
               ZC-22-054   10-20-2022   Variance for setback (east side) from 10 feet to 2 feet.
ZC-22- 10-
054    20-  Variance for setback (east side) from 10 feet to 2 feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 10-
057    4-   Variance for minimum lot frontage from 80 feet to 0 feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 11-
061    1-   Variance for minimum side yard setback from 50 feet to 23 feet.
       2022
ZC-22- 12-  Variance for street setback from 30 feet to 26.30 feet (Valley View Place); variance
068    20-  for street setback from 30 feet to 21.90 feet (Deep Haven Drive); variance for side
       2022 yard setback (west side) from 10 feet to 7.89 feet.
ZC-22- 1-3- Variance for minimum street setback (Washington Street) from 100 feet to 38.52 feet;
075    2023 variance for minimum street setback (Park Road) from 100 feet to 30.57 feet.
ZC-22- 11-
076    16-  MA from E-1 to R-1 for PIN #14-12-11-300-024-0000.
       2023
ZC-22- 1-3- Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 220.51 feet; variance for minimum
077    2023 side setback (east side) from 50 feet to 30 feet.
ZC-22- 12-
087    20-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 10 feet.
       2022
VEXT-  12-
22-002 20-  Extension for approved variance for ZC-21-051.
       2022
APCD-  6-   Variance for maximum accessory building area 1,800 square feet to 4,815.18 square
23-003 15-  feet; and variance for maximum number of vehicles permitted in a residential district
       2023 from 5 to 15 (ZC-23-005).
ZC-23- 4-
005    18-  Variance for side yard (east side) setback from 10 feet to 4.4 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 7-
006    18-  Variance for minimum side yard setback (west side) from 100 feet to 50 feet.
       2023
APCD-  12-  Variance for maximum height of ADU from 20 feet to 26 feet; Variance for maximum size
23-006 21-  of ADU from 650 square feet to 2,212 square feet; and variance for maximum accessory
       2023 building area from 1,500 square feet to 3,177 square feet (ZC-23-089).
ZC-23- 5-2- Variance for minimum rear yard setback from 5 feet to 0.96 feet; variance for minimum
009    2023 side yard setback (east side) from 10 feet to 4.79 feet; variance for minimum street
            setback from 30 feet to 21.31 feet.
ZC-23- 5-2- Variance for minimum side yard setback (east side) from 10 feet to 5 feet.
010    2023
ZC-23- 6-6- Variance for lot frontage from 80 feet to 0 feet.
012    2023
            Variance for the distance of removal of 1 advertising sign structure within a 5 mile
ZC-23- 5-2- radius of the advertising sign face that is to be converted to a dynamic display to a
019    2023 10.35 mile radius; variance for a proposed advertising sign dynamic display sign face
            located within a 300 foot radius from a residential zoning districts to 196 feet.
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,462 square
021    3-   feet.
       2023
            Variance for east side yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-200-007-
            0000 (15.04); variance for fence height from 4 feet to 8 feet in the street yard
            setback for PIN #11-04-22-200-007-0000 (15.04); variance for rear yard setback from
            10 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-200-007-0000 (15.04); variance for front yard
            setback from 80 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-200-007-0000 (15.04); variance for
            east side yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-200-006-0000 (15.02);
            variance for rear yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04- 22-200-006-0000
            (15.02); variance for front yard setback from 80 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-
ZC-23- 6-6- 200- 006-0000 (15.02); variance for fence height from 4 feet to 8 feet in the street
023    2023 yard setback for PIN #11- 04-22-200-006-0000 (15.02); variance for east side yard
            setback from 10 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04- 22-400-001-0000 (15.05); variance for
            rear yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-400- 001-0000 (15.05);
            variance for front yard setback from 80 feet to 0 feet for PIN #11-04-22-400-001-
            0000 (15.05); variance for fence height from 4 feet to 8 feet in the street yard
            setback for PIN #11-04- 22-400-001-0000 (15.05); variance for fence height from 5
            feet to 8 feet in the street yard setback for PIN #11-04-22-200-015-0000 (easterly
            river bank parcel); variance for fence height from 7 feet to 8 feet for PIN #11-04-
            22-200-015-0000 (easterly river bank parcel).
ZC-23- 5-2- Variance for setback from 10 feet to 3 feet (east side) to co-locate a wireless
024    2023 telecommunications facility.
ZC-23- 6-6- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,781 square
026    2023 feet.
ZC-23- 7-
027    18-  Variance for lot area from 10 acres to 5.498 acres.
       2023
ZC-23- 6-6- Variance for street setback from 30 feet to 28.72 feet.
032    2023
ZC-23- 6-6- Variance for number of required mowing from 5 times to 1 time; variance for maximum
036    2023 ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
ZC-23- 8-1- Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 2; variance for maximum ground
037    2023 cover plant height from 13 inches to 24 inches.
ZC-23- 8-1- Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 2; variance for maximum ground
038    2023 cover plant height from 13 inches to 24 inches.
ZC-23- 8-1- Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 0; variance for maximum ground
040    2023 cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       6-   Extension request for variance approved on Case ZC-22- 015 to expire on 12-4-2023;
VEXT-  20-  variance for maximum height of a self-service storage facility from 12 feet to 28
23-001 2023 feet; variance for maximum floor area of a self-service storage unit from 600 feet to
            700 feet.
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for side yard setback (north side) from 20 feet to 3.25 feet; variance for
041    3-   side yard (south side) from 20 feet to 5.09 feet; variance for lot frontage from 300
       2023 feet to 82.56 feet; variance for lot area from 20.50 acres to 2.49 acres.
ZC-23- 7-   Variance for minimum animal confinement setback (south side) from 50 feet to 32 feet;
042    18-  variance for maximum accessory building height from 25 feet to 26.5 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 9-5- Variance for side yard (south side) setback from 10 feet to 3.6 feet.
043    2023
ZC-23- 7-
055    18-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 75 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 10 feet; variance for an adult-use
057    17-  cannabis infuser from 1,000 feet to 210.86 feet from a property line of an area zoned
       2023 residential use.
ZC-23- 7-   Variance for rear yard setback from 40 feet to 33.2 feet; variance for side yard
061    18-  setback (west side) from 10 feet to 6.1 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 7-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 5,340 square
063    18-  feet; variance for maximum building height for accessory structure from 25 feet to 28
       2023 feet.
ZC-23- 8-
066    15-  Variance for minimum side yard setback (south side) from 50 feet to 24 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 10-
071    3-   Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 7.887 acres.
       2023
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit size from 650 square feet to 1,986
072    3-   square feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to
       2023 3,296 square feet.
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 10 feet; variance for an adult-use
073    17-  cannabis infuser from 1,000 feet to 210.86 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 11-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 165 feet; variance for maximum
078    7-   accessory building height from 25 feet to 40 feet; variance for side yard setback
       2023 (south side) from 20 feet to 10 feet.
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for street setback from 47 feet to 30 feet; variance for minimum animal
079    3-   confinement setback (north) from 50 feet to 15 feet.
       2023
       10-  Variance for lot frontage from 165 feet to 142.50 feet; variance for side yard (east
ZC-23- 3-   side) setback from 15 feet to 10.21 feet; variance for maximum accessory building
080    2023 area from 1,800 square feet to 2,583 square feet; variance for street setback from 57
            feet to 20.70 feet.
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,477 square
081    17-  feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 11-
082    7-   Variance for side setback (south side) from 5 feet to 2 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 11-  Variance for maximum height of a dwelling from 30 feet to 39 feet; variance for
085    21-  maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,268.73 square feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time; variance for max ground
086    3-   cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2023
ZC-23- 10-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time; variance for max ground
087    3-   cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2023
ZC-23- 11-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,794 square
088    21-  feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 11-
089    7-   Variance for side yard setback (south side) from 10 feet to 5 feet.
       2023
       11-  Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 1,471
ZC-23- 21-  square feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to
092    2023 3,764 square feet; variance for distance behind principal structure from 10 feet to 0
            feet.
ZC-23- 12-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time; variance for maximum ground
093    19-  cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2023
ZC-23- - -  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time.
094
ZC-23- 11-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time; variance for maximum ground
096    7-   cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2023
ZC-23- 12-
097    5-   Variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 0 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 11-
098    7-   Variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 0.91 feet (west side).
       2023
       1-   Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres; variance for minimum animal
ZC-23- 16-  confinement setback (north side) from 50 feet to 5 feet; variance for minimum side
099    2024 yard setback (north side) from 50 feet to 2 feet; variance for minimum rear yard
            setback from 50 feet to 33 feet.
ZC-23- 11-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,811 square
102    21-  feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 12-
105    19-  Variance for lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres.
       2023
ZC-23- 12-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time; variance for maximum ground
108    5-   cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2023
ZC-23- 12-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 167 feet; variance for minimum lot
109    5-   area from 10 acres to 5.27 acres.
       2023
       12-  Variance for lot area from 12,500 square feet to 6,949 square feet; variance for lot
ZC-23- 19-  frontage from 70 feet to 50 feet; variance for street setback from 30 feet to 22
113    2023 feet; variance for side yard setback from 10 feet to 7 feet (east side); variance for
            side yard setback from 10 feet to 7 feet (west side).
ZC-23- 12-  Variance for max accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 4261.46 square
115    19-  feet; variance for minimum street setback from 57 feet to 24 feet.
       2023
ZC-23- 4-2- Variance for minimum lot area from 215,000 square feet to 164,873 square feet (lot
117    2024 1); variance for minimum lot area from 215,000 square feet to 164,873 square feet
            (lot 2).
       1-   Variance for side yard (south side) setback from 5 feet to 0.1 feet; variance for
ZC-23- 16-  rear yard setback from 25 feet to 0 feet; variance for minimum lot area from 10,000
120    2024 square feet to 4,780 square feet; variance for minimum lot frontage from 70 feet to
            40 feet; variance for street setback from 30 feet to 24.7 feet.
ZC-23- 1-   Variance for w sysb from 50 feet to 31.54 feet; variance for east sysb from 50 feet
122    16-  to 42.61 feet.
       2024
ZC-23- 2-
123    20-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 150 feet to 127.6 feet.
       2024
            Parcel 1 variances: front yard setback from 100 feet to 68.21 feet; side yard setback
ZC-23- 1-   from 50 feet to 4.37 feet for block garage; side yard setback from 50 feet to 12.5
124    16-  feet for block garage; side yard setback from 50 feet to 20.14 feet for metal pole
       2024 barn. Parcel 2 variances: front yard setback from 100 feet to 78.11 feet; back yard
            setback from 50 feet to 33.78 feet.
ZC-23- 4-2- Variance for northern sysb for animal confinement structures from 50 feet to 13 feet;
126    2024 variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,406 square
            feet; variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 165.94 feet.
ZC-23- 3-5- Variance for maximum fence height in street setback from 4 feet to 8 feet.
128    2024
ZC-23-      Variance from centerline of Water Tower Dr. from 100 feet to 37 feet; variance for
129    - -  maximum number of animal units allowed from 10 to 16.5 units; variance for maximum
            accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,435 square feet.
ZC-23- 4-2- Variance for minimum side yard setback from 5 feet to 2 feet (south side).
130    2024
ZC-23- 4-2- Variance for minimum lot area from 10,000 square feet to 6,250 square feet; variance
131    2024 for minimum street setback (Jessie St.) from 30 feet to 20 feet; variance for minimum
            street yard setback (4th Ave.) from 30 feet to 5.87 feet.
            Second extension for variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 1
VEXT-  1-7- time - extension for 180 days - extension to expire on July 26, 2025; second
24-004 2025 extension variance of maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches -
            extension for 180 days - extension to expire on July 26, 2025.
ZC-24- 5-7- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,529 square
006    2024 feet; variance for maximum accessory structure height from 25 feet to 28.1 feet.
ZC-24- 4-   Variance for minimum swimming pool setback from the nearest building from 8 feet to 0
007    16-  feet; variance for animal confinement setback (south side) from 50 feet to 0 feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 4-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,597.4 square
012    2024 feet.
ZC-24- 5-   Variance for minimum swimming pool setback from the nearest building from 8 feet to 5
013    21-  feet.
       2024
       5-   Variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet; variance for minimum lot area from
ZC-24- 21-  10 acres to 1.556 acres; variance for side yard setback (north side) from 50 feet to
014    2024 13.1 feet; variance for minimum swimming pool setback from nearest building from 8
            feet to 6 feet.
ZC-24- 4-   Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 2 times; variance for maximum
015    16-  ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2024
ZC-24- 4-   Variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 169.10 feet; variance for lot area from 10
018    16-  acres to 5.34 acres; variance for east side yard setback from 50 feet to 30 feet;
       2024 variance for west side yard setback from 50 feet to 22 feet.
ZC-24- 4-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,982 square
019    16-  feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 5-7- Variance for number of required mowings from 5 to 1 time; variance for maximum ground
020    2024 cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
ZC-24- 5-7- Variance for lot area from 10 acres to 8.33 acres; variance for lot frontage from 300
021    2024 feet to 273.18 feet.
            Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 1,778
ZC-24- 5-7- square feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to
022    2024 4,806 square feet; variance for accessory dwelling unit height from 20 feet to 25.5
            feet; variance for distance behind principal structure from 10 feet to 0 feet.
ZC-24- 6-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,332.4 square
023    2024 feet.
ZC-24- 5-7- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,679 square
024    2024 feet.
ZC-24- 8-6- Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 720 square
027    2024 feet.
ZC-24- 7-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 6,000 square
028    2024 feet; variance for side yard setback for animal confinement structure from 50 feet to
            29 feet (east side); variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 200 feet.
       6-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,443 square
ZC-24- 18-  feet; variance for animal confinement side yard setback from 50 feet to 25 feet (west
031    2024 side); variance for street setback from the right-of-way of a dedicated street from
            47 feet to 44 feet.
ZC-24- 7-2- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,300 square
035    2024 feet.
ZC-24- 7-   Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 565 square feet to 1,111
036    16-  square feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 5-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,356 square
039    21-  feet; variance for street yard setback from 100 feet to 62 feet (88th Ave.).
       2024
ZC-24- 8-6- Variance for number of required mowings from 5 times to 2 times per year; variance
040    2024 for maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 24 inches.
ZC-24- 6-   Variance for minimum swimming pool setback from the nearest building from 8 feet to 4
042    18-  feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 8-6- Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 8.71 acres; variance for minimum side
044    2024 yard setback (east side) from 50 feet to 41 feet.
VEXT-  9-   Variance extension use for Case ZC-23-065, Ray and Joyce Cambruzzi, PIN #03-17-06-
24-003 17-  302-001-1033, located in Wilmington Township, commonly known as 26247 Willow Lane.
       2024
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time; variance for maximum
045    1-   ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2024
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time; variance for maximum
046    1-   ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2024
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for minimum street setback from the centerline of the road from 100 feet to
049    1-   60 feet; variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 8-6- Variance for lot frontage from 300 feet to 45.51 feet.
053    2024
ZC-24- 8-6- Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 9.61 acres; variance for minimum lot
054    2024 frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet.
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for animal units from 3 to 6; variance for animal confinement setback from
055    17-  50 feet to 30 feet; variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square
       2024 feet to 3,200 square feet.
ZC-24- 7-   Variance for side yard setback from 5 feet to 0 feet (south side); variance for side
056    16-  yard setback from 5 feet to 2.21 feet (north side); variance for rear yard setback
       2024 from 5 feet to 0 feet.
ZC-24- 10-
060    1-   Variance for minimum street setback from 80 feet to 71.86 feet.
       2024
       9-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,233.02
ZC-24- 17-  square feet; variance for minimum street yard setback from 47 feet to 13.12 feet
062    2024 (Cass Street); variance for minimum street yard setback from 47 feet to 2.42 feet
            (Washington Street).
            Variance for maximum height of a principal building from 35 feet to 81 feet; variance
ZC-24- 9-3- for minimum setback of principal building from 200 feet to 75 feet (north) of any
064    2024 residential district; variance for minimum setback of principal building from 200
            feet to 110 feet (south) of any residential district.
ZC-24- 9-3- Variance for street setback from centerline of road (Regan Road) from 100 feet to
065    2024 40.2 feet.
       11-  Variance for the dynamic display portion of sign from 50% to 63% of the total area of
ZC-24- 19-  the sign; variance for the minimum setback of a dynamic display sign face from a
067    2024 residential structure from 300 feet to 170 feet; variance for maximum height of a
            freestanding sign in a residential zoning district from 8 feet to 11 feet.
ZC-24- 9-   Variance for street setback from the centerline of the road from 100 feet to 52 feet;
072    17-  variance for south side yard setback from 50 feet to 5 feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 9-   Variance for street yard setback (east side) from 30 feet to 11.79 feet; variance for
073    17-  maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,558 square feet; variance
       2024 for fence height in a street yard setback from 4 feet to 6 feet.
            Variance for lot area from 12,000 square feet to 10,919 square feet; variance for
       11-  distance from right-of-way of a dedicated street (Grandview Place) from 100 feet to
ZC-24- 19-  15 feet; variance for distance from the right-of-way of a dedicated street (State
074    2024 Street) from 100 feet to 45 feet; variance for fence height within street setback
            (Grandview Place) from 4 feet to 7 feet; variance for fence height within street
            setback (State Street) from 4 feet to 6 feet.
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for minimum street setback from the center line of roadway from 100 feet to
075    1-   52.22 feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 11-
076    19-  Variance for minimum street setback from 30 feet to 28.11.
       2024
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for maximum building height of an accessory structure from 25 feet to 33
079    15-  feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 1-7- Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 2,164
080    2025 square feet.
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,058 square
085    15-  feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 11-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 165 feet to 107.5 feet; variance for minimum
087    19-  side yard setback from 15 feet to 7.1 feet (north side).
       2024
ZC-24- 10-  Variance for side yard setback (east side) from 50 feet to 11 feet; variance for side
088    15-  yard setback (west side) from 50 feet to 20 feet; variance for lot frontage from 300
       2024 feet to 164.58 feet; variance for lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres.
ZC-24- 12-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 3,221 square
089    17-  feet; variance for side yard setback (east side) from 10 feet to 4.14 feet.
       2024
ZC-24- 12-  Variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time per year; variance
090    17-  for the maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2024
       11-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,761 square
ZC-24- 19-  feet; variance for street yard setback (Main Street) from 30 feet to 25.57 feet;
091    2024 variance for side yard setback (east side) from 10 feet to 9.64 feet; variance for
            rear yard setback from 5 feet to 4.29 feet.
ZC-24- 1-7- Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 9.41 acres.
093    2025
ZC-24- 12-  Variance for lot area from 10 acres to 1.25 acres; variance for minimum lot frontage
096    3-   from 300 feet to 0 feet; variance for side yard (south side) setback from 50 feet to
       2024 16 feet; variance for street yard setback from 100 feet to 32 feet.
ZC-24- 12-  Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 7.210 acres; variance for minimum lot
098    17-  frontage from 300 feet to 266.13.
       2024
ZC-24- 3-   Variance for ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches; variance for the
102    18-  number of required mowings from 5 times to 2 times.
       2025
ZC-24- 2-   Variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time; variance for
103    18-  maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 30 inches.
       2025
ZC-24- 1-7- Variance for minimum street setback (Harvard Street) from 100 feet to 30 feet;
104    2025 variance for minimum rear setback from 20 feet to 10 feet; variance for minimum
            street setback (State Street) from 100 feet to 30 feet.
ZC-24- 2-
105    18-  Variance for side yard (west) setback from 50 feet to 10 feet.
       2025
            Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 4,266 square
ZC-24- 1-   feet; variance for accessory dwelling unit area from 650 square feet to 2,465 square
106    21-  feet; variance for accessory dwelling unit height from 20 feet to 26 feet; variance
       2025 for side yard (north) setback from 20 feet to 17.54 feet; variance for lot frontage
            from 300 feet to 127.33 feet; variance for lot area from 2.5 acres to 0.792 acres.
ZC-24- 1-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,364 square
107    21-  feet.
       2025
ZC-24- 12-  Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,802 square
108    17-  feet.
       2024
            Variance for ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches (PIN 020);
ZC-24- 2-   variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time per year (PIN
109    18-  020); variance for ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches (PIN 010);
       2025 variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time per year (PIN
            010).
ZC-24- 12-  Variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 2 times; variance for the
110    17-  maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 24 inches.
       2024
            Variance for lot area from 10 acres to 0.5 acres (21,823 square feet); variance for
            lot frontage from 300 feet to 297.05 feet; variance for side yard setback (west side)
ZC-24- 1-7- from 50 feet to 8.14 feet; variance for side yard setback (south side) from 50 feet
111    2025 to 25 feet; variance for street setback from center line of the road from 100 feet to
            44.98 (W. Monee Manhattan Road); variance for street setback from the center line of
            the road from 100 feet to 44.33 feet (S. Center Road).
ZC-24- 2-4- Variance for minimum street setback from 30 feet to 8 feet; variance for minimum side
112    2025 yard (north side) from 10 feet to 2.7 feet.
ZC-24- 4-3- Variance for rear yard setback from 5 feet to 2.4 feet; variance for side yard
119    2025 setback from 5 feet to 3.4 feet (east side).
ZC-24- 4-
117    15-  Variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 30 inches.
       2025
ZC-24- 3-4- Variance for the number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time; variance for
120    2025 maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
ZC-24- 3-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,195 square
121    2025 feet; variance for minimum street setback from 30 feet to 17 feet.
ZC-24- 4-3- Variance for the minimum setback of a dynamic display sign face from a residential
123    2025 structure from 300 feet to 180 feet; variance for minimum side yard setback
            (northwest side) from 10 feet to 8.26 feet.
ZC-24- 3-4- Variance for the maximum size of an accessory dwelling unit from 633.08 square feet
124    2025 to 724 square feet.
ZC-24- 4-
126    15-  Variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2025
ZC-24- 3-4- Variance for rear yard setback from 30 feet to 13 feet.
127    2025
ZC-25- 3-   Variance for street yard setback from 80 feet to 58 feet; variance for lot frontage
001    18-  from 150 feet to 0 feet.
       2025
VEXT-  4-   Second extension for variance to the rear yard setback 40 feet to 27 feet. Extension
25-001 15-  of variance to October 11, 2025.
       2025
            First extension (V-24-188) of variance of number of required mowings from five times
VEXT-  9-2- to one time, this will extend the expiration date for the variance to March 30, 2026;
25-002 2025 first extension (V-24-208) of variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13
            inches to 36 inches, this will extend the expiration date for the variance to March
            30, 2026.
            First extension (V-24-189) of variance for number of required mowings from five times
VEXT-  9-2- to one time, this will extend the expiration date for the variance to March 30, 2026;
25-003 2025 first extension (V-24-1920) of variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13
            inches to 36 inches, this will extend the expiration date for the variance to March
            30, 2026.
ZC-25- 4-3- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 4,253 square
002    2025 feet; variance for animal units from 5 to 13; variance for lot frontage from 165 feet
            to 101.53 feet.
ZC-25- 2-
003    18-  Variance for side yard setback from 50 feet to 13 feet (north side).
       2025
ZC-25- 3-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,549.23
006    18-  square feet; variance for east side yard setback from 10 feet to 4.2 feet; variance
       2025 for west side yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet.
ZC-25- 3-4- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,535 square
007    2025 feet.
ZC-25- 3-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 3,000 square feet to 3,571 square
008    18-  feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 3-   Variance for street yard setback from 30 feet to 24 feet; variance for rear yard
009    18-  setback from 40 feet to 34 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 4-3- Variance for minimum street yard setback from 47 feet to 37 feet.
011    2025
ZC-25- 4-3- Variance for building setback from 25 feet to 21 feet.
015    2025
ZC-25- 8-5- Variance for maximum number of vehicles permitted in a residential district 5 to 21;
020    2025 variance for maximum number of commercial vehicles and or commercial trailers to be
            parked on a constructed driveway within a residential zoning district from 2 to 16.
ZC-25- 5-
021    20-  Variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 10 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 4-
023    15-  Variance for street setback from 30 feet to 10 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 5-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,794 square
024    20-  feet; variance for street yard setback from 30 feet to 14 feet; variance for rear
       2025 yard setback from 5 feet to 3 feet.
ZC-25- 5-6- Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres; variance for minimum side
029    2025 yard setback (west side) from 50 feet to 36 feet.
ZC-25- 5-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,800 square feet to 3,700 square
030    20-  feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 7-1- Variance for minimum side yard setback (south side) from 20 feet to 10 feet; variance
031    2025 for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 165 feet.
ZC-25- 5-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,908 square
034    20-  feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 4-
035    15-  Variance for minimum side yard setback (west side) from 10 feet to 8.14 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 5-6- Variance for minimum street yard setback (Chicago Street) from 80 feet to 30 feet;
036    2025 variance for minimum street yard setback (Zarley Boulevard) from 80 feet to 50 feet;
            variance for minimum lot area from 20,000 square feet to 14,500 square feet.
ZC-25- 5-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 1,764 square
037    20-  feet.
       2025
            Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 2,600 square
ZC-25- 6-3- feet; variance for street setback from the center line of non-dedicated road from 80
039    2025 feet to 12 feet; variance for rear setback from 40 feet to 33 feet; variance for rear
            setback for an accessory structure from 5 feet to 1.85 feet; variance for east side
            yard setback from 10 feet to 0.7 feet.
ZC-25- 7-
044    15-  Variance for east side yard setback from 10 feet to 4 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 6-3- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,672 square
045    2025 feet; variance for street yard (Kathryn Ave.) setback from 30 feet to 0 feet.
ZC-25- 8-5- Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,200 square feet to 1,783 square
053    2025 feet.
            Variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 9.03 feet (west side);
ZC-25- 6-3- variance for minimum street yard setback from 80 feet to 56 feet; variance for
056    2025 minimum rear yard setback from 40 feet to 17 feet; variance for minimum lot frontage
            from 90 feet to 0 feet; variance for minimum lot area from 20,000 square feet to
            13,285.03 square feet.
ZC-25- 10-  Variance for street yard setback from 30 feet to 18 feet; variance for maximum
061    21-  accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 3,243 square feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 7-
070    15-  Variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 5 acres.
       2025
ZC-25- 10-  Variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit size from 743 square feet to 923 square
083    21-  feet; variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit height from 20 feet to 25.25 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 9-2- Variance for number of required parking spaces from 76 parking spaces to 54 parking
084    2025 spaces.
ZC-25- 10-  Variance for number of required mowing from 5 times to 1 time; variance for maximum
085    21-  ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches.
       2025
ZC-25- 1-
086    20-  Variance for rear yard setback from 50 feet to 24.92 feet.
       2026
ZC-25- 11-  Variance for lot area from 10 acres to 5.02 acres; variance for lot frontage from 300
096    18-  feet to 272 feet; variance for animal confinement setback (western) from 50 feet to
       2025 32 feet.
ZC-25- 1-
099    20-  Variance for animal confinement setback (eastern) from 50 feet to 28 feet.
       2026
ZC-25- 12-
103    2-   Variance for street yard setback from 30 feet to 15.2 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 1-7- Variance for minimum street setback (Harvard St.) from 100 feet to 30 feet; variance
104    2025 for rear yard setback from 20 feet to 10 feet; variance for street setback (State
            St.) from 100 feet to 30 feet.
ZC-25- 2-
105    18-  Variance for side yard setback (west) from 50 feet to 10 feet.
       2025
            Variance for minimum street yard setback (Kennedy Rd.) from 100 feet to 33 feet;
ZC-25- 12-  variance for minimum street yard setback (Rathje Rd.) from 100 feet to 51.7 feet;
107    2-   variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to 0.507 acres; variance for minimum lot
       2025 frontage from 300 feet to 297.2 feet; variance for minimum side yard setback (north
            side) from 50 feet to 7.2 feet.
ZC-25- 12-
108    2-   Variance for rear setback from 50 feet to 20 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 1-
115    20-  Variance for lot frontage from 150 feet to 127.6 feet.
       2026
ZC-25- 12-
119    2-   Variance for side yard setback (east) from 10 feet to 4 feet.
       2025
ZC-25- 1-   Variance for maximum accessory building area from 1,500 square feet to 3,942 square
126    20-  feet.
       2026
ZC-25- 1-   Variance for street setback from 100 feet to 42.4 feet; variance for side yard
127    20-  setback (east side) from 50 feet to 17 feet.
       2026
ZC-25- 1-
128    20-  Variance for fence height within street setback from 4 feet to 8 feet.
       2026
       11-  First extension of variance of number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time,
VEXT-  4-   extending expiration date for variance to August 31, 2026; first extension of
25-005 2025 variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches, extending
            expiration date for variance to August 31, 2026.
            First extension of variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to
            36 inches (PIN_#020), extending expiration date for variance to August 16, 2026;
       11-  first extension of variance for number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time per
VEXT-  18-  year (PIN #020), extending expiration date for variance to August 16, 2026; first
25-006 2025 extension of variance for maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36
            inches (PIN #010), extending expiration date for variance to August 16, 2026; first
            extension of variance for number of required mowings from 5 times to 1 time per year
            (PIN #010), extending expiration date for variance to August 16, 2026.
           
 
 
TABLE XVII: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Book/Res./Ord. Date Description
Book/Res./   Date Description
Ord.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2005-S, rezoning property in DuPage Township from an F District
k.   , p. 26-  to a B-1A District.
             1977
             1-   Zoning case no. 2007-S, rezoning property in Lockport Township from an F District
k.   , p. 26-  to an I-1 District.
             1977
             1-   Zoning case no. 2010-S, rezoning property in Crete Township from an F District to
k.   , p. 26-  an I-1 District.
             1977
             1-   Zoning case no. 2011-S, rezoning property in Plainfield Township from an F
k.   , p. 26-  District to a B-1A District.
             1977
             2-   Zoning case no. 2014-S, rezoning property in Wilmington Township from a B-
k.   , p. 23-  1 District to a B-4 District.
             1977
             2-   Zoning case no. 2004-S, rezoning property in DuPage Township from an F District
k.   , p. 23-  to a B-2 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 5-
163          18-  Lot 53, Block 1 reclassified from a B-1 District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , pp.7-   Zoning amending case no. 2015-V, rezoning land in Reed Township in the City of
282—283    13-  Braidwood from a B-1 District to a B-2 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-   Zoning amending case no. 2016-V, rezoning land in Lockport Township from a B-
283          13-  1 District to a B-4 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-   Zoning amending case no. 2017-V, rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 in Block 4 in
284          13-  Sterling Park, from an R-1 District to an R-3 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-   Zoning amending case no. 2019-V, rezoning property in Plainfield Township from an
284          13-  F District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-   Zoning amending case no. 2022-V, rezoning property in Joliet Township from an F
285          13-  District to an I-1 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 7-   Zoning case no. 2024-V, rezoning property in Green Garden Township from an F
285          13-  District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-   Zoning case no. 2025-V, rezoning property in Wheatland Township from an F
367          17-  District to an I-1 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-   Zoning case no. 2032-V, rezoning property in Frankfort Township from an R-
367          17-  1 District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-   Zoning case no. 2036-V, rezoning property in Joliet Township from a B-1 and F
368          17-  District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , pp.8-   Zoning case no. 2020-V, rezoning property in Plainfield Township from an R-
369—370    17-  1 District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 8-   Zoning case no. 2033, rezoning property in Homer Township from an F District to a
370          17-  B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2038-V, rezoning property in Troy Township from an F District to
498          19-  a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2049-V, rezoning property in Wilmington Township from an F
498          19-  District to an I-1 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2030-V, rezoning Lot 20 in Crete Township from an R-2 District to
499          19-  a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no 2039-V, rezoning property in New Lenox Township from an F District
499          19-  to an O-R District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2041-V, rezoning property in New Lenox Township from an F
500          19-  District to a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2043-V, rezoning Lot 43 in Homer Township from an R-2 District to
501          19-  a B-1A District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2045-V, rezoning property in Homer Township from an F District to
501          19-  a B-2 District.
             1977
k.   , p. 10-  Zoning case no. 2042-V, rezoning Lots 19, 20 and 21 in Bel Air addition from an
502          19-  R-1 District to an O-R District.
             1977
             1-   Zoning case no. 2055-V, rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 25,
-            18-  Township 35 North, Range 13 East in Frankfort Township from an R-3 District to an
             1978 R-1 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2056-V, rezoning part of northeast quarter of northwest quarter
-            18-  of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from an F
             1978 District to an I-1 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2060a-V, rezoning west 132 feet of east 396 feet of north 330
-            23-  feet of west half of northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 36 North, Range 11
             1978 East in Homer Township from an F District to a B-1A District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2063-V, rezoning property on New Richards Street between Coburn
-            23-  and Oscar Avenue in Joliet Township from an R-1 District to a B-1A District.
             1978
             3-   Zoning case no. 2065-V, rezoning part of Lot 3 of Ogden’s Subdivision of Raccoon
-            23-  Grove Reserve from a B-1E and F District to a B-1C District.
             1978
             3-   Zoning case no. 1995-S, correction of typing error in zoning of 30 acres in
-            23-  Section 22 and 23 on northeast side of Route 30 and south of Brown Street in
             1978 Plainfield Township.
             5-   Zoning case nos. 2073-V, 2073A-V, 2073C-V and 2073D-V, rezoning parcels in
-            18-  Frankfort Square Subdivision in Frankfort Township from an R-3 District to an R-
             1978 1 District.
             5-   Amendment no. 10 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning approximately 40 acres
-            18-  in Section 24 in Plainfield Township from an R-1 District to an I-3 District.
             1978
             5-   Amendment no. 11 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning part of west half of
-            18-  northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from an A-
             1978 1 District to an R-6 District.
             5-   Amendment no. 12 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning property beginning at
-            18-  point in east line of southwest quarter 1,105.08 feet north of southeast corner
             1978 thereof, from an A-1 District to a C-4 District.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2078-V, rezoning part of Lots 1 and 2 in Krygsheld’s Subdivision
-            18-  in Crete Township from an F District to a B1-C District.
             1978
             5-   Zoning case no. 2079-V, rezoning south half of northeast quarter of northwest
-            18-  quarter of northeast quarter, Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 14 East;
             1978 Washington Township from an F District to an I-1 District.
             6-   Zoning case no. 2070-V, rezoning five acres out of west 44 acres of south half of
-            12-  southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet
             1978 Township from an F District to a B1-C District.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2076-V, rezoning two and one-half acres on northeast corner of
-            24-  Taylor and Burler Roads in Plainfield Township from an F District to an I-
             1978 1 District.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2080-V, rezoning 1 acre on Route 7, Section 17, Township 36
-            24-  North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an F District to a C-2 District.
             1978
             9-   Zoning case nos. 2082-V and 2084-V, rezoning seven acres on northwest corner of
-            14-  159th and Bell Roads, Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer
             1978 Township from a C-2 District to a C-2 District with special use.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2087-V, rezoning 16.5 acres of Frankfort Square Complex in
-            14-  Frankfort Township from an R-6 District to an R-5 District, with variation.
             1978
             9-   Zoning case no. 2088-V, rezoning 20 acres on 191 Street, Section 11, Township 35
-            14-  North, Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to an I-
             1978 1 District.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2089-V, rezoning .71 acres fronting Route 53 approximately 150
-            14-  feet from southeast intersection with Romeoville Road in Lockport Township, from
             1978 a C-2 District to a C-2 District with special use.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2091-V, rezoning south half of west half of northwest quarter of
-            14-  Section 27, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in Wheatland Township from an A-
             1978 1 District to an I-1 District.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2092-V, rezoning north 500 feet of east 900 feet of northeast
-            14-  quarter of Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in Wheatland Township from
             1978 an A-1 District to a C-1 District.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2093-V, rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 7, Township
-            14-  34 North, Range 10 East in Jackson Township from an A-1 District to an I-
             1978 3 District.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2066-V, rezoning west half of south 466.70 feet of west 466.70
-            14-  feet of west half of southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 34 North, Range 12
             1978 East in Green Garden Township from an A-1 District to an I-1 District.
             10-  Zoning case no. 2071-V, rezoning approximately 43 acres at intersection of
-            26-  Spencer Road and Briggs Street in Joliet Township from an A-1 District to C-2, I-
             1978 1 and I-2 Districts on defined parcels.
                  Zoning case no. 2081-V, rezoning part of Lot 4 in Lemont Farms Subdivision in the
             10-  east half of northeast quarter of southwest quarter; north half of southeast
-            26-  quarter and southeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 36
             1978 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from a C-1 District to a C-1 District with
                  special use.
             10-  Zoning case no. 2096-V, rezoning south half of southeast quarter of southeast
-            26-  quarter of Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an
             1978 A-1 District to an A-2 District.
             10-  Zoning case no. 2090-V, rezoning part of west half of southwest quarter of
-            26-  Section 5, Township 35 North, Range 9 East in Troy Township from an A-1 District
             1978 to an I-2 District.
             12-  Zoning case no. 2102-V, rezoning south 135 feet of north 576.73 feet of east 141
-            21-  feet of northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 33 North, Range 9 East (except
             1978 east 33 feet thereof) in Wilmington Township from a C-6 District to a C-
                  6 District with special use.
             12-  Zoning case nos. 2104-V, 2105-V and 2106-V, rezoning a 10 foot by 30 foot parcel
-            21-  located on east line of southeast quarter of Section 16, Township 35 North, Range
             1978 12 East in Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to an A-1 District with
                  special use.
             12-  Zoning case no. 2109-V, rezoning south half of northeast quarter of Section 10
-            21-  and north half of southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 12
             1978 East in Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to an R-5 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2110-V, rezoning Lots 157 and 158 in New Lenox Estates, Unit 3,
-            18-  in New Lenox Township from an R-3 District to a C-2 District.
             1979
             2-   Zoning case no. 2113-V, rezoning part of west half of west half of Section 13,
-            22-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from a C-4 District to a C-
             1979 1 District with special use.
             2-   Zoning case no. 2119-C, rezoning a tract in west half of Section 11, Township 36
-            22-  North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 District to a C-2 District
             1979 with special use.
             2-   Zoning case no. 2128-C, rezoning Lot 6 in Section 7, Township 34 North, Range 14
-            22-  East in Crete Township from an A-2 District to an R-1 District.
             1979
             2-   Zoning case no. 2141-C, rezoning five acres on west side of State Line Road,
-            22-  south of Danne Road, Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 15 East in Crete
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to an A-2 District.
             2-   Zoning case no. 2121-C, rezoning east 548.5 feet of west 852.5 feet of south
-            22-  794.17 feet of west half of southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 33 North,
             1979 Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to an A-1 District with
                  special use.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2097-V, rezoning five acres on south side of 311th Street east of
-            21-  Dixie Highway, Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 14 East in Washington
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to and I-1 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2122-C, rezoning north 330 feet of south 990 feet of east 660
-            21-  feet of southeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North,
             1979 Range 12 East in Green Garden Township from an A-2 District to an R-1 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2123-C, rezoning southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34
-            21-  North, Range 12 East in Green Garden Township from an A-l District to a A-
             1979 2 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2124-C, rezoning south 330 feet of east 660 feet of southeast
-            21-  quarter of southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 12 East in
             1979 Green Garden Township from an A-1 District to an R-1 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2125-C, rezoning east half of northeast quarter of northeast
-            21-  quarter of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 12 East in Green Garden Township
             1979 from an A-1 District to an A-2 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2130-C, rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 19,
-            21-  Township 34 North, Range 15 East in the county from an A-1 District to an R-
             1979 5 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2135-C, rezoning part of east half of southwest quarter of
-            21-  Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in the county from an A-1 District
             1979 to a C-4 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2136-C, rezoning part of east half of southeast quarter of
-            21-  Section 32, Township 35 North, Range 9 East in Troy Township from an A-1 District
             1979 to an R-2 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2139-C, rezoning 78.15 acres in Section 12, south of I-55 between
-            21-  Joliet Road and DuPage County Line in DuPage Township from an A-1 District to an
             1979 I-1 District.
             3-   Zoning case no. 2127-C, rezoning part of southwest quarter of Section 26,
-            21-  Township 34 North, Range 14 East in the county from an A-1 District to an R-
             1979 2 District.
             4-   Zoning objection A to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning 85.45 acres in parts
-            18-  of Section 1 and 12, Township 34 North, Range 13 East in Monee Township from an
             1979 I-2 and A-1 District to an I-2 District.
             4-   Zoning objection E to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning 4.5 acres in Section
-            18-  22, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet Township from an R-4 District to a
             1979 C-4 District.
             4-   Zoning objection I to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning a parcel in Section
-            18-  13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet Township from an A-1 District to
             1979 an I-2 District.
             4-   Zoning objection H to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning tract located in
-            18-  Section 23, 25 and 26, Township 37 North, Range 10 East in DuPage Township from
             1979 an A-1 District with special use to an I-3 District with special use.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2120-C, rezoning south half of northeast quarter and north 305.34
-            18-  feet of north half of southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range
             1979 12 East in Frankfort Township from an R-1 District to an R-5 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2126-C, rezoning Lot 2 and parts of Lots 3, 4 and 6 of Section
-            18-  13, Township 34 North, Range 14 East in Crete Township from an A-1 District to an
             1979 R-2 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2137-C, rezoning 6.18 acres in Section 28, Township 37 North,
-            18-  Range 10 East, on northeast side of Joliet- Naperville Road and south of I-55 in
             1979 DuPage Township, from an A-1 District to an I-2 District with special use.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2138-C, rezoning part of east half of northwest quarter of
-            18-  Section 28, Township 37 North, Range 10 East in DuPage Township from an A-
             1979 1 District to an I-1 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2143-C, rezoning 2 parcels in Section 14, Township 35 North,
-            18-  Range 10 East in the county from a C-2 District to a C-4 District.
             1979
             4-   Zoning case no. 2144-C, rezoning south 215.5 feet of north 1,436.7 feet of west
-            18-  half of northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New
             1979 Lenox Township from an A-1 District to an R-1 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2146-C, rezoning certain parcels in Section 11, Township 36
-            18-  North, Range 11 East in the county from an R-4 District to a C-1 District with
             1979 special use.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2147-C, rezoning Lots 7 through 18 in Block 16 of Bonnie Brae
-            18-  Subdivision, Unit No. 3, in Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 10 East in
             1979 Lockport Township from an R-5 District to a C-3 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2149-C, rezoning northwest quarter of southeast quarter of
-            18-  Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12 East and south half of southeast quarter
             1979 of Section 12 in the county from an A-1 District to an R-5 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2154-C, rezoning a tract in northwest corner of east half of west
-            18-  half of northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in the
             1979 county from an A-1 District to a C-1 District.
             4-   Zoning case no. 2155-C, rezoning three acres in Section 2, Township 35 North,
-            18-  Range 11 East, at northwest corner of Route 6 and Parker Road in New Lenox
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to a C-1 District.
             4-   Zoning objection L to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning certain parcels in
-            25-  northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 37 North, Range 10 East in the county
             1979 from an A-1 District to an I-3 District with special use.
             4-   Zoning objection D to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning Lot 4 and parts of
-            25-  Lots 5, 6 and 7 of southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 35 North, Range 10
             1979 East in the county from an R-4 district to a C-4 District.
             4-   Zoning objection P to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning certain parts of
-            25-  Section 36, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in the county from an A-1 District to
             1979 an A-1 District with special use.
             5-   Zoning objection “Chickasaw Hills no. 2", rezoning part of southeast quarter of
-            16-  northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to a C-1 District with special use.
             5-   Zoning objection “Codo”, rezoning 30 acres in Section 4, Township 34 North, Range
-            16-  9 East at northwest corner of I-55 and Route 6 in Channahon Township from an A-
             1979 1 District to an I-3 District.
             5-   Zoning objection “Haight”, rezoning three acres in northeast quarter of Section
-            16-  23, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, southeast of Naperville-Plainfield Road on
             1979 west side of 224th Avenue in Wheatland Township from an A-1 District to an I-
                  2 District.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2150-C, rezoning 9.9 acres in Section 12, on west side of Harlem
-            16-  Avenue, north of Vollmer Road extending west, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in
             1979 Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to an R-6 District.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2157-C, rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 25,
-            16-  Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from a C-6 District to a
             1979 C-6 District with special use.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2158-C, rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 25,
-            16-  Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from a C-6 District to an
             1979 R-3 District.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2161-C, rezoning south 313 feet of west 208.667 feet of southwest
-            16-  quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from a
             1979 C-2 District to a C-2 District with special use.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2163-C, rezoning north 417.34 feet of south 730.34 feet of west
-            16-  208.67 feet of southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
             1979 in Homer Township from a C-2 District to a C-2 District with special use.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2151-C, rezoning Lots 15, 16 and 18 in Assessor’s Subdivision of
-            16-  southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 34 North, Range 15 East in Crete
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to an R-3 District.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2162-C, rezoning west half of southwest quarter of northwest
-            16-  quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an
             1979 A-1 District to an A-1 District with special use.
             5-   Zoning case no. 2134-C, rezoning 6.2 acres in Section 18, Township 35 North,
-            16-  Range 10 East, south of I-80 and west of Larkin Avenue in Joliet Township from an
             1979 R-1 District to a C-3 District with variance.
             6-   Zoning case no. 2159-C, rezoning part of southwest quarter of Section 28,
-            14-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 District to an R-
             1979 3 District.
             6-   Zoning case no. 2168-C, rezoning west 20 acres of north two-thirds of west three-
-            14-  fourths of northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in
             1979 New Lenox Township from an A-1 District to an R-1 District.
             6-   Zoning case no. 2171-C, rezoning two parcels in Section 10, Township 33 North,
-            14-  Range 13 East on south side of Eagle Road between Cicero and Crawford Aves. in
             1979 Will Township from an A-1 District to an A-2 District.
             6-   Zoning case no. 2176-C, rezoning 20 acres in Section 7, Township 34 North, Range
-            14-  14 East on east side of King Road between Exchange Street and Norfolk Avenue in
             1979 Crete Township from an A-1 District to an R-1 District.
             6-   Zoning case no. 2177-C, rezoning 9.905 acres in Section 20 and 21, Township 34
-            14-  North, Range 14 East on west side of Dixie Highway between Old Monee and New
             1979 Monee Roads in Crete Township from an A-1 District to a C-3 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-8 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning 138 acres in
-            14-  northeast quarter of Section 4, Township 35 North, Range 9 East in Troy Township
             1979 from an A-1 District to an I-1 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-2 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning 3.450 acres in
-            14-  southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to a C-3 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-3 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning 4.585 acres in
-            14-  southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, on east side
             1979 of Route 45, in Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to a C-3 District with
                  special use.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-4 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning north 749 feet of
-            14-  west half of west half of northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 35 North,
             1979 Range 9 East in Troy Township from an R-3 District to a C-3 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-5 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning Lots 11, 12 and
-            14-  part of 13 in Block 4 of Elgin Park Subdivision, northwest quarter of Section 11,
             1979 Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet Township from an R-3 District to an I-
                  2 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-6 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning parcel in south
-            14-  half of northeast quarter of northwest quarter of northeast quarter of Section
             1979 21, Township 33 North, Range 14 East in Washington Township from an A-1 District
                  to an I-2 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 79-10 to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning northeast
-            14-  quarter of northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in
             1979 Homer Township from an A-1 District to an R-4 District.
             7-   Zoning objection Q to Will County Zoning Ordinance, rezoning parcel located in
-            25-  Section 2, 3, 4 and 9, Township 37 North, Range 10 East in DuPage Township from
             1979 an A-1 District to an I-3 District with special use.
             7-   Zoning objection “Bertani no. 2", rezoning 1.584 acres in Section 34, Township 36
-            25-  North, Range 9 East in Plainfield Township from an A-1 District to a C-1 District
             1979 with special use.
             7-   Zoning objection “Santa Fe”, rezoning 80 acres in Section 13 and 23, Township 37
-            25-  North, Range 10 East in DuPage Township from an A-1 District to an I-1 District.
             1979
             7-   Zoning objection C, rezoning 140 acres known as Frankfort Ranchettes in Section
-            25-  6, Township 34 North, Range 13 East in Monee Township from an A-1 District to
             1979 “permitted nonconforming homesites” District.
             7-   Zoning objection D, rezoning north half of northwest fractional quarter of
-            25-  Section 13, north of Indian Boundary Line, Township 34 North, Range 11 East in
             1979 Manhattan Township from an A-1 District to “permitted nonconforming homesites”
                  District.
             7-   Zoning objection F, rezoning Shirehorse Country Estates in Manhattan Township
-            25-  from an A-1 District to “permitted nonconforming homesites” District.
             1979
             7-   Zoning objection “Condo”, rezoning Lot 3 of subdivision of north 671.22 feet of
-            25-  west 648.8 feet of south half of southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 34
             1979 North, Range 14 East in Crete Township from an A-1 District to a C-1 District
                  with special use.
             7-   Zoning objection 79-7, rezoning part of northwest quarter of southwest quarter of
-            25-  Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from an A-
             1979 1 District to a C-2 District.
             7-   Zoning objection 79-11, rezoning part of northwest quarter of northeast quarter
-            25-  of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox Township from an A-
             1979 1 District to a C-2 District.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2148-C, rezoning north 165 feet of east 450 feet of south half of
-            25-  southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to a C-4 and C-5 District.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2160-C, rezoning ten acres in Section 15, Township 36 North,
-            25-  Range 11 East on west side of Parker Road north of 159th Street in Homer Township
             1979 from an I-1 and C-2 District to an I-1 District with special use.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2174-C, rezoning Lots 3, 4 and part of 7 in Pleasantview
-            25-  Subdivision in southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East
             1979 in New Lenox Township from an A-1 District to a C-5 District.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2179-C, rezoning part of Lot 8 in Whispering Hills Subdivision in
-            25-  northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 13 East in Monee
             1979 Township from an A-2 District to an R-1 District.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2182-C, rezoning part of east half of southeast quarter in
-            25-  Section 25, Township 34 North, Range 12 East in Green Garden Township from an A-
             1979 1 District to an R-1 District.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2186-C, rezoning five acres in Section 6, Township 34 North,
-            25-  Range 13 East, at southeast corner of Steger Road and Harlem Avenue in Monee
             1979 Township from an A-1 District to an R-1 District.
             7-   Zoning case no. 2178-C, rezoning north 1,980 feet of east half of northwest
-            25-  quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 13 East in Monee Township from an
             1979 A-1 District to an R-1 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 5, rezoning part of east half of northwest quarter and west five
-            29-  acres of south half of northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range
             1979 12 East lying north of north line of Lincoln Highway in Frankfort Township from a
                  C-2 to a C-3 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 12, rezoning west 200 feet of east 1,080 feet of north 440 feet
-            29-  in east half of southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12 East
             1979 in Frankfort Township from a C-2 District to a C-2 District with special use.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2180-C, rezoning part of east half of Section 2, Township 36
-            29-  North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 District to an R-4 District.
             1979
             8-   Zoning objection 79-9, rezoning 1.25 acres in Section 23, Township 35 North,
-            29-  Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from an A-1 District to a C-1 District with
             1979 special use.
             8-   Zoning objection 79-12, rezoning part of north half of northwest quarter of
-            29-  southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 12 East in the county
             1979 from an A-1 to a C-2 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 79-13, rezoning part of west half of northeast quarter of
-            29-  Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to an
             1979 R-3 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 79-14, rezoning part of east half of northeast quarter of
-            29-  Section 23, Township 36 North, Range 9 East in Plainfield Township from an A-1 to
             1979 an I-2 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 79-16, rezoning part of southwest quarter of Section 27 and
-            29-  southeast quarter of Section 28, Township 36 North, Range 10 East in Lockport
             1979 Township from an I-2 to an I-3 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 79-17, rezoning northwest quarter of northeast quarter of
-            29-  Section 21, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in Wheatland Township from an R-2 to
             1979 an R-3 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 79-18, rezoning approximately two and one-half acres located on
-            29-  west side of Route 59, 1,750 feet south of Theodore Street in Troy Township from
             1979 an A-1 to an I-1 District.
             8-   Zoning objections 79-15, 79-15(a) and 79-15(b), rezoning three tracts of land in
-            29-  Section 35 and 36, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in Wheatland Township from A-
             1979 1 to I-3 District, C-6 to I-3 District and C-6 to A-1 District.
             8-   Material service objections on Channahon Parcels 540, 541, 542, 543, 545, 547;
-            29-  northeasterly 5.4 acres of Parcel 510 in Plainfield Township; Plainfield Township
             1979 Parcels 501, 502, 503, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510 (except northeasterly 5.4 acres);
                  and Lockport Township Parcels 415, 420 and 421 rezoned.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2188-C, rezoning 95.3 acres in Section 16, Township 36 North,
-            29-  Range 11 East, on west side of Cedar Road, 770 feet north of intersection of
             1979 Cedar Road and 159th Street in Homer Township from an A-1 District to an R-
                  2 District.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2189-C, rezoning west 40 acres of southwest quarter of Section
-            29-  11, Township 34 North, Range 11 East in Manhattan Township from an A-1 District
             1979 to an A-2 District.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2190-C, rezoning portion of west half of northeast quarter of
-            29-  Section 29, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in Wheatland Township from an A-1 to
             1979 an I-1 District for Lots 1 through 17 and to an I-2 District for Lot 18.
             8-   Zoning case no. 2193-C, rezoning 1.365 acres in Section 24, Township 36 North,
-            29-  Range 10 East on south side of Route 7 in Lockport Township from a C-2 District
             1979 to a C-2 District with special use.
             9-   Zoning objection on Parcel 16, being east 340 feet of west 875 feet of south 340
-            26-  feet (except east 190 feet of south 190 feet) of northeast fractional quarter
             1979 north of Indian Boundary Line of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in
                  the county from an R-5 to a C-2 District.
             9-   Zoning objection to Parcel 17, being east 190 feet of west 875 feet of south 190
-            26-  feet of northeast fractional quarter north of Indian Boundary Line of Section 14,
             1979 Township 35 North, Range 12 East in the county from R-5 to C-2 District.
             9-   Zoning case no. 2184-C, rezoning part of northwest quarter of southeast quarter
-            26-  of Section 19, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in Wheatland Township from A-1 to
             1979 R-2 District.
             9-   Zoning objection Bakker Parcels 1 and 2, rezoning east and west halves of Lot 9
-            26-  in northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 14 East in Crete
             1979 Township from A-1 to R-1 District.
             9-   Zoning objection “Mathias”, rezoning east two acres of Lot 3 in northeast quarter
-            26-  of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 14 East in Crete Township from A-1 to R-
             1979 2 District.
             9-   Zoning objection Schedeen (a), (b), (c) and (d), rezoning four parcels in Section
-            26-  14, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in the county.
             1979
             10-  Zoning objection 79-23, rezoning north half of Lot 43 in Section 5 and 6,
-            24-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an R-2 to a C-3 District.
             1979
             10-  Zoning objection T(b), rezoning northeast quarter of northwest quarter of Section
-            24-  9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to an R-
             1979 3 District.
             10-  Zoning case no. 2114-C, rezoning west half of west half of northeast fractional
-            24-  quarter of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from A-
             1979 1 to R-2 District.
             10-  Zoning case no. 2192-C, rezoning a 112.50 by 124.00 feet parcel in Elms Highlands
-            24-  Subdivision in Section 12 and 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet
             1979 Township from an R-5 to an R-6 District.
             10-  Zoning case no. 2202-C, rezoning north 13 acres of east 6.92 chains of west 20
-            24-  chains of southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in
             1979 the county from an A-2 to an R-2 District.
             12-  Zoning objection R(b), rezoning south half of southeast quarter of northeast
-            19-  quarter, and southwest quarter of northeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36
             1979 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to an R-5 District.
             12-  Zoning objection S(a), rezoning west half of east half of Section 12, Township 36
-            19-  North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to an R-3 District.
             1979
             12-  Zoning objection T(a), rezoning west half of northwest quarter of Section 12,
-            19-  Township 36 North, Range 12 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to an R-
             1979 5 District.
             12-  Zoning objection V(a), rezoning west half of southeast quarter of northeast
-            19-  quarter, north half of northwest quarter of southeast quarter, and west half of
             1979 northeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11
                  East in Homer Township from an A-1 to an R-2 District.
             12-  Zoning case no. 2201-C, rezoning 27.616 acres in part of southwest quarter of
-            19-  Section 11, and part of northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range
             1979 11 East in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to an R-1 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2185-C, rezoning 117 acres in Section 12 and 13, Township 35
-            23-  North, Range 11 East in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to an A-2 District.
             1980
             1-   Zoning objection Hoffman-Rosner Parcels 6 and 7, rezoning two parcels in Section
-            23-  24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in Frankfort Township from C-2 to R-
             1980 5 District with variance.
             1-   Zoning objection 79-21, rezoning two parcels in south half of Section 16,
-            23-  Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to an I-
             1980 1 District.
             1-   Zoning objections 79-24(a) and (b), rezoning two parcels in northwest quarter of
-            23-  Section 27, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to
             1980 an I-1 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2209-C, rezoning five acres in Section 4, Township 34 North,
-            23-  Range 11 East, on west side of Cedar Road in Manhattan Township from A-1 to an R-
             1980 2 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2210-C, rezoning part of north half of Section 3 and 4, Township
-            23-  32 North, Range 9 East in Reed Township from a court-decreed mobile home
             1980 development to an R-1 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2213-C, rezoning part of southwest quarter of Section 13 and
-            23-  northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox
             1980 Township from A-2 to an R-1 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2214-C, rezoning 24 acres in Section 31 on northeast side of
-            23-  Route 52, east of Cherry Hill Road, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox
             1980 Township from an A-1 to an R-2 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2215-C, rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 16,
-            23-  Township 34 North, Range 11 East in Manhattan Township from an A-1 to an I-
             1980 1 District.
             1-   Zoning case no. 2216-C, rezoning 5.57 acres in Section 11, Township 35 North,
-            23-  Range 11 East, northeast of Francis and Lincolnway School Way Roads intersection,
             1980 in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to an R-1 District.
             2-   Zoning case no. 2218-C, rezoning east 150 feet of west 217 feet of south 206 feet
-            20-  of east half of southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
             1980 in Homer Township from an R-3 to C-2 District.
             2-   Zoning case no. 2219-C, rezoning part of northwest quarter of northeast quarter
-            20-  of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to
             1980 C-2 District.
             2-   Zoning case no. 2223-C, rezoning part of northeast quarter of northeast quarter
-            20-  of Section 17, Township 33 North, Range 12 East in Peotone Township from an A-
             1980 1 to R-1 District.
             3-   Zoning objection 79-27, rezoning Lot 3 in northeast quarter of northwest quarter
-            26-  of Section 2, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in the county from an A-1 to R-
             1980 1 District.
             3-   Zoning case 2206-C, rezoning west half of west half of southeast quarter of
-            26-  Section 18, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet Township, from an R-1 to
             1980 an I-1 District.
             3-   Zoning case 2207-C, rezoning part of east half of northwest quarter of Section 8,
-            26-  Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to R-
             1980 3 District.
             3-   Zoning case 2217-C, rezoning five acres in southwest quarter of Section 13,
-            26-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to C-1 District
             1980 for part of parcel, and to C-3 District for remainder.
             3-   Zoning case 2226-C, rezoning Lots 34 and 35, Unit 2 in Balmoral Heights in
-            26-  Section 20 and 21, Township 34 North, Range 14 East in Crete Township from C-4 to
             1980 C-4 District with special use.
             3-   Zoning case 2230-C, rezoning north 150 feet of 2.5 acres in northeast quarter of
-            26-  Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an I-2 to C-
             1980 2 District with special use.
             3-   Zoning case 2231-C, rezoning two parcels in northwest quarter of Section 36,
-            26-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to R-2 District.
             1980
             4-   Zoning objection 80-3, rezoning parcel in southeast quarter of Section 35,
-            23-  Township 36 North, Range 10 East in Lockport Township from an A-1 to I-
             1980 2 District.
             4-   Zoning objection 79-26, rezoning Lot 24 in Block 15 in Bonnie Brae Unit 3 in
-            23-  south half of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 10 East in Lockport Township
             1980 from an R-5 to R-6 District.
             4-   Zoning case 2115-C, rezoning 35 acres in part of west half of southeast quarter
-            23-  of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to
             1980 R-3 District for north two-thirds acres, and from an A-1 to R-4 District for
                  south one- third acres.
             4-   Zoning case 2199-C, rezoning west 52 acres of east half of northwest quarter of
-            23-  Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 9 East in Plainfield Township from an A-1 to
             1980 R-3 District.
             4-   Zoning case 2224-C, rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 34
-            23-  North, Range 14 East in Crete Township from an A-1 to C-3 District.
             1980
             4-   Zoning case 2225-C, rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 34
-            23-  North, Range 14 East in Crete Township from an A-1 to I-1 District.
             1980
             4-   Zoning case no. 2232-C, rezoning 13 acres in northeast quarter of Section 20,
-            23-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township from an A-1 to C-4 District.
             1980
             4-   Zoning case 2234-C, rezoning Lots 150 and 151 in Eastmoreland Subdivision, in
-            23-  parts of Section 12 and 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet Township
             1980 from an R-5 to C-3 District.
             5-   Zoning objection 80-4 rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 20 and
-            21-  part of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of
             1980 the third principal meridian from an R-5 to a C-3 District.
             5-   Zoning objection 80-5 rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 13,
-            21-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from an A-1 to
             1980 an R-4 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2227-C, rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of Section
-            21-  10, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from an A-1 to an A-2 District.
             1980
                  Zoning amending case 2233-C, rezoning the north 125 feet of the parcels of
             5-   property commencing at the intersection of the west line of Section 23, Township
-            21-  35 North and in Range 12 East of the third principal meridian and commencing at
             1980 the intersection of the west line of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 12 East
                  of the third principal meridian from an A-1 to an C-1 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2241-C, rezoning a part of the south fractional half of
-            21-  fractional Section 17, Township 34 North, Range 15 East of the third principal
             1980 meridian from an A-1 to an A-2 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2242-C, rezoning a part of the south half of the southwest
-            21-  quarter of Section 28 that lies east of the center line of the DuPage River and
             1980 north of the north line of Camelot Unit No. “One” from an A-1 to an R-4 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2245-C (a), rezoning part of a 332.6-acre tract located in
-            21-  the northwest and southwest quarters of Section 34 in Homer Township from an A-
             1980 1 to an A-2 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2245-C(b), rezoning part of a 332.6-acre tract located in
-            21-  the northwest quarter of Section 3 in New Lenox Township, lying on the east side
             1980 of Cedar Road and on the west side of Blodgett (Meader) Road, north of Route 6,
                  from an A-1 to an A-2 District.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2251-C, rezoning the east 190 feet of the south 450 feet of
-            25-  the east 340 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 13,
             1980 Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to C-3 District.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2253-C, rezoning the south 450 feet of the east 340 feet of
-            25-  the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 11
             1980 East from an A-1 to R-2 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 80-7, rezoning a rectangular plot of land, being 225 feet south
-            25-  of the northeast corner of Section 13, in New Lenox Township from an A-1 to I-
             1980 1 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 80-8, rezoning Lot 14 and the south 30 feet of Lots 16 and 17 in
-            25-  block 5 of Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincolnwood Unit No. 2 from an R-3 to
             1980 C-1 District.
             6-   Zoning objection 80-14, rezoning part of Lot 2 of McIntosh and Company’s Pilcher
-            25-  Park Farms Subdivision from an A-2 to C-2 District.
             1980
             6-   Zoning case 2244-C, rezoning the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
-            25-  Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, except the north 375 feet of the
             1980 west 496 feet from an A-1 to R-4 District.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2248-C, rezoning part of the east half of the northwest
-            25-  quarter of Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 10 East from an A-1 to C-
             1980 4 District.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2250-C, rezoning a parcel of land in the northwest quarter
-            25-  of Section 12, and Lot 1 in Wilson Phelps Subdivision from an A-1 to R-
             1980 3 District.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2259-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section
-            25-  33, Township 33 North, Range 9 East from a C-6 to R-2 District.
             1980
             7-   Zoning objection 80-19(c) rezoning the south five acres of the east 411 feet of
-            23-  the west 661 feet of the south 1059.85 feet of the east half of the southeast
             1980 quarter of Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an R-1 to I-
                  2 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2165-C, rezoning part of the east half of the northwest
-            23-  quarter of Section 28, Township 35 North, Range 9 East in Troy Township from an
             1980 A-2 to R-1 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2252-C, rezoning the southeast quarter or the east half of
-            23-  Lot 21 in the subdivision of Section 16, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an
             1980 A-1 to C-2 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2257-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section
-            23-  32, Township 36 North, Range 9 East from an A-1 to R-2 District.
             1980
             7-   Zoning amending case 2260-C, rezoning the east 200 feet of part of the south half
-            23-  of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 12 East from an
             1980 A-1 to C-1 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2261-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section
-            23-  13, 35 North, Range 11 East from an R-1 to R-2 District.
             1980
             7-   Zoning amending case 2262-C, rezoning the east 525 feet of the south 25 acres of
-            23-  the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 11
             1980 East from an A-2 to R-1 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2263-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section
-            23-  24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-2 to C-2 District.
             1980
             7-   Zoning objection 80-13, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 25,
-            23-  Township 35 North, Range 10 East in Joliet Township from an A-1 to I-1 District,
             1980 with special use for outdoor storage.
             8-   Zoning objection 80-16, rezoning Lot 134 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
-            27-  addition to Lincoln Estates from an R-1 to A-2 District.
             1980
             8-   Zoning objection 80-18, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 27,
-            27-  Township 35 North, Range 11 East lying westerly of the right-of-way of the
             1980 Norfolk and Western Railroad from an A-1 to I-1 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 80-20, rezoning part of the east 127 acres of the northeast
-            27-  quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 9 East from an I-1 to I-
             1980 3 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 80-22(a), rezoning part of the south half of the east half of
-            27-  the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East from an A-
             1980 1 to I-1 District.
             8-   Zoning objection 80-22(b), rezoning part of the east half of the southeast
-            27-  quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East from an A-1 to C-
             1980 1 District.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2228-C, rezoning the east 328.83 feet of the west 986.32
-            27-  feet of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 36
             1980 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to A-2 District.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2256-C, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the
-            27-  southwest quarter of Section 18, Township 34 North, Range 13 East from an A-2 to
             1980 R-2 District.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2265-C, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 7,
-            27-  Township 34 North, Range 15 East from an A-2 to R-2 District.
             1980
             8-   Zoning amending case 2266-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the
-            27-  southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 14 East; also part of
             1980 the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North,
                  Range 14 East from an A-1 to C-2 District with a special use.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2268-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the
-            27-  northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 33 North, Range 12 East from an A-1 to
             1980 C-4 District with special use and a variance.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2271-C, rezoning part of the west half of Section 11,
-            27-  Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer Township, from a C-1 to C-1 District
             1980 with special use for ancillary liquor use in restaurant.
             9-   Zoning objection 80-1, rezoning part of Section 23, Township 37 North, Range 9
-            24-  East from an A-1 to an I-2 District with special use for mining with blasting and
             1980 an additional special use for a concrete ready- mix plant.
             9-   Zoning objection 80-1(a), rezoning part of Section 23, Township 37 North, Range 9
-            24-  East from an A-1 to I-2 District with special use for mining with blasting.
             1980
             9-   Zoning objection 80-2, rezoning the south half of the southwest quarter of
-            24-  Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 9 East from an A-1 to I-2 District with
             1980 special use for mining with blasting.
                  Zoning objection 80-11, rezoning Lot 65 in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Lockport Farms;
             9-   Lot 63, except the north 40 feet of the east ten feet in Arthur T. McIntosh’s
-            24-  Lockport Farms; and the north 40 feet of the east ten feet in Arthur T.
             1980 McIntosh’s Lockport Farms, all being a part of Section 13, Township 36 North,
                  Range 10 East, from an R-3 to C-2 District.
             9-   Zoning objection 80-17, rezoning Lots 27, 28 and 29 in Arthur T. McIntosh and
-            24-  Company’s Lincolnwood from an R-3 to A-1 District.
             1980
             9-   Zoning amending case 2273-C, rezoning part of the east half of the northwest
-            24-  quarter of Section 18, Township 32 North, Range 10 East from an A-2 to R-
             1980 2 District.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2276-C, rezoning part of the west half of the southwest
-            24-  quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from an A-1 to R-
             1980 1 District.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2281-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the
-            24-  southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 12 East from a C-5 to
             1980 C-2 District.
             9-   Zoning objection 80-24, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 18,
-            24-  Township 35 North, Range 11 East from a C-4 to C-4 District with a special use
             1980 for ancillary liquor use in restaurant and with a variance.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2279-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter, except the
-            29-  west 48 acres, of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to A-
             1980 2 District.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2283-C, rezoning Lot 14 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
-            29-  Pilcher Park Farms from an A-2 and R-2 to R-2 District.
             1980
                  Zoning amending case 2285-C, rezoning part of the west 963.0 feet of the east
             10-  line of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 37 North, Range 10 East;
-            29-  and the north 309.1 feet of the west 963.0 feet of the northeast quarter of the
             1980 northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 37 North, Range 10 East from an A-1 to
                  R-1 and R-2A District.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2294-C, rezoning Lots 4, 5, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
-            29-  24, 37 and 38 in Old Oak Subdivision in Unit 4-A, of part of the east half of the
             1980 northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an R-4 to
                  C-1 District.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2295-C, rezoning the south 300 feet of the east 500 feet of
-            29-  the east half of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 17,
             1980 Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to C-2 District.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2298-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section
-            29-  13, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to C-3 District.
             1980
                  Zoning amending case 2305-C, rezoning part of the north half of the northeast
             10-  quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East; and part of the
-            29-  northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North,
             1980 Range 11 East from an A-1 to A-1 District with a special use for bus storage,
                  terminal, wash and repair facility, and outdoor off-street parking and a
                  variance.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2269-C, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section
-            29-  28, Township 32 North, Range 9 East from an A-1 to C-5 District.
             1980
             10-  Zoning amending case 2284-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 9,
-            29-  Township 34 North, Range 10 East, Jackson Township; and part of the northeast
             1980 quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range 10 East, Jackson Township from an
                  A-2 to C-1 District.
             11-  Zoning objection 80-25, rezoning the south 100 feet of Lot 1 and the south 80
-            28-  feet of Lot 2 in the Krygsheld’s Subdivision, Crete Township, from an R-1 to C-
             1980 3 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2047-V, rezoning part of Section 8, Township 33 North, Range
-            28-  9 East from an I-1 to A-1 District.
             1980
             11-  Zoning amending case 2049-V, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 8,
-            28-  Township 33 North, Range 9 East from an A-1 to I-1 District.
             1980
                  Chickasaw Hills zoning objection #2 rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the
                  northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to
             11-  C-1 District; and part of the northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North,
-            28-  Range 11 East from an A-1 to A-1 with special use for a sewage treatment plant;
             1980 and part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 2, Township
                  36 North, Range 11 East from a C-1 with special use for a sewage treatment plant
                  to an A-1 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2300-C, rezoning Lot 146 and parts of Lots 127 and 128, all
-            28-  in Lily Cache, a subdivision in Sections 22 and 23, Township 36 North, Range 9
             1980 East, Plainfield Township, from an R-3 to C-2 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2302-C, rezoning the north 660 feet of the northeast quarter
-            28-  of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 14 East, except the east 2,239 feet
             1980 thereof, Washington Township, from an A-1 to A-2 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2303-C, rezoning the west half of the north 165 feet of the
-            28-  west 1,320 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 34 North, Range
             1980 12 East, Green Garden Township, from an A-1 to A-1 District with special use for
                  the operation of a landscaping business.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2307-C, rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of Section
-            28-  14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, New Lenox Township, from an A-1 to R-
             1980 2 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2308-C, rezoning the south 660.0 feet of the east 330.0 feet
-            28-  of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 5, Township 33 North, Range
             1980 13 East, Will Township, from an A-1 to A-2 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2314-C, rezoning the north 500 feet of the south 731 feet of
-            28-  the west 436 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 8, Township 34 North, Range
             1980 9 East, Channahon Township, from an A-1 to A-2 District.
             11-
-            28-  Redesignating from an A-1 to an I-1
             1980
             5-   District the property actually covered and intended to be covered under zoning
-            21-  case 2049-V; and correctly redesignating from an I-1 to an A-1 District the
             1980 property actually covered and intended to be covered under zoning case 2047-V.
             11-  Amending and making zoning map corrections to “Chickasaw Hills Zoning Objection
-            28-  #2”.
             1980
             1-   Zoning amending case 2229-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section
-            22-  28, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, Homer Township, from an R-3 to R-2A
             1981 District.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2293-C, rezoning a part of the north half of the northwest
-            22-  quarter of Section 36, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, Homer Township, from an
             1981 A-1 to R-1 District.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2310-C, rezoning the west 300 feet of the south 726 feet of
-            22-  the east 35.24 acres of the south half of the southwest fractional quarter of
             1981 Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 10 East, Lockport Township, from an A-1 to
                  A-2 District.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2311-C, rezoning the east half of Lot 80 in Stern Park
-            22-  Gardens, a subdivision of the west three- quarters of the south half of the
             1981 south-west quarter of Section 35, Township 36 North, Range 10 East, Lockport
                  Township, from an R-4 to R-4 District with special use for a refreshment stand.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2312-C, rezoning the west 60 feet of the commercial building
-            22-  located at 12320-12326 West 143rd Street, Lockport, Homer Township, from a C-1 to
             1981 C-1 District with special use for ancillary liquor use in restaurant.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2316-C, rezoning Lot 5 and part of Lot 2 in County Clerk’s
-            22-  Subdivision of Section 20, Township 35 North, Range 10 East, Joliet Township,
             1981 from an A-1 to I-2 District with special use for outdoor storage of uncontained
                  bulk materials.
             2-   Zoning amending case 2309-C, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 4,
-            26-  Township 34 North, Range 9 East, Channahon Township, from an A-1 to R-2 District.
             1981
             2-   Zoning amending case 2320-C, rezoning a part of Lots 14, 15, 16 and 17 in the
-            26-  subdivision of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 22, Township 36
             1981 North, Range 9 East, Plainfield Township, from an A-1 to R-2A District.
             2-   Zoning amending case 2321-C, rezoning a part of Lots 73 and 74 in Arthur T.
-            26-  McIntosh and Company’s Lincoln Estates, a subdivision in the west half of Section
             1981 24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, Frankfort Township, from a C-2 to C-
                  3 District.
             3-   Zoning amending case 2336-C(a), rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of
-            26-  Section 32, Township 35 North, Range 9 East from an A-1 to R-2 District.
             1981
             3-   Zoning amending case 2336-C(b), rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section
-            26-  32, Township 35 North, Range 9 East from an A-1 to an R-1 District.
             1981
             3-   Zoning amending case 2337-C, rezoning a part of the southeast corner of Section
-            26-  8, Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from an A-1 to an I-1 District.
             1981
             3-   Zoning amending case 2340-C, rezoning a part of the northwest quarter of the
-            26-  southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from an A-1 to
             1981 an R-1 District.
             3-   Zoning amending case 229l-C, rezoning a part of the north half of Lot 216 in
-            26-  Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s New Lenox Estates, Unit no. 3, from an R-1 to an
             1981 R-2 District.
             3-   Zoning amending case 2335-C, rezoning a part of the south half of the west half
-            26-  of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 11 East from an
             1981 A-1 to R-1 District.
             4-   Zoning amending case 2339-C, rezoning a part of Lot 371 in Sunnyland Subdivision
-            23-  in the east half of the east half in Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 9 East,
             1981 from an R-3 to a C-2 District.
             4-   Zoning amending case 2341-C, rezoning a part of Lot 9 in Wolf Creek Industrial
-            23-  Park in the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 27, Township 37 North,
             1981 Range 9 East from an I-1 to an I-1 with special use.
             4-   Zoning amending case 2343-C, rezoning a part of the west half of the southwest
-            23-  quarter and northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 18, Township 34
             1981 North, Range 13 East from an A-1 to R-1 District.
             4-   Zoning amending case 2345-C, rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of Section
-            23-  13, Township 35 North, Range 12 East from a C-2 to a C-2 with special use.
             1981
                  Zoning amending case 2253-C, rezoning that part of the southwest quarter of the
             5-   northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 11 East beginning at
-            28-  the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
             1981 34, from an A-2 District to an A-2 District with a special use for a landscaping
                  business.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2349-C, rezoning a 3.478-acre parcel, a part of Lot 16 in
-            28-  County Clerk’s Subdivision of the north part of Section 20, Township 35 North,
             1981 Range 10 East in Joliet Township, from an A-1 to an I-2 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2355-C, rezoning Lot 8, except the north 383 feet thereof,
-            28-  in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s New Lenox Farm Unit No. 2, a subdivision of
             1981 part of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East,
                  from an R-3 to a C-2 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2356-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel located in part of the
-            28-  northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox
             1981 Township, lying on the east side of Schmuhl Road, south of and adjoining the
                  right-of-way of the Penn Central Railroad, from an A-1 to an A-2 District.
                  Zoning amending case 2358-C, rezoning a three-fourths-acre (more or less) parcel
             5-   located in part of the northwest quarter of Section 22 Township 35 North, Range
-            28-  10 East, in Joliet Township, lying southwesterly of the intersection of “old”
             1981 Richards Street and Colburn Avenue and commonly known as 803 Richards Street,
                  from an R-5 to a C-1 District.
             5-   Zoning amending case 2359-C, rezoning a triangular 2.8-acre parcel located in
-            28-  part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 35 North,
             1981 Range 11 East, in New Lenox Township lying northwesterly of the intersection of
                  U.S. Route 52 and Delaney Road, from an A-1 to an R-2 District.
                  Zoning amending case 2362-C, rezoning a two and one-half-acre parcel located in
             6-   part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North,
-            25-  Range 11 East, in Homer Township, and lying on the south side of 159th Street,
             1981 from an I-2 District to an I-2 District with a special use for a residence of the
                  proprietor.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2363-C, rezoning a 3.11-acre parcel located in the east half
-            25-  of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer
             1981 Township, and lying on the north side of 159th Street, from an A-1 and an R-
                  3 District to an I-1 District with a special use for outdoor storage.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2365-C, rezoning a 0.1697-acre parcel located in part of the
-            25-  northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer
             1981 Township lying on the south side of 143rd Street, from a C-1 District to a C-
                  1 District with a special use.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2366-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel located in part of the
-            25-  northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 14 East, in Washington
             1981 Township, lying on the south side of the Beecher-Peotone Road, from an A-1 to an
                  A-2 District.
             6-   Zoning amending case 2369-C, rezoning a part of Lot 5 of the Subdivision of the
-            25-  northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 36 North, Range 10 East in Lockport
             1981 Township, lying on the south side of the Bruce Road, from an A-1 to an R-
                  4 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2364-C, rezoning Lots 4 and 5 in Old Oak Subdivision Unit
-            23-  No. 4-A in Homer Township, from a C-1 District to a C-1 District with a special
             1981 use for a health club facility.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2351-C, rezoning the east 330 feet of the south half of the
-            23-  northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from an A-1 to
             1981 an R-1 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2372-C, rezoning a 1.7-acre parcel located in part of the
-            23-  southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North,
             1981 Range 14 East in Crete Township, lying on the southeasterly and northwesterly
                  sides of Anne Lane, from an A-1 to an R-2 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2381-C, rezoning a 2.5-acre parcel located in part of the
-            23-  southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox
             1981 Township from an A-2 to an R-2 District.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2382-C, rezoning a 1.203-acre parcel located in part of the
-            23-  east half of the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 11
             1981 East in New Lenox Township, from a C-2 District to a C-2 District with a special
                  use.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2384-C, rezoning the following parcels of land, all in Homer
-            23-  Township.
             1981
                  (A) A part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 19,
                Township 36 North, Range 11 East, containing approximately 1.6 acres, from an A-
                  1 to an R-2 District.
                  (B) A part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 19,
                Township 36 North, Range 11 East, containing approximately five acres, from an A-
                  1 District to an A-2 District with a variance for lot frontage.
                  (C) A part of the west three quarters of the southeast quarter of the northeast
                quarter of Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, containing in excess of
                  five acres, from an A-1 to an A-2 District with a variance for lot frontage.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2385-C, rezoning a 0.1003-acre parcel located in part of the
-            23-  northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East in Homer
             1981 Township lying on the east side of Golden Oak Drive south of 143rd Street from a
                  C-1 District to a C-1 District with a special use.
             7-   Zoning amending case 2386-C, rezoning the following two parcels of land, all in
-            23-  the southwest fractional quarter of Section 1 in Wesley Township.
             1981
                  (A) Lot 363 in Lakewood Shores 6th Addition, and also a parcel beginning at the
                east line of the Sixth Addition to Lakewood Shores, from an A-1 and R-3 to an A-
                  2 District with a variance for lot frontage.
                  (B) A parcel beginning at a point that is 560 feet east of the northwest corner
                of property conveyed to Chicago Title and Trust Company from an A-1 to and A-
                  2 District with a variance for lot frontage.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2379-C, rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of Section
-            27-  18, Township 35 North, Range 9 East in Troy Township, from an A-1 District to an
             1981 A-1 District with a special use.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2380-C, rezoning a 0.85-acre parcel which in a part of the
-            27-  southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 33 North, Range 10 East in Florence
             1981 Township, from an A-1 District to an A-1 District with a special use.
             8-   Zoning amending case 2346-C, rezoning Lot 23, except the north 100 feet thereof,
-            27-  in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincoln Estates, from a C-2 District to a C-
             1981 2 District with a special use for child care facilities.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2398-C, rezoning the north 114 feet of Lot 6 in McGilvray
-            24-  Acres from and R-3 to an R-2 District with a variance for lot frontage.
             1981
             9-   Zoning amending case 2399-C, rezoning the south 164.27 feet of the north 492.72
-            24-  feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North,
             1981 Range 10 East in Lockport Township, from an A-1 to an I-1 District with a special
                  use.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2401-C, rezoning three separate parcels totaling 16.198
-            24-  acres and located in the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 4,
             1981 Township 34 North, Range 12 East in Green Garden Township, from an A-1 to an A-
                  2 District.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2402-C, rezoning the east 729.81 feet of the northwest
-            24-  quarter of Section 36, Township 34 North, Range 12 East in Green Garden Township
             1981 from an A-1 to an R-1 District.
                  Zoning amending case 2403-C, rezoning Lots 150 and 151 in Eastmoreland, a
             9-   subdivision of Lot 30 and parts of Lots 28 and 29 of Range J Barr’s Subdivision,
-            24-  in the south half of Section 12 and the north half of Section 13, Township 35
             1981 North, Range 10 East from a C-1 to a C-2 District with a special use and a
                  variance.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2404-C, rezoning Lots 385 and 386 in Elm Highlands
-            24-  Extension, a part of Section 12 and Section 13 Township 35 North, Range 10 East
             1981 from an R-5 to a C-1 District with a special use.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2405-C, rezoning the south half of Lot 3 in School Trustee’s
-            24-  Subdivision on Section 16, Township 32 North, Range 10 East from an A-1 to an A-
             1981 2 District.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2406-C, rezoning a 1.93-acre parcel located in the northeast
-            24-  quarter of Section 18, Township 32 North, Range 9 East, and commonly known as 827
             1981 Kennedy Road, Braidwood, from an A-1 to an R-2 District.
             9-   Zoning amending case 2407-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel in the southwest quarter
-            24-  of Section 15 Township 34, North, Range 11 East lying on the east side of Cedar
             1981 Road in Manhattan Township, from an A-2 to an A-2 District with a special use.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2396-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel, being the north 164.21
-            22-  feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 17, in Lockport
             1981 Township, lying on the east side of Weber Road, from an A-1 District to an I-
                  1 District with a special use.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2408-C, rezoning Lot 5 in Unit 1A of Challas Estates
-            22-  Subdivision, from an R-1 to an R-2 District.
             1981
             10-  Zoning amending case 2411-C, rezoning a 5.036-acre parcel located in the south
-            22-  half of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20 in Petone
             1981 Township, lying on the east side of U.S. Route 45, from an A-1 to a C-4 District.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2413-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel located in the southwest
-            22-  quarter of Section 18 in Monee Township, lying on the east side of Harlem Avenue,
             1981 from an A-1 to an A-2 District.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2415-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel lying at the southwest
-            22-  corner of the intersection of Bell Road and 151st Street in Homer Township, from
             1981 an A-1 to an R-2 District with a variance.
             10-  Zoning amending case 2432-C, rezoning part of Lot 2 in Safford’s Subdivision of
-            22-  parts of Section 9 and Section 10, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from an A-
             1981 1 to an R-2A District with a variance.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2378-C, rezoning a ten-acre parcel located in the northwest
-            19-  quarter of Section 17 in Troy Township, on the south side of U.S. Route 52, from
             1981 an A-1 District to an A-1 District with a special use.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2392-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel located in part of the
-            19-  east half of the northwest quarter of Section 24, in Frankfort Township, lying at
             1981 the northeast corner of the intersection of Frankfort Square Road and U.S. Route
                  30, from a C-2 District to a C-2 District with a special use.
             11-  Zoning amending case 1638-S, rezoning a parcel of approximately five acres
-            19-  located in the southwest quarter of Section 11 in Troy Township, lying on the
             1981 north side of Jefferson Street, from an A-1 District to a C-1 District with a
                  special use.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2419-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel in Frankfort Township,
-            19-  lying at the northwest corner of the intersection of U.S. Route 30 and Harlem
             1981 Avenue, from an A-1 to a C-2 District.
             11-  Zoning amending case 2422-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel in Wheatland Township,
-            19-  lying on the west side of Book Road, from an A-1 to an R-2 District.
             1981
             11-  Zoning amending case 2429-C, rezoning two parcels containing a total of ten acres
-            19-  located in part of the west half of the northwest quarter of the northwest
             1981 quarter of Section 14 in Will Township, from an A-1 District to an A-2 District
                  with a special use.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2423-C, rezoning the northerly 360 feet of the northwest
-            17-  quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East
             1981 from an A-1 to an R-2A District.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2424-C, rezoning a 7.025-acre parcel located in the west
-            17-  half of the northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in
             1981 Wheatland Township, and lying on the east side of 248th Avenue, from an A-1 to an
                  R-2A District.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2426-C, rezoning a 30.738-acre tract located in the
-            17-  northeast and southeast quarter of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East in
             1981 Wheatland Township, and lying on the west side of Illinois Route 59, from an A-
                  1 to a C-2 District.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2427-C, rezoning a 58.412-acre tract located in the south
-            17-  half of the northeast quarter, and in the north half of the southeast quarter of
             1981 Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, lying on the west side of Illinois
                  Route 16 in Wheatland Township, from an A-1 to a C-3 District with a special use.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2428-C, rezoning the southwest quarter of the southwest
-            17-  quarter of the southeast quarter, of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East,
             1981 from an A-1 to an R-2A District.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2436-C, rezoning a 150-foot by 200-foot parcel located in
-            17-  the northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 33 North, Range 9 East in
             1981 Wilmington Township, lying at the southwest corner of Lorenzo Road and
                  Interstate-55 Service Road, from a C-4 to a C-4 with a special use.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2438-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel located in the northwest
-            17-  quarter of Section 3 Township 34 North, Range 11 East in Manhattan Township,
             1981 lying on the south side of Delaney Road, from an A-1 to an R-2 District with a
                  variance.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2439-C, rezoning a one-acre (more or less) parcel commonly
-            17-  known as 19999 South LaGrange Road in Frankfort Township, from a C-6 to a C-
             1981 3 District.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2441-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel located in part of the
-            17-  north half of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11
             1981 East in Homer Township, lying on the west side of Cedar Road, from an A-2 to an
                  R-2 District.
             12-  Zoning amending case 2451-C, rezoning a 1.054-acre (more or less) parcel located
-            17-  in part of the west half of the west half of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range
             1981 11 East in Homer Township, lying on the north side of 159th Street, from a C-4 to
                  a C-1 District with a special use.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2374-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel located in part of the
-            28-  northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 4, Township 35 North, Range
             1982 9 East in Troy Township, lying on the east side of River Road, from an A-1 to an
                  R-2A District.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2445-C(a), rezoning a one-acre parcel located in part of the
-            28-  northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 4, Township North, Range 9
             1982 East in Troy Township lying on the east side of River Road, from an A-1 to an R-
                  2A District.
             1-   Zoning amending case 2445-C(b), rezoning a one-acre parcel located in part of the
-            28-  northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 4, Township 3 North, Range
             1982 9 East in Troy Township lying on the east side of River Road, from an A-1 to an
                  R-2A District.
             2-   Zoning amending case 2448-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel located in part of the
-            25-  west half of the southeast quarter of Section 34 in Monee Township, lying at the
             1982 northeast corner of the intersection of Kueisten Road and Offner Road, from an A-
                  1 to an R-1 District.
             2-   Zoning amending case 2453-C, rezoning two contiguous five-acre parcels located in
-            25-  part of the west half of Section 14 in Troy Township lying on the south side of
             1982 Jefferson Street, from an A-1 to an R-2 District with a special use.
 
Editor’s note:
   As of the 1983 Supplement, the Will County Zoning Map changes shall be
organized by case number.
Case No. Date Description
Case No.   Date       Description
                      Zoning case no. 2448-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel located in part of the west
2448-C     3-25-1982  half of the southeast quarter of Section 34, in Monee Township at the northeast
                      corner of the intersection of Kuerstein Road and Offner Road, from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning Case no. 2453-C, rezoning two contiguous five-acre parcels located in part
2453-C     3-25-1982  of the west half of Section 14, in Troy Township lying on the south side of
                      Jefferson Street, approximately one- eighth-mile east of Houbolt Avenue, from A-
                      1 to A-2, with a special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case no. 2359-C, rezoning a triangular 2.8-acre parcel located in part of
2359-C     3-25-1982  the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 31, in New Lenox Township, from
                      R-2 to R-2A, with a special use permit for the driveway.
2414-C     3-25-1982  Zoning case no. 2414-C, rezoning a 43.87-acre tract, located in the west half of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 26, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2452-C, rezoning a 2.90-acre parcel located in part of the
2452-C     3-25-1982  northwest quarter of Section 33, in Troy Township between River Meadows Unit No.
                      3 Subdivision to the west, and the DuPage River to the east, approximately five-
                      eighths-mile south of Interstate-80 from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2454-C, rezoning a 10.07-acre parcel described as the east half
2454-C     3-25-1983  of the west half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 31,
                      in Washington Township lying on the north side of 323rd Street, approximately one
                      mile west of State Line Road, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2444-C, rezoning three separate lots totaling 3.811 acres, and
                      described as Lots 33 and 34 of Wheatland Industrial Park Unit No. 2 and as Lot 2
2444-C     4-22-1982  of Wheatland Industrial Park Resubdivision of Lots 28, 37, 38, 46, 47, 48, 49 and
                      50 in Wheatland Industrial Park Unit No. 2, from I-1 (Limited Industrial Use) to
                      I-1 (special use permit).
                      Zoning case no. 2449-C, rezoning three existing lots known as Lots 1, 2 and 3 in
2449-C     4-22-1982  Lorts Subdivision, together with an unsubdivided nine-acre (more or less) parcel,
                      all located in the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 1 in
                      Will Township, from A-1 and A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2457-C, rezoning a one-acre (more or less) parcel located in part
2457-C     4-22-1982  of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 12, in Homer Township from
                      A-1 to I-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2459-C, rezoning a 20-acre (more or less) tract described as the
2459-C     4-22-1982  north 660 feet of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 32, in Joliet
                      Township, from A-1 to I-2.
                      Zoning case no. 1868-S, rezoning a five-acre (more or less) parcel located in
1868-S     5-27-1982  part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 4 in Jackson Township,
                      from A-1 to I-1.
                      Zoning amending case no. 2082-V, rezoning 55 feet by 195 feet of property in part
2082-V     5-27-1982  of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 14, in Homer Township, from
                      a nonexistent B-4 to a C-2 classification.
                      Zoning amending case no. 2084-V, rezoning 175 feet by 264 feet of property in
2084-V     5-27-1982  part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 14 in Homer Township
                      from a nonexistent B-4 to a C-2 classification.
                      Zoning amending case no. 2089-V, rezoning 147 feet by 210 feet of property in
2089-V     5-27-1982  part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 3 in Lockport Township
                      from a nonexistent B-4 to a C-2 classification.
                      Zoning amending case no. 2092-V, rezoning of 10.33-acre parcel of property
2092-V     5-27-1982  located in part of the northeast quarter of Section 10 in Wheatland Township from
                      a nonexistent B-1A to a C-1 classification.
                      Zoning amending case no. 2093-V, rezoning a five-acre parcel of property in the
2093-V     5-27-1982  southeast quarter of Section 7 in Jackson Township from an I-2 to an I-
                      3 classification.
                      Zoning case no. 2460-C, rezoning two parcels, designated Parcel A and Parcel B,
2460-C     5-27-1982  each consisting of approximately 1.2 acres, and each located in part of the west
                      half of the northeast quarter of Section 34, in Homer Township, from R-1 to R-2.
2467-C     5-27-1982  Zoning case no. 2467-C, rezoning a five-acre (more or less) parcel located
                      southwest quarter of Section 24, in DuPage Township, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2465-C, rezoning the southerly half of Lot 53 of Lincolnwood
2465-C     5-27-1982  Subdivision of part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 24, from
                      C-1 to C-1 with special use permit for the sale of video items.
                      Zoning case no. 2425-C, rezoning a 41.677-acre tract located in the northwest and
2425-C     6-24-1982  northeast quarters of Section 16, in Wheatland Township from A-1 to A-1 with
                      special use permit for an airport.
                      Zoning case no. 2472-C, rezoning a 6.306-acre (more or less) parcel located in
2472-C     7-22-1982  the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 10 in Jackson Township from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2446-C, rezoning a 29.41-acre (more or less) tract located in
2446-C     8-26-1982  part of the north 45 acres of the east half of northwest quarter of Section 28,
                      in Troy Township, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2462-C, rezoning two parcels, totaling 26.4-acres (more or less),
2462-C     8-26-1982  located in part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 2,
                      in Wheatland Township from A-1 to R.
                      Zoning case no. 2466-C, rezoning a 1.9-acre parcel described as Lot 11 (except
2466-C     8-26-1982  the north 477.62 feet thereof), in A.T. McIntosh New Lenox Farms Unit No. 2, a
                      subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of Section 14, in New Lenox
                      Township, from A-2 to C-6.-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2476-C, rezoning a portion of a 125 feet by 142 feet parcel
2476-C     8-26-1982  described as the east 125 feet of the south 142 feet of the southwest quarter of
                      the northwest quarter of Section 2, in New Lenox from C-1 to C-1 with special use
                      for package liquor sales.
                      Zoning case no. 2477-C, rezoning a 1.288-acre parcel located in part of the
2477-C     8-26-1982  northeast quarter of Section 22, in Plainfield Township from C-4 to C-4 with
                      special use permit for a restaurant and cocktail lounge.
                      Zoning case no. 2480-C, rezoning a 1.835-acre triangular-shaped parcel located in
2480-C     9-23-1982  part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 36, in Frankfort
                      Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2481-C, rezoning a .77-acre parcel located in part of the
2481-C     9-23-1982  northeast quarter of Section 24, in Lockport Township from C-4 to C-4 with
                      special use permit for a car wash.
                      Zoning case no. 2486-C, rezoning a parcel of property having dimensions of 50.15
2486-C     9-23-1982  feet by 106.4 feet by 57.70 feet by 119.8 feet, described as Lot 5 in Block 5 in
                      A. Cagwin’s Subdivision of part of the west half of the east half of Section 11,
                      in Joliet Township from R-5 to C-1.
2416-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2416-C, rezoning a four-acre parcel located in part of the south
                      half of the southwest quarter of Section 2, in Crete Township from A-2 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2483-C, rezoning a 2.2-acre parcel located in part of the
2483-C     10-28-1982 northeast quarter of Section 28, in Green Garden Township from A-1 to A-1 with
                      special use permit for outdoor storage.
2487-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2487-C, rezoning a 2.012-acre parcel located in part of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 10, in Manhattan Township from A-1 to R-2.
2488-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2488-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel located in part of the north
                      fractional half of Section 17, in Washington Township from A-1 to A-2.
2490-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2490-C, rezoning a 5.007-acre parcel located in part of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 29, in Washington Township from A-1 to A-2.
2491-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2491-C, rezoning an 11.7-acre parcel located in part of the north
                      half of the northwest quarter of Section 32, in Peotone Township from A-1 to C-4.
2494-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2494-C, rezoning 2.28-acre parcel located in part of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 2, in Lockport Township from A-1 to R-2A.
2498-C     10-28-1982 Zoning case no. 2498-C rezoning a 10,815-square foot parcel described as part of
                      Lot 6, Block 3, in Preston Heights, from R-6 to C-3.
                      Zoning case no. 2500-C, rezoning a 3.15-acre parcel located in part of the east
2500-C     11-23-1982 half of the southeast quarter of Section 7, in Channahon Township from A-1 to C-
                      2.
                      Zoning case no 2493-C, rezoning a 7.04-acre parcel located in the west half of
2493-C     12-16-1982 the west half of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 27, in Homer
                      Township from A-2 to A-2 with special use permit for the construction of an
                      addition at residence.
                      Zoning case no. 2497-C, rezoning a nine-acre parcel located in part of the
2497-C     12-16-1982 northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section
                      27, in Wilmington Township from A-1 to R-1.
2501-C     12-16-1982 Zoning case no. 2501-C, rezoning five-acre parcel located in the east half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 36, in Homer Township from A-1 to A-2.
2495-C     1-20-1983  Zoning case no. 2495-C, rezoning a 1.79-acre parcel located in the west half of
                      the southwest quarter of Section 17, in Lockport Township from I-1 to C-3.
                      Zoning case no. 2506-C, rezoning a one-acre parcel described as the north 165
2506-C     1-20-1983  feet of the south 496 feet of the west 263.46 feet of the southwest quarter of
                      the southwest quarter of Section 23, in Homer Township from R-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2508-C, rezoning a 2.2-acre parcel described as part of Lot 16 in
2508-C     1-20-1983  County Clerk’s Subdivision of the north part of Section 20, North of the
                      DesPlaines River, in Joliet Township from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2510-C, rezoning a 28,710 square foot parcel described as part of
2510-C     1-20-1983  Lot 2 in Ogden’s Subdivision of Raccoon Grove Reserve, in Section 29 of Monee
                      Township from R-2F to R-2A.
                      Zoning case no. 2469-C, rezoning a 2.5-acre parcel described as the northeast
2469-C     2-17-1983  quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 13, in Crete Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2512-C, rezoning a 2.002-acre parcel described as the south
2512-C     2-17-1983  295.20 feet of the east 295.20 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 17, in Troy Township from A-1 to A-1 with special use permit for a
                      municipal maintenance building.
                      Zoning case no. 2516-C, rezoning a 2.40-acre parcel as being a part of Lot 16 in
2516-C     2-17-1983  the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the north part of Section 20, in Joliet
                      Township from A-1 to I-2.
2517-C     3-17-1983  Zoning case no. 2517-C, rezoning a two and one-half-acre parcel located in part
                      of the northwest quarter of Section 11, in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2518-C, rezoning a 5.098-acre parcel described as part of Lot 12
2518-C     3-17-1983  in Henrietta Carpenter’s Subdivision of the south part of the west half of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 23, in New Lenox Township from A-1 to A-1 with
                      special use permit for a commercial fishing pond.
2520-C     3-17-1982  Zoning case no. 2520-C, rezoning an 11.4484-acre parcel located in part of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 13, in DuPage Township from A-1 to C-4.
                      Zoning case no. 2521-C, rezoning a five-acre parcel described as the south five
2521-C     3-17-1982  acres of the east half of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 35, in Homer Township from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2522-C, rezoning a 2.9-acre parcel located in part of the
2522-C     3-17-1983  northeast quarter of Section 22 and in part of the northwest quarter of Section
                      23, in Plainfield Township from C-4 to C-3.
2447-C     4-21-1983  Zoning case no. 2447-C, rezoning a 17.94-acre parcel located in the north half of
                      the southeast quarter of Section 23, in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2504-C, rezoning a 0.64-acre parcel described as part of Lot 141
2504-C     4-21-1983  in Lily Cache, being a subdivision in Section 22 and 23, in Plainfield Township
                      from R-3 to C-2.
                      Zoning case no 2523-C, rezoning a parcel having dimensions of 50 feet by 200
2523-C     4-21-1983  feet, described as Lot 145 and parts of Lots 128 and 129 in Lily Cache, being a
                      subdivision in Sections 22 and 23, in Plainfield Township from R-3 to C-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2524-C, rezoning a 4.09-acre parcel located in part of the west
2524-C     4-21-1983  half of the southwest quarter of Section 27, in Wilmington Township from A-1 to
                      R-1.
2526-C     4-21-1983  Zoning case no. 2526-C, rezoning a 6.862-acre parcel located in the southwest
                      quarter of Section 26, in Homer Township from A-2 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2527-C, rezoning a 20.4-acre parcel located in the east half of
2527-C     4-21-1983  the southeast quarter of Section 36, in Homer Township from A-1 to A-1 with
                      special use permit for private outdoor recreational activities.
                      Zoning case no. 2528-C, rezoning a 0.53-acre parcel described as Lot 6, Unit 4-A,
2528-C     4-21-1983  Old Oak Subdivision, being a part of the east half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 11, in Homer Township from R-4 to R-4 with special use permit for a day/
                      nursery school.
                      Zoning case no. 2362-C, rezoning the north 433.64 feet (except the east 35.00
2362-C     5-19-1983  feet thereof) of the west half of the west half of the northeast quarter of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 24 in Homer Township from I-2 to I-2 with special
                      use for residence of proprietor.
2498-C     5-19-1983  Granting 180 day extension in case no. 2498-C, special use.
2525-C     5-19-1983  Zoning case no. 2525-C, rezoning four parcels.
                    (A) The west 135 feet of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 9, Homer Township from A-1 to R-2A.
                    (B) The east 431.29 feet of the west 566.29 feet of the southeast quarter of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 9, Homer Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      (C) The east 113.17 feet of the west 679.46 feet of the southeast quarter of the
                    northwest quarter of Section 9, Homer Township from A-1 to R-2A with a variance
                      of lot width.
                      (D) The east 113.17 feet of the west 792.63 feet of the southeast quarter of the
                    northwest quarter of Section 9, Homer Township, from A-1 to R-2A with a variance
                      for lot width.
2529-C     5-19-1983  Zoning case no. 2529-C, rezoning part of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to R-1.
2530-C     5-19-1983  Zoning case no. 2530-C, rezoning the south 351 feet of the north 701 feet in
                      Monee Township from A-1 to R-2.
2531-C     5-19-1983  Zoning case no. 2531-C, rezoning two parcels in Crete Township from A-1 to R-
                      1 with special use to allow the construction of a driveway.
2532-C     5-19-1983  Zoning case no. 2532-C, rezoning part of the east half of the northeast quarter
                      of Frankfort Township from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2534-C, rezoning the north 165 feet of the south 331 feet of the
2534-C     5-19-1983  west 263.46 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 23 in Homer Township from R-
                      1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2540-C, rezoning part of the northeast corner of the northwest
2540-C     6-16-1983  quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Washington Township from A-1 to
                      R-2A with a variance for lot width.
2541-C     6-16-1983  Zoning case no. 2541-C, rezoning the east ten acres of the west 93 acres of the
                      north three quarters of the northeast quarter of Section 14, Custer Township.
2542-C     6-16-1983  Zoning case no. 2542-C, rezoning three parcels in Custer Township from A-2 to R-
                      2.
                      Zoning case no. 2543-C, rezoning part of the east half of the north two thirds of
2543-C     6-16-1983  the west three quarters of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
                      Crete Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2544-C, rezoning the east 150 feet of the north 450 feet of the
2544-C     6-16-1983  north 726 feet of the west 300 feet of Lot 2 in School Trustees Subdivision of
                      Section 16, Crete Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2545-C, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter
2545-C     6-16-1983  of Section 15, Homer Township from A-1 to R-2 with a variance for side yard
                      setback and rear yard setback.
2547-C     7-21-1983  Zoning case no. 2547-C, rezoning two parcels in Wheatland Township from A-1 to C-
                      3 with special use for caretaker residence.
                      Zoning case no. 2549-C, rezoning the west 197 feet of the north half of the south
2549-C     7-21-1983  half of the south half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 9, New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-2A with special use for a driveway.
                      Zoning case no. 2550-C, rezoning the west 130 feet of the east 230 feet of the
2550-C     7-21-1983  south 200 feet of the north 585.08 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 35,
                      Plainfield Township from A-1 to R-2A.
2554-C     7-21-1983  Zoning case no. 2554-C, rezoning the north 730 feet of the east half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 5, Frankfort Township from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2555-C, rezoning the south 532 feet of the west 204 feet of the
2555-C     7-21-1983  east 2,255 feet of the south half of the northwest quarter of Section 14,
                      Frankfort Township from A-2 to R-1.
2556-C     7-21-1983  Zoning case no. 2556-C, rezoning two parcels:
                    (A) Part of the northwest quarter of Section 28 in Troy Township from A-1 to R-
                      2A.
                    (B) Part of the northwest quarter of Section 28 in Troy Township from A-1 to R-
                      2 with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2552-C, rezoning the south five acres of the southwest quarter of
2552-C     8-18-1983  the southwest quarter in Section 35, Homer Township from A-1 to A-2 with special
                      use for furniture refinishing.
2558-C     8-18-1983  Zoning case no. 2558-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 28,
                      Plainfield Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2559-C, rezoning part of the east 15 acres of the north half of
2559-C     8-18-1983  the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 11, New Lenox Township
                      from A-1 to R-1.
2562-C     8-18-1983  Zoning case no. 2562-C, rezoning part of the west 528 feet of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 11, Wheatland Township from R-3 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2563-C, rezoning part of the south half of the south half of
2563-C     8-18-1983  Section 34, DuPage Township from A-1 to C-2 with a variance for front yard
                      setback.
2564-C     8-18-1983  Zoning case no. 2564-C, rezoning the east 150 feet of the north 174 feet of the
                      southwest fractional quarter of Section 19, Crete Township from A-1 to R-3.
                      Zoning case no. 2569-C, rezoning Lot 5 of County Clerk’s Subdivision of part of
2569-C     8-18-1983  the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13, DuPage Township
                      from C-4 to C-3 with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2512-C, extending special use permit for a 2.002-acre parcel
2512-C     9-15-1983  described as the south 295.20 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 17 in Troy Township.
                      Zoning case no. 2548-C, rezoning the west 405 feet of the north 275.03 feet of
                      that part of the east half of the west half of the northwest quarter, the west
2548-C     9-15-1983  half of the east half of the northwest quarter, the east half of the west half of
                      the southwest quarter, and the west half of the east half of the southwest
                      quarter, all in Section 11 in New Lenox Township from A-2 to R-1.
2562-C     9-15-1983  Zoning case no. 2562-C, rezoning Lots 2, 3 and 5 of Acorn Hill Estates from R-
                      2 and R-1 to solely R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2565-C, rezoning a 2.5-acre parcel in part of the west half of
2565-C     9-15-1983  the southeast quarter of Section 6 in Homer Township from A-1 to C-3 with special
                      use for outdoor storage.
                      Zoning case no. 2566-C, rezoning two parcels in Lot 8 in County Clerk’s
2566-C     9-15-1983  Subdivision of part of the north half of the northwest quarter of Section 7,
                      Homer Township from R-1 to C-6 and from R-1 to R-2.
2570-C     9-15-1983  Zoning case no. 2570-C, rezoning a three and one-half-acre parcel in part of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 14, New Lenox Township from R-3 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2573-C, rezoning a 0.757-acre parcel in the west 110 feet of the
2573-C     9-15-1983  east half of Lot 142 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company Addition to Lincoln
                      Estates Subdivision from R-2 to R-2A with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2575-C, rezoning ten acres in part of the east half of the
2575-C     9-15-1983  southwest quarter of Section 27, Homer Township from A-2 to A-2 with special use
                      for construction of additional single- family residence.
                      Zoning case no. 2576-C, rezoning a 30,000 square foot parcel located in part of
2576-C     9-15-1983  the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Lockport Township
                      from R-2 to R-2A with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2582-C, rezoning 5.18 acres in the west 240 feet of the north 941
2582-C     9-15-1983  feet of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 21, Wheatland
                      Township from I-1 to I-1 with special use for residence of proprietor.
2583-C     9-15-1983  Zoning case no. 2583-C, rezoning a 1.148-acre parcel in part of the west half of
                      the northwest quarter of Section 21, Jackson Township, from A-1 to R-2.
2522-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2522-C, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 23,
                      Plainfield Township from C-3 to C-3 with special use for package liquor store.
                      Zoning case no. 2567-C, rezoning the north 528 feet of the west 165 feet of the
2567-C     10-20-1983 east 1,155 feet of the north half of the northwest quarter of Section 29 in Green
                      Garden Township from A-1 to R-1 with a variance for lot width.
2568-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2568-C, rezoning two parcels in Frankfort Township from R-1 to R-
                      2A with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2571-C, rezoning the east 135 feet of a parcel beginning at a
2571-C     10-20-1983 point on the north R.O.W. line of Regan Road in New Lenox Township from R-1 to R-
                      2.
2572-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2572-C, rezoning the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter,
                      except the east 190 feet, of Section 35 in Crete Township from A-1 to A-2.
2578-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2578-C, rezoning Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, in Green Garden
                      Township from A-1 to A-2 with variances for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2580-C, rezoning the west half of the east half of the northwest
2580-C     10-20-1983 quarter of Section 6, and the east half of the east half of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 6 in Frankfort Township from A-1 to A-2.
2581-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2581-C, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 17, Wesley Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2587-C, rezoning the south 60 feet of the west 608 feet of the
2587-C     10-20-1983 south half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 35 in
                      Frankfort Township from A-1 to A-1 with special use for a cabinet shop.
                      Zoning case no. 2590-C, rezoning a tract of land lying north of the north right-
2590-C     10-20-1983 of- way line of Illinois Route No. 113, in the northwest fractional quarter of
                      Section 28, Custer Township from A-1 to R-2.
2591-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2591-C, rezoning two parcels in Wheatland Township from A-1 to R-
                      2 with a variance for lot width and one parcel from A-1 to A-2.
2596-C     10-20-1983 Zoning case no. 2596-C, rezoning the north 802.61 feet of the west 283 feet of
                      the southeast quarter of Section 14, Crete Township from A-1 to I-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2604-C, rezoning the north 300 feet of the east 300 feet of the
2604-C     10-20-1983 west 582 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 28 in Jackson Township from A-
                      1 to R-2 with a variance for lot width.
2531-C     11-17-1983 Zoning case no. 2531-C, extension of special use permit.
2602-C     11-17-1983 Zoning case no. 2602-C, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 14 in
                      Lockport Township from A-1 to R-2.
2609-C     11-17-1983 Zoning case no. 2609-C, rezoning Outlot C of Unit 3 in Dixie Dells Subdivision in
                      Crete Township from R-5 to C-3.
                      Zoning case no. 2603-C, rezoning 0.92 acres on the northerly side of U.S. Route
2603-C     12-15-1983 30 in Frankfort Township from C-3 to C-3 with special use for a self-serve car
                      wash.
                      Zoning case no. 2606-C, rezoning 1.82 acres at the southeast corner of the
2606-C     12-15-1983 intersection of Jessie Street and Fifth Avenue in Joliet Township from A-1 to R-
                      2 with special use for a woodworking shop.
2610-C     12-15-1983 Zoning case no. 2610-C, rezoning part of the south 1,100 feet of the southeast
                      quarter of Section 6 in Wesley Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2612-C, rezoning the south 220 feet of the north 880 feet of the
2612-C     12-15-1983 east 660 feet of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 34 in Homer
                      Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case no. 2599-C, rezoning part of Lot 9 in Assessor’s Subdivision lying at
2599-C     1-19-1984  the northeast corner of the intersection of Cottage Grove Avenue and the Calumet
                      Expressway from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2600-C, rezoning 0.65 acres south of the intersection of 111th
2600-C     1-19-1984  Street, Essington Road and the Naperville- Plainfield Road in Wheatland Township
                      from A-1 to R-2A with a variance for lot area.
2614-C     1-19-1984  Zoning case no. 2614-C, rezoning three acres on the south side of Francis Road
                      west of Parker Road in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2615-C, rezoning 6.25 acres on the south side of 143rd Street
2615-C     1-19-1984  east of Bell Road in Homer Township from R-5 to R-5 with special use for health
                      care medical clinic.
2616-R     1-19-1984  Zoning case no. 2616-R, rezoning three parcels in Peotone Township from A-1 to A-
                      2 with a variance for lot width.
2617-R     1-19-1984  Zoning case no. 2617-R, rezoning 1.158 acres in the southeast quarter of Section
                      13, Custer Township from A-1 to R-2 with a variance for rear yard setback.
                      Zoning case no. 2618-R, rezoning five acres in the northwest quarter of Section
2618-R     1-19-1984  24, Homer Township from A-1 to C-3 with a special use for residence of
                      proprietor.
2613-C     2-16-1984  Zoning case no. 2613-C, rezoning the southeast corner of Washington and Briggs
                      Street from R-5 to C-2.
2624-R     2-16-1984  Zoning case no. 2624-R, rezoning the east side of 108th Avenue consisting of
                      5.011 acres in Frankfort Township from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2625-C, rezoning Parcel D north 660 feet (except the west 990
2625-C     2-16-1984  feet) of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 36 in Homer Township
                      from A-1 to A-2.
2626-R     2-16-1984  Zoning case no. 2626-R, rezoning 23162 W. Lincoln Highway, Plainfield Township
                      from C-5 and R-3 to C-1.
2628-R     2-16-1984  Zoning case no. 2628-R, rezoning Pauling Road one mile east of Center Avenue,
                      Green Garden Township, from A-1 to A-2.
2549-C     3-15-1984  Zoning case no. 2549-C, extending special use permit for construction of a
                      driveway in a floodplain area.
                      Zoning case no. 2579-C, rezoning five acres on the south side of U.S. Route 30
2579-C     3-15-1984  and on the west side of Spencer Road in New Lenox Township from C-2 to C-2 with
                      special use for automotive service station.
2629-R     3-15-1984  Zoning case no. 2629-R, rezoning Route 5, Box 39, Lockport, from A-2 to R-2 with
                      variance for lot frontage.
                      Zoning case no. 2630-R, rezoning 9.87 acres in the northwest quarter of the
2630-R     3-15-1984  northwest quarter of Section 2 in Township 33 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to A-
                      2 with a variance for lot frontage.
                      Zoning case no. 2627-R, rezoning property in Crete Township, commonly known as
2627-R     4-19-1984  R.R., north of Calumet Expressway and Elms Court Lane and south of New Monee Road
                      from A-1 to C-6.
                      Zoning case no. 2631-R, rezoning the west 220.0 feet of the south 990.0 feet of
2631-R     4-19-1984  the east half of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township
                      34 North, Range 13 East from A-1 to A-2, with a variance for lot frontage.
2632-R     5-17-1984  Zoning case no. 2632-R, rezoning part of the east half of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2.
2635-R     5-17-1984  Zoning case no. 2635-R, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 13,
                      Township 34 North, Range 10 East from A-1 to R-2.
2603-C     6-21-1984  Zoning case 2603-C, granting 180-day extension of a special use for a self-
                      service car wash.
                      Zoning case no. 2636-R, rezoning the west 324.00 feet, except the north 288.75
2636-R     6-21-1984  feet thereof and also except the south 450.00 feet thereof, of the southwest
                      quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 10 East
                      from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case no. 2637-R, rezoning Lot 12, except the north 40 feet thereof, in
2637-R     6-21-1984  Block 1 of Ingalls Park Subdivision, a subdivision of part of the west half of
                      the west half of Section 12, Township 25 North, Range 10 East from R-1 to R-
                      6 with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case no. 2639-R, rezoning the north 465.0 feet as measured on the east and
2639-R     6-21-1984  west lines thereof, of part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter and
                      of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2A.
2640-R     6-21-1984  Zoning case no. 2640-R rezoning four parcels of land in Homer Township, commonly
                      known as northwest corner of Gougar Road and 7th Street from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case no. 2641-R, rezoning the south 200 feet of the north 750 feet of the
                      east 298.06 feet of the west 884.06 feet of the west half of the northwest
2641-R     6-21-1984  quarter of Section 20, and also the east 15 feet of the west 601 feet lying south
                      of the north 750 feet of the west half and lying north of Briarwood Lane right-
                      of-way of Briarwood Acres Subdivision from A-1 to R-2 with a variance for
                      frontage.
                      Zoning case 2642-R, rezoning Lot 11 in A.T. McIntosh and Company’s New Lenox
2642-R     7-19-1984  Farms Unit 2, being a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of Section 14,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East from A-2 and C-6 to C-3.
                      Zoning case 2644-R, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest
2644-R     7-19-1984  quarter of Section 10, Township 35 north, Range 12 from A-1 to C-2 with a
                      variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case 2645-R, rezoning the south 150 feet of the north 200 feet of the east
2645-R     7-19-1984  290.4 feet of the west 340.4 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 15,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to C-4.
                      Zoning case 2648-R, rezoning the west 650.50 feet of the south 335 feet of the
                      southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 33 North,
2648-R     7-19-1984  Range 10 East, containing 5.00 acres, more or less, from A-1 to A-2. Also, the
                      south 335 feet of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20,
                      Township 33 North, Range 10 East, except the west 650.50 feet thereof, containing
                      5.01 acres, more or less, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2634-R, rezoning part of the south half of the northeast quarter of
2634-R     8-16-1984  Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 9 from I-1 to I-1 with a special use for
                      outside storage and an on-premise residential apartment.
                      Zoning case 2647-R, rezoning part of the north half of the south half of the
2647-R     8-16-1984  southwest quarter of Section 21 lying west of the highway known as Chicago and
                      Vincennes State Road (Dixie Highway) from A-1 to R-2A with a variance for side
                      yard length.
                      Zoning case 2649-R, rezoning the east half of the west 330 feet of the east 1,716
2649-R     8-16-1984  feet of the north half of the north half of the northeast quarter of Section 16,
                      Township 33 North, Range 14 East, from A-2 to R-1 with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case 2651-R, rezoning the north 428.66 feet of the west half of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 34 North, Range 10 East, lying north
2651-R     8-16-1984  and west of State Highway No. 4, except the north 300.00 feet of the west 582.00
                      feet, also except the south 128.66 feet of the north 428.66 feet of the west
                      522.13 feet from A-1 to R-1.
2652-R     8-16-1984  Zoning case 2652-R, rezoning part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2653-R, rezoning the south 330.3 feet of the west half of the
2653-R     8-16-1984  northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 33 North,
                      Range 13 East from A-2 to A-2 with a special use for floodplain development for a
                      driveway.
2655-R     8-16-1984  Zoning case 2655-R, rezoning four parcels of land all in the northwest quarter of
                      Section 27, Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2656-R, rezoning the south 341.0 feet of the north 741.0 feet of the
2656-R     8-16-1984  east 585.0 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East from A-1 to A-2 with a variance for lot area.
                      Zoning case 3657-R, rezoning the north 255.62 feet of the east 288.62 feet of the
3657-R     8-16-1984  north 82.50 rods of the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 33 North, Range
                      11 East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2618-R, rezoning the north 513 feet of the west 425 feet of the east
2618-R     8-16-1984  half of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      from A-1 to C-3 with a special use for a residence of the proprietor.
                      Zoning case 2654-R, rezoning the east half of the north half of the north half of
2654-R     9-20-1984  the west 80 acres of the northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East from A-1 to A-2.
2659-R     9-20-1984  Zoning case 2659-R, rezoning part of the north 100 acres of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2661-R rezoning the west 300 feet of the north 413 feet and the north
2661-R     9-20-1984  40 feet of the east 360 feet of part of the east half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to R-1 with a variance for
                      lot width.
                      Zoning case 2662-R, rezoning the east 360 feet of the south 426 feet of the north
2662-R     9-20-1984  466 feet of part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 27,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2663-R, rezoning the south 330 feet of the north 1650 feet of the
2663-R     9-20-1984  east 660 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 14
                      East from A-1 to A-2.
2658-R     10-18-1984 Zoning case 2658-R, rezoning two parcels of land described as follows:
                      (A) The south 275 feet of the north 595 feet of part of the west 273.50 feet (as
                    measured along the north line thereof) of the northwest quarter of Section 28,
                      Township 34 North, Range 10 East; also part of the east 50 feet of the west
                      273.50 feet of the quarter from A-1 to R-2 with a variance for lot width.
                      (B) Part of the west 223.50 feet (as measured along the north line thereof) of
                    the northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 34 North, Range 10 East, excepting
                      the north 595 feet of the quarter, from A-1 to R-2.
2668-R     10-18-1984 Zoning case 2668-R, rezoning the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to C-6.
                      Zoning case 2673-R, rezoning the south 284 feet of the east 357.5 feet of the
2673-R     10-18-1984 southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to R-
                      1 with a variance for lot area.
2674-R     11-15-1984 Zoning case 2674-R, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 28,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2676-R     11-15-1984 Zoning case 2676-R, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 14,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to A-2 with a variance for lot width.
                      Zoning case 2677-R, rezoning a parcel of land commencing at the intersection of
2677-R     12-20-1984 the west line of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, commonly known as
                      8600 W. Lincoln Highway, with a special use and a variance for sideyard width.
                      Zoning case 2678-R, rezoning the north 500 feet of the east 900 feet (as measured
                      along the east line and along the north line thereof) of the northeast quarter of
2678-R     12-20-1984 Section 10, Township 37 North, Range 9 East to C-1 with a special use for
                      gasoline sales. (Amended on 6-20-1985, to rezone subject property from C-1 to C-
                      1 with a special use for gasoline sales).
2679-R     12-20-1984 Zoning case 2679-R, rezoning two parcels of land as follows:
                      (A) The east 285.26 feet of part of Lot 1 in Akins Subdivision, part of the east
                    half of the northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 35 North, Range 12 East,
                      from A-1 to R-2.
                    (B) Part of Lot 1 in Akins Subdivision, part of the east half of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 17, Township 35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to A-2.
2680-R     1-17-1985  Zoning case 2680-R, rezoning a tract in the south half of the southeast quarter
                      of Section 14, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2681-R, rezoning the south 194.3 feet of the north 653 feet of the
2681-R     1-17-1985  east 300 feet lying west of the westerly right- of-way line of U.S. Route 53
                      Highway, in the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range 10 East
                      from C-1 to C-1 with a special use for liquor in restaurant and hall.
                      Zoning case 2684-R, rezoning the east 412.86 feet of the west 825.73 feet, as
                      measured along the north line of subject property (except the north 1339.50 feet,
2684-R     1-17-1985  as measured along the west line, and except the south 1034 feet, as measured
                      along the west line) of the northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East from A-2 to R-1. (Amended by Res. 85-59).
                      Zoning case 2675-R, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 11,
2675-R     2-21-1985  Township 35 North, Range 10 East from I-2 to I-1 with special use for outdoor
                      storage and special use permit for auto salvage and scrap yard.
                      Zoning case 2683-R, rezoning Lot 57, except the northerly 102.3 feet thereof,
                      measured along the westerly line of Lot 57, in Robert Bartlett’s Spring Creek
2683-R     2-21-1985  Woods, a subdivision of the northeast quarter and the southeast quarter of
                      Section 4, the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 3, and the southwest
                      quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 3, all in Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East from R-1 to R-2A with a variance for frontage.
                      Zoning case 2685-R, rezoning a parcel of land beginning at an iron pipe 14 feet
2685-R     2-21-1985  east of the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 36
                      North, Range 9 East from R-3 to R-3 with special uses for banquet hall, ancillary
                      liquor and residence of proprietor.
                      Zoning case 2686-R, rezoning part of the west 592 feet of the northwest quarter
2686-R     2-21-1985  of Section 27, Township 35 North, Range 11 East from I-1 to I-1 with a special
                      use for service and sales of liquor.
                      Zoning case 2688-R, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 29,
2688-R     2-21-1985  Township 33 North, Range 9 East from C-6 to C-6 with a special use for bar in the
                      clubhouse.
                      Zoning case 2690-R, rezoning part of the east half of the southwest quarter of
2690-R     2-21-1985  Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-1 with a variance of
                      lot width. Also rezoning part of the east half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-1.
2691-R     3-21-1985  Zoning case 2691-R, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 36 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-3 with a variance for frontage.
                      Zoning case 2692-R, rezoning the west 200 feet of the east 718 feet of the south
2692-R     3-21-1985  326.70 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 11
                      East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2693-R, rezoning the west 140 feet of the east 400 feet of the south
2693-R     4-18-1985  217.8 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East from C-6 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2697-R, rezoning the west 200 feet of that part of the east half of
2697-R     5-16-1985  the southwest quarter lying south of the centerline of the drainage ditch of the
                      Claypool Drainage and Levee District, in Section 31, Township 33 North, Range 9
                      East, from A-1 to C-3.
2698-R     5-16-1985  Zoning case 2698-R, rezoning the north 600 feet of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 29, Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2700-R     5-16-1985  Zoning case 2700-R, rezoning two parcels located in the southwest quarter of
                      Section 28, Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2704-R, rezoning two parcels in the northeast quarter of Section 20,
2704-R     6-20-1985  Township 35 North, Range 12 East from R-1 to R-2 and granting a lot width
                      variance.
                      Zoning case 2708-R, rezoning parcels in Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 13
2708-R     6-20-1985  East from A-1 to R-1 and granting a lot width variance, as requested by Elizabeth
                      Gorman.
                      Zoning case 2709-R, rezoning property in the southeast quarter of Section 2,
2709-R     6-20-1985  Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-2 to C-2 with special use for package
                      liquor sales.
                      Zoning case 2711-R, rezoning the east 220 feet of the south 990 feet of the east
2711-R     6-20-1985  half of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East from A-1 to A-2 with a lot width variance.
                      Zoning case 2712-R, rezoning approximately 3 acres in the northwest quarter of
2712-R     6-20-1985  Section 11, Township 33 North, Range 13 East from A-1 to R-1 with a variance for
                      side yard setback.
                      Zoning case 2713-R, rezoning the east 300 feet of the north 435.6 feet of the
2713-R     6-20-1985  west half of the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 9 East
                      from A-1 to R-1 with special use of fabrication of kitchen cabinets.
                      Zoning case 2714-R, rezoning the west 153 feet of that part of the southwest
2714-R     6-20-1985  quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East,
                      lying south of the center thread of Spring Creek, from A-1 to R-2.
Res. 85-59 6-20-1985  Amending the legal description of the property rezoned in zoning case 2684-R.
                      Zoning case 2703-R, rezoning a part of the north half of the northwest quarter of
2703-R     8-15-1985  Section 5, Township 34 North, Range 10 East from A-1 to A-2 and granting side and
                      rear yard variances.
                      Zoning case 2715-R, rezoning the east 329.14 feet of the west 658.28 feet of the
2715-R     8-15-1985  north 661.72 feet of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
                      24, Township 33 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2719-R, rezoning that part of the north half of the west half of Lot
2719-R     8-15-1985  24 in Ogden Subdivision of Raccoon Grove Reserve lying east of the west 33 feet
                      of that lot and lying south of the north 33 feet of that lot from R-2 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2722-R, rezoning the east 329 feet of the southeast quarter of the
2722-R     8-15-1985  northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10 East from A-1 to R-
                      2 with a variance for lot width on two parcels.
                      Zoning case 2723-R, rezoning the east half of the west 470 feet of the east
2723-R     8-15-1985  1412.70 feet of the south 466.70 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 16,
                      Township 33 North, Range 13 East, from A-1 to R-1.
2724-R     8-15-1985  Zoning case 2724-R, rezoning the following property from A-1 to A-2 with a lot
                      width variance:
                    (A) Approximately five acres of the north one-third of the east half of Section
                      1, Township 33 North, Range 11 East.
                    (B) Property commonly known as RR No. 1, Sheer Road, Peotone, Illinois.
                      Zoning case 2725-R, rezoning Lots 388, 389, 390 and 391 in Elm Highlands
2725-R     8-15-1985  Extension 2, Subdivision of part of Lot 29 of Richard J. Barr’s Subdivision, from
                      C-1 to C-2 with special use for car wash.
2727-R     8-15-1985  Zoning case 2727-R, rezoning approximately 2.90 acres in the southwest quarter of
                      Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2726-R, rezoning the west half of the northeast quarter of the east
2726-R     9-19-1985  half of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 9 East,
                      containing approximately 46.933 acres, from A-1 to R-1.
2728-R     9-19-1985  Zoning case 2728-R, rezoning the north 130 feet of Lot 41 in McDonald’s Lake
                      Estates Unit 3, from R-3 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2729-R, rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of the northwest
2729-R     9-19-1985  quarter of Section 13 and a part of the southeast quarter of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 12, all in Township 37 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to I-2.
2731-R     9-19-1985  Zoning case 2731-R, rezoning the north half of the southwest quarter of Section
                      28, Township 35 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to C-6.
2732-R     9-19-1985  Zoning Case 2732-R, rezoning a part of the southeast quarter of Section 28,
                      Township 35 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to C-6.
                      Zoning case 2735-R, rezoning approximately 1.50 acres in the east half of the
2735-R     9-19-1985  northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 37 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to R-
                      2 with a lot width variance.
2740-R     9-19-1985  Zoning case 2740-R, rezoning two parcels in the northwest quarter of Section 36,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-1.
2733-R     10-17-1985 Zoning case 2733-R, rezoning approximately 3.068 acres in the southeast quarter
                      of Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2734-R, rezoning the south 330 feet of the north 1177 feet of the
2734-R     10-17-1985 west 660 of the southwest quarter of Section 32, Township 34 North, Range 11 East
                      from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2738-R, zoning the south 246.25 feet of the west 208.70 feet of the
2738-R     10-17-1985 east 368.70 feet of the west half of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, C-2 with special use for residence
                      of the proprietor. (Amended on 11-21-1985).
                      Zoning case 2741-R, rezoning two parcels in the east half of the southeast
2741-R     10-17-1985 quarter of Section 29, Township 35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to C-4. (Special
                      use for a secondary residence granted on 11-21-1985).
                      Zoning case 2742-R, zoning three parcels in the west half of the northeast
2742-R     10-17-1985 quarter of Section 29, Township 37 North, Range 9 East A-1 with special use for
                      horsebarn/riding stable, polo practice field and caretaker residence.
                      Zoning case 2744-R, rezoning the south half of the east 20 acres of the south
2744-R     10-17-1985 half of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 35, Range 11 East from A-
                      1 to C-4.
2745-R     10-17-1985 Zoning case 2745-R, rezoning land in Section 10, Township 34 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2746-R, rezoning a part of the southeast quarter of the southwest
2746-R     10-17-1985 quarter, lying east of Archer Road in Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-1 to C-3.
2747-R     10-17-1985 Zoning case 2747-R, rezoning land adjacent to Harlem Avenue in Section 24,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 2749-R, rezoning land in the south half of the southeast quarter of
2749-R     11-21-1985 Section 14, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to A-2 with a frontage
                      variance and a special use for a driveway with culvert, in the floodplain.
                      Zoning case 2752-R, rezoning a tract of land eight rods east and west by ten rods
2752-R     11-21-1985 north and south in the northwest corner of the east half of the west half of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-1 to C-
                      3 with a front-yard setback variance.
2748-R     12-19-1985 Zoning case 2748-R, allowing a special use for operation of a mini-warehouse on
                      Lot 3 in Cedar Industrial Park, Phase I.
                      Zoning case 2760-R, rezoning the south 314.80 feet of the 145 feet of the west
2760-R     12-19-1985 580 feet of the east half of Lot 15 of Assessor’s Subdivision of Section 8,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
2682-R     1-16-1986  Zoning case 2682-R, rezoning the north half of the southwest quarter of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2A.
2737-R     1-16-1986  Zoning case 2737-R, rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
                      25, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2, R-3 and R-4.
2751-R     1-16-1986  Zoning case 2751-R, rezoning three parcels in Section 11, Township 35 North,
                      Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2A with a lot width variance.
                      Zoning case 2761-R, rezoning the south 521.77 feet of the east 208.71 feet of the
2761-R     1-16-1986  southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 33 North,
                      Range 15 East, from A-1 to A-2 with a frontage variance.
2763-R     1-16-1986  Zoning case 2763-R, rezoning a part of the southeast quarter of Section 8,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
2764-R     1-16-1986  Zoning case 2764-R, rezoning a part of Unit No. 1 in Reeds Rolling Meadows Farm,
                      from A-2 to R-2A with a lot width variance.
2758-R     2-20-1986  Zoning case 2758-R, rezoning a parcel in the northwest quarter of Section 8,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2769-R, rezoning a part of the north half of the north half of the
2769-R     2-20-1986  southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2770-R, rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of the northwest
2770-R     2-20-1986  quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East,
                      from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2768-R, rezoning approximately .920 acres in the northeast quarter of
2768-R     3-20-1986  Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to C-4 with special use for
                      storage of trucks and construction equipment and a front yard setback variance.
                      Zoning case 2773-R, rezoning a part of the southeast quarter of Section 29,
2773-R     3-20-1986  Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from I-1 to I-1 with special use to allow those
                      uses permitted under C-4 zoning.
2775-R     3-20-1986  Zoning case 2775-R, rezoning a part of the north half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 28, Township 35 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2A.
2778-R     3-20-1986  Zoning case 2778-R, rezoning a part of Section 16, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East, from A-1 to A-2.
2776-R     4-17-1986  Zoning case 2776-R, rezoning a part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 1, Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2777-R     4-17-1986  Zoning case 2777-R, rezoning a part of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2779-R, rezoning a part of the west 20 acres of the south 90 acres of
2779-R     4-17-1986  the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-1 to
                      C-1 with a special use for package liquor sales.
                      Zoning case 2782-R, rezoning two parcels located in the west half of the west
2782-R     4-17-1986  two- thirds of the east half of the south half of Section 22, Township 33 north,
                      Range 9 east, from A-1 to R-2 with a frontage variance.
2783-R     4-17-1986  Zoning case 2783-R, rezoning a part of the southwest quarter of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2786-R     4-17-1986  Zoning case 2786-R, rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2772-R     5-15-1986  Zoning case 2772-R, rezoning a part of the east half of the east half of Section
                      7, Township 37 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2780-R, rezoning the east 244.20 feet of the southwest quarter of the
2780-R     5-15-1986  southwest quarter (excepting the north 250 feet thereof) in Section 5, Township
                      36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-1.
2784-R     5-15-1986  Zoning case 2784-R, rezoning certain parcels of Section 16, Township 37 North,
                      Range 9, from A-1, C-2 and C-3 to C-6.
2785-R     5-15-1986  Zoning case 2785-R, rezoning certain parcels of Section 16, Township 37 North,
                      Range 9, from A-1, C-2 and C-3 to C-6.
                      Zoning case 2787-R, rezoning the north five acres of the west half of the
2787-R     5-15-1986  southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2788-R, rezoning the west 450 feet of the east 480 feet (except the
2788-R     5-15-1986  east 150 feet of the south 435.6 feet thereof) of the southwest quarter of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 11 East.
2789-R     5-15-1986  Zoning case 2789-R, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 18,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East.
                      Zoning case 2790-R, rezoning that part of the west 330 feet of the northwest
2790-R     5-15-1986  quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 36 north, Range 11, from
                      A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2791-R, rezoning Lot 20, except the west 62 feet thereof and except
2791-R     5-15-1986  the east 200 feet of the west 262 feet of the north 220 feet thereof, in Arthur
                      T. McIntosh and Company’s Pilcher Park Farms, from R-3 and A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2793-R, rezoning property commencing at a point on the south line of
2793-R     5-15-1986  the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 33 north, Range 13, from A-1 to A-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2794-R, rezoning property commencing at a point on the south line of
2794-R     5-15-1986  the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 33 north, Range 13, from A-1 to A-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2795-RMS-3V2, rezoning the south 400 feet of the west 310 feet of the
2795-RMS-  6-19-1986  southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 33 north, Range 9, from I-1 to C-3 with
3V2                   special use permits for miniwarehouses, propane sales for campers and package
                      liquor sales.
2796-R     6-19-1986  Zoning case 2796-R, rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
                      11, Township 34 north, Range 11 from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2797-R, rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
2797-R     6-19-1986  Section 22, Township 35 North, Range 11 East from C-5 to C-5 with special use for
                      residence of proprietor.
                      Zoning case 2799-RM, rezoning the south 219 feet of the north 319 feet of a
2799-RM    6-19-1986  parcel of land described as that part of the northwest quarter of the southeast
                      quarter of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
2802-RMS2  6-19-1986  Zoning case 2802-RMS2, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 19,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to I-2.
                      Zoning case 2792-R, rezoning the north 210 feet of Lot 16 in Arthur T. McIntosh
2792-R     7-17-1986  and Company’s Bruce Road Farms, from R-3 to R-3 with special use to allow a small
                      machine shop in existing block building.
                      Zoning case 2800-RM, rezoning the north 444 feet of the west 300 feet of the east
2800-RM    7-17-1986  half of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 34 North, Range 11 East,
                      from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2807-RMS, rezoning the east 131 feet of the south 82 feet of the
2807-RMS   7-17-1986  north 234.27 feet of that part of Lot 4 of the Assessor’s Subdivision of Section
                      3, Township 35 North, Range 10 East, from I-2 to C-1.
                      Zoning case 2808-RM, rezoning the north 445.01 feet of the south half of the
2808-RM    7-17-1986  northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-
                      1.
2809-RM    7-17-1986  Zoning case 2809-RM, rezoning the west half of the west half of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 29, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2810-RMS, rezoning the south 233.37 feet of the west half of the east
2810-RMS   7-17-1986  half of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 11 East,
                      from A-1 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 2812-RM, rezoning the east 299 feet of the south 729 feet of the east
2812-RM    7-17-1986  half of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 8, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2813-RMSV, rezoning that part of Lot 10 in County Clerk’s
2813-RMSV  7-17-1986  Subdivision, of the east half of the northeast quarter in Section 18, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East, with a special use permit for radio-television exchange
                      with tower and equipment shelter.
                      Zoning case 2804-RMV2, rezoning the north 830 feet of the east ten acres of the
2804-RMV2  8-21-1986  west fifteen acres of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
                      24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to R-5.
                      Zoning case 2807-RMS, rezoning the east 131 feet of the south 82 feet of the
2807-RMS   8-21-1986  north 234.27 feet of that part of Lot 4 of the Assessor’s Subdivision of Section
                      3, Township 35 North, Range 10 East, from I-2 to C-1 with a special use permit
                      for package liquor.
                      Zoning case 2810-RMS, rezoning the south 233.37 feet of the west half of the east
2810-RMS   8-21-1986  half of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 11 East,
                      from A-1 to C-2 with a special use permit for living quarters for the proprietor.
                      Zoning case 2814-RM, rezoning the south 231 feet of the west 200 feet of the
2814-RM    8-21-1986  northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 33 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2815-RMS, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 12,
2815-RMS   8-21-1986  Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-2 with a special use permit for an
                      equipment and vehicle storage structure.
                      Zoning case 2818-RM, rezoning the north 300 feet of the east half of the
2818-RM    8-21-1986  southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to I-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2825-RMSV, rezoning the east 275 feet of the south 425 feet of the
2825-RMSV  8-21-1986  southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-
                      2.
2817-RM    9-18-1986  Zoning case 2817-RM, rezoning the west 60 acres of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to R-4.
2819-RM    9-18-1986  Zoning case 2819-RM, rezoning Lots 21, 22, 23, 24, 37 and 38 in Old Oak
                      Subdivision Unit from C-1 to R-4.
2828-RMV   9-18-1986  Zoning case 2828-RMV, rezoning that part of the west half of Section 5, Township
                      37 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2829-RS, rezoning from C-2 to C-2, with special use for package
2829-RS    9-18-1986  liquor, the White Hen Pantry Store on Lot 1 in Frankfort Square Commercial Unit
                      1.
2832-RM    9-18-1986  Zoning case 2832-RM, rezoning that part of the east half of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 25 in Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2833-RM, rezoning the west 645.82 feet of the east 1017.82 feet of
2833-RM    9-18-1986  the north 185 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 22, Township 33 North,
                      Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2834-RM, rezoning the north 726.00 feet of the west 300.0 feet of the
2834-RM    9-18-1986  east 2261.72 feet of the north 100 acres of the Assessor’s Subdivision of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 8, in Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to
                      R-2.
                      Zoning case 2779-R, rezoning that part of the west 20 acres of the south 90 acres
2779-R     11-20-1986 of the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11, from C-1 to
                      C-1 with a special use permit for the sale of package liquor.
2816-RM    11-20-1986 Zoning case 2816-RM, rezoning portions of the northwest and southwest quarters of
                      Section 34, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2839-RM, rezoning the west 350.76 feet of the east 420.76 feet of the
2836-RM    11-20-1986 north 500 feet of the south 969.26 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 12,
                      Township 35 north, Range 12 south from A-1 to C-2.
2837-RM    11-20-1986 Zoning case 2837-RM, rezoning a part of the northeast quarter of Section 29,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2839-RM, rezoning the south half of the southwest quarter of the
2839-RM    11-20-1986 southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to A-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2840-RMV, rezoning part of the west half of the northeast quarter of
2840-RMV   11-20-1986 the northeast quarter of Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-
                      2 to R-1.
2841-RMV   11-20-1986 Zoning case 2841-RMV, rezoning a tract of land in the east half of the east half
                      of Section 30, Township 33 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2842-RMV2  11-20-1986 Zoning case 2842-RMV2, rezoning part of Lot 1, Section 16, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
2843-RM    11-20-1986 Zoning case 2843-RM, rezoning the south 40 acres of the west half of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 32 North, Range 10 East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2844-RS, rezoning part of the south 1433.02 feet of Section 34,
2844-RS    11-20-1986 Township 36 North, Range 10 East, from I-2 to I-2 with a special use permit for
                      package liquor sales conditioned upon specific zoning limitations.
                      Zoning case 2847-RMV, rezoning the west 215 feet (except the north 821 feet
2847-RMV   12-18-1986 thereof) of the east 22.5 acres of the north 30 acres of the west half of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 10 East, from R-1 to R-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2848-RM, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the Cenagewine
2848-RM    12-18-1986 Reserve in fractional Section 11, Township 33 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to
                      A-2.
2849-RMS   12-18-1986 Zoning case 2849-RMS, rezoning the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to C-1.
                      Zoning case 2855-RM, rezoning the east half of the east half of the southwest
2855-RM    12-18-1986 quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East,
                      from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2795-RMS3V2, rezoning the south 400 feet of the west 310 feet of the
2795-      12-18-1986 southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from I-1 to C-
RMS3V2                3 with a special use permit for miniwarehouses, propane sales for campers and
                      sales of package liquor.
                      Zoning case 2762-R, rezoning the east 500 feet of the west 850 feet of the north
                      340 feet of the north half of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
2762-R     12-19-1986 Section 33, Township 33 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to C-4 with special uses
                      for secondary residence, live bait and fishing equipment wholesale operation and
                      warehouse activities.
                      Zoning case 2850-RMV, rezoning Lot 68, except the north 200 feet of the west
2850-RMV   1-15-1987  435.6 feet, in Fry’s Wheatland View, Unit Four, a subdivision in the northwest
                      quarter of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2851-RM, rezoning a portion of northwest quarter of Section 1,
2851-RM    1-15-1987  Township 35 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to A-1 with a special use for
                      fabrication of wood pallets under specific zoning conditions.
                      Zoning case 2852-RS, rezoning the south 200 feet of the north 417.34 feet of the
2852-RS    1-15-1987  south 730.34 feet of the west 208.67 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 1,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-2 to C-2 with a special permit for a day
                      care center under specific conditions.
                      Zoning case 2853-RS, rezoning the south 160 feet of the east 593.49 feet of the
2853-RS    1-15-1987  southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-
                      1 with special use for a cemetery.
2854-RM    1-15-1987  Zoning case 2854-RM, rezoning two parcels of land in Section 5, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
2856-RM    1-15-1987  Zoning case 2856-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
2857-RM    1-15-1987  Zoning case 2857-RM, rezoning part of Section 36, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2858-RMS, rezoning eight acres located in the southwest corner of the
2858-RMS   1-15-1987  south 60 acres of the southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 37 North, Range 9
                      East, from A-1 to A-2 with a special use permit for a landscaping business under
                      specific conditions.
                      Zoning case 2860-RM, rezoning the north 200 feet of the west 435.6 feet of Lot 68
2860-RM    1-15-1987  in Fry’s Wheatland View Unit Four, a subdivision in the northwest quarter of
                      Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2.
2862-RM    1-15-1987  Zoning case 2862-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 4,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2861-RMV   2-19-1987  Zoning case 2861-RMV, rezoning part of Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 14
                      East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2863-RM, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 6 lying
2863-RM    2-19-1987  north of the north line of the south 31 acres thereof, in Township 35 North,
                      Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2866-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2866-RM, rezoning part of the west 80 acres of Section 11, Township
                      35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2867-RS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
2867-RS    2-19-1987  quarter of Section 31, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from I-2 to I-2 with a
                      special use permit for residence of the proprietor.
                      Zoning case 2868-RMV, rezoning the south five acres of the east half of the south
2868-RMV   2-19-1987  half of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 35 North,
                      Range 12 East, from R-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2870-RM, rezoning the south 1,650 feet of the north 2,310 feet of the
2870-RM    2-19-1987  southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to R-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 2872-RM, rezoning the south 23.667 acres of the east half of the west
2872-RM    2-19-1987  half of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East,
                      from A-1 to R-3.
2873-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2873-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 15,
                      Township 33 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2874-RMV   2-19-1987  Zoning case 2874-RMV, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest
                      quarter in Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2875-RM, rezoning the east 330 feet of the northeast quarter of the
2875-RM    2-19-1987  southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from A-2 to R-
                      2.
2876-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2876-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 31,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2877-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2877-RM, rezoning two parcels of land in the School Trustee’s
                      Subdivision of Section 16, Township 34 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2878-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2878-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 4,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2879-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2879-RM, rezoning part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 26, Township 36 north, Range 11 East, from A-2 to R-2.
2881-RMV   2-19-1987  Zoning case 2881-RMV, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 27,
                      Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from R-3 to R-2A.
2882-RM    2-19-1987  Zoning case 2882-RM, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 32,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2859-RMS, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 7 and the
2859-RMS   3-19-1987  southwest quarter of Section 8, both in Township 37 North, Range 10 East from A-
                      1 with special use for an airport to C-3 and special use for a car wash.
2865-RM    3-19-1987  Zoning case 2865-RM, rezoning part of Section 2, Township 34 North, Range 12 East
                      from A-1 to A-2.
2884-RMV   3-19-1987  Zoning case 2884-RMV, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
2885-RM    3-19-1987  Zoning case 2885-RM, rezoning five parcels of land in Section 32, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2886-RMS, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
2886-RMS   3-19-1987  Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-2 and R-2 to C-2 with
                      special use for a drive-in bank facility under specific conditions.
                      Zoning case 2887-RMS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 16,
2887-RMS   3-19-1987  Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from R-2A to C-6 with special use for floodplain
                      development.
                      Zoning case 2888-RMS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 16,
2888-RMS   3-19-1987  Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from C-6 to R-1A with special use for floodplain
                      development.
                      Zoning case 2889-RMS, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 16,
2889-RMS   3-19-1987  Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to C-6 with special use for floodplain
                      development.
2890-RM    3-19-1987  Zoning case 2890-RM, rezoning part of the south half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
2891-RM    3-19-1987  Zoning case 2891-RM, rezoning part of Section 6, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2894-RMS, rezoning part of Section 10, Township 36 North, Range 11
2894-RMS   3-19-1987  East, from A-1 to C-6 with special use for a restaurant and bar under specific
                      conditions.
                      Zoning case 2895-RMS, rezoning part of the east 300 feet of the west 1,918.62
2895-RMS   4-16-1987  feet of the northwest quarter of Section 7 in Township 33 North and in Range 9
                      East from A-1 to R-2 with special use for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 2896-RS, rezoning Lots 44 and 45 in Robert Bartlett’s Spring Creek
2896-RS    4-16-1987  Woods from R-1 to R-1 with a special use for a storage building and railroad
                      tracks.
2899-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2899-RM, rezoning an approximately 120 acre parcel in Homer Township
                      from A-1 to R-4.
2849-RMS   5-21-1987  Amending legal Description
(amended)
2901-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2901-RM, rezoning an approximately 5.38 acre parcel in Wheatland
                      Township from A-1 to A-2.
2902-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2902-RM, rezoning an approximately two acre parcel in Homer Township
                      from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2903-RMS, rezoning the west 200 feet of a parcel with a special use
2903-RMS   5-21-1987  permit to allow an automobile service station on the west 200 feet of an
                      approximately two acre parcel in Wheatland Township from A-1 to C-1.
2904-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2904-RM, rezoning an approximately 6.1 acre parcel located in
                      Frankfort Township from A-1 to A-2.
2906-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2906-RM, rezoning two parcels of approximately 1.27 and one acre
                      respectively located in Homer Township from A-1 to R-2A.
2907-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2907-RM, rezoning an approximately 62,450 square feet area located in
                      Homer Township from C-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 2912-RS, rezoning an approximately 152 acre parcel located in
2912-RS    5-21-1987  Wheatland Township from A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit for a private polo
                      club.
2913-RS    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2913-RS, rezoning a 40 acre parcel located in Wheatland Township from
                      A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit for a private polo club.
2915-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2915-RM, rezoning an approximately three acre parcel located in Green
                      Garden Township from A-1 to A-2.
2920-RM    5-21-1987  Zoning case 2920-RM, rezoning an approximately 23.46 acre parcel located in Troy
                      Township from R-2 to R-2A.
2908-RMS   6-18-1987  Zoning case 2908-RMS, rezoning an approximately 94 acre parcel located in Homer
                      Township from A-1 to R-3 and C-2 with a special use permit for a PUD.
2914-RM    6-18-1987  Zoning case 2914-RM, rezoning an approximately 7.000 acre parcel located in Homer
                      Township from A-1 to A-2.
2921-RM    6-18-1987  Zoning case 2921-RM, rezoning Lot 2 in Fuller and Woodruff’s Subdivision located
                      in Joliet Township from A-2 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2925-RM, rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
2925-RM    6-18-1987  30, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian located in
                      Homer Township from A-1 to A-2.
2922-RS    7-16-1987  Zoning case 2922-RS, rezoning Lot 14 in Jay O’Brien’s Riverview Subdivision from
                      R-3 to R-3 with a special use for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 2923-RM, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of the northwest
2923-RM    7-16-1987  quarter of Section 28, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
2927-RMS4  7-16-1987  Zoning case, 2927-RMS4, rezoning from A-2 to C-2 with four special use permits.
                      Zoning case 2929-RS, rezoning the north half of the south half of the south half
2929-RS    7-16-1987  of the north half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to A-
                      2 with a special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 2930-RM, rezoning the north 760.65 feet of the west 171.80 feet of
2930-RM    7-16-1987  the east half of the north 25 acres of the east 50 acres of the west half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2931-RM, rezoning the north 100 acres of the Assessor’s Subdivision
2931-RM    7-16-1987  of the northwest quarter in Township 36 North, with exceptions, containing 20.165
                      acres, more or less, from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2935-RM, rezoning the north 230 feet of the west 474 feet of the
2935-RM    7-16-1987  northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-2.
2936-RM    7-16-1987  Zoning case 2936-RM, rezoning part of the north half of Section 35, Township 34
                      North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2937-RS, rezoning the north half of Section 4, Township 37 North,
2937-RS    7-16-1987  Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-1 with special use
                      permit for a planned unit development permitting construction of a golf course,
                      clubhouse, maintenance buildings and access roads with conditions.
                      Zoning case 2938-RMS, rezoning the northwest quarter and the west half of the
2938-RMS   7-16-1987  northwest quarter of Section 22, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian, with exceptions, from A-1 to R-2A and I-1.
                      Zoning case 2939-RMS, rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
2939-RMS   7-16-1987  22, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      R-2A with special use for floodplain development.
2916-RM    8-20-1987  Zoning case 2916-RM, rezoning Lot 2 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lockport
                      Farms from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2934-RMS, rezoning the northerly 490 feet on the east 165 feet of the
2934-RMS   8-20-1987  east 330 feet of the west 600 feet the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter
                      of Section 15, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      from C-2 to C-4.
                      Zoning case 2941-RMS, rezoning the north 285.17 feet of the east 205.93 feet of
2941-RMS   8-20-1987  the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian from A-1 to C-5.
                      Zoning case 2944-RS, rezoning the north 324.18 feet of the west 150.00 feet of
2944-RS    8-20-1987  the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian from C-1 to C-1 with a special use permit for a drive-in
                      savings and loan facility.
2945-RM    8-20-1987  Zoning case 2945-RM, rezoning the part of the northeast quarter of Section 33,
                      Township 35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2946-RS, rezoning the easterly 382.33 feet on the northerly 533.35
2946-RS    8-20-1987  feet of the southerly 1,103.05 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 7,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to A-1 with special use permit to
                      construct and equine veterinary clinic.
                      Zoning case 2948-RM, rezoning the north 140 feet of the south 540 feet of Lot 34
                      in County Clerk’s Subdivision of the east half of the northwest quarter, and the
2948-RM    8-20-1987  southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 5, and in the east three
                      quarters of the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2953-RM, rezoning the west 250.00 feet of the northwest quarter of
2953-RM    8-20-1987  Section 28, Township 37 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to C-3.
                      Zoning case 2954-RMS, rezoning the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
2954-RMS   8-20-1987  Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian from
                      C-6 to C-4 and a special use permit for mini-warehouses.
                      Zoning case 2956-RS, granting a special use permit for a tavern and for residence
2956-RS    8-20-1987  of a proprietor for property located in Section 25, Township 33 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian in Peotone Township.
                      Zoning case 2959-RS, rezoning the south 165.405 feet of the west half of the
                      northwest quarter and the north 331.08 feet of the west half of the southwest
2959-RS    8-20-1987  quarter, except the south 165.495 feet in Section 35, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit to
                      allow a mobile home as a second residence.
                      Zoning case 2960-RMSV, rezoning part of the south 450 feet of the west half of
2960-RMSV  8-20-1987  the west half of Section 13 (except the last 920 feet) in Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from C-1 to C-3 with a special use
                      permit for a car wash with conditions.
                      Zoning case 2961-RMS, rezoning the south 148.50 feet of the west 294.50 feet
                      (except the west 148.50 feet) of part of the southwest quarter of Section 25
2961-RMS   8-20-1987  lying west of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad in Township 33 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian from I-1 to I-1 with a special use permit
                      for living quarters of the proprietor and special use permit to allow the repair
                      of vehicles, machines and farm implements.
                      Zoning case 2962-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
2962-RM    8-20-1987  Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2A.
2965-RM    8-20-1997  Zoning case 2965-RM, rezoning from A-1 to E-2 nine parcels in New Lenox and from
                      A-1 to A-2 three parcels in Homer Township.
                      Zoning case 2971-RM, rezoning the west 502.05 feet of the east half of the
2971-RM    8-20-1997  northwest quarter (except the south 2,211 feet) in Section 8, Township 35 North,
                      Range 9 east of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-1.
2934-RMS   9-17-1987  Zoning case 2934-RMS, rezoning from C-2 to C-4 with a special use permit.
(amended)
                      Zoning case 2957-RMSV, rezoning the part of the southeast quarter of Section 14
                      lying north of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad, in Township 35
2955-RMSV  9-17-1987  North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-1 with a
                      special use permit for a cedar fencing warehouse and outdoor storage with four
                      conditions.
                      Zoning case 2957-RM2S2, rezoning the south half of the northwest quarter of
2957-RM2S2 9-17-1987  Section 18 and the southwest quarter if Section 18 (excepting the southeast
                      quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 18) in Township 34 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian to delete the I zoning.
                      Zoning case 2964-RS, requesting a special use permit to serve liquor to the
2964-RS    9-17-1987  fenced picnic area, ball field and around the rides on the part of Sections 23
                      and 24 in Township 37 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Zoning case 2968-RM, rezoning the east 808.42 feet of the south 808.42 feet of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 21 (except the east 544.50 feet of the south 400
2968-RM    9-17-1987  feet), all in Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to C-3 with a special use permit for outdoor storage and a residence of
                      the proprietor.
                      Zoning case 2970-RM, rezoning part of the west half of Section 5 (except the
2970-RM    9-17-1987  north 215 rods) in Township 37 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 2972-RMSV2, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 35,
2972-RMSV2 9-17-1987  Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-
                      2 with a special use permit for a dog kennel.
2973-RM    9-17-1987  Zoning case 2973-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 35,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 2974-RMV, rezoning the north 183.0 feet of the south 458.5 feet of
2974-RMV   9-17-1987  the east 470.0 feet of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
                      2, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-
                      2A.
                      Zoning case 2975-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest
2975-RM    9-17-1987  quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from R-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2976-RM, rezoning the east 577.17 acres of the south 50 acres of the
2976-RM    9-17-1987  west half of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-2.
                      Zoning case 2977-RS, rezoning the west 449.0 feet of the south 265.0 feet of the
2977-RS    9-17-1987  southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range
                      9 East of the third principal meridian from I-1 to I-1 with a special use permit
                      for a outdoor storage with conditions.
                      Zoning case 2978-RM, rezoning the west 30 acres of the part of the west half of
                      the southeast quarter of Section 22 lying south of the north line of the second
2978-RM    9-17-1987  parcel of land conveyed by deed from George J. Bump to Otto Konow, Jr. by deed
                      recorded December 30, 1946 all in Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2979-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 12,
2979-RM    9-17-1987  Township 36 North, Range 11 East, with exceptions, of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-3 on the eastern edge and R-4 on the remainder of the
                      site.
                      Zoning case 2980-RM, rezoning the part lying south of the centerline of Francis
2980-RM    9-17-1987  Road (as dedicated by document 774213) of the east 15 acres of the north half of
                      the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2983-RMS, rezoning the east half of the east half of the northwest
2983-RMS   9-17-1987  quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2 with a special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 2984-RM, rezoning the part of the east 60 acres of the south half of
2984-RM    9-17-1987  the southeast quarter of Section 9, lying west of the centerline of Creme Road,
                      excepting the north 383.93 feet in Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to A-2 and R-2.
                      Zoning case 2986-RM, rezoning the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
2986-RM    9-17-1987  Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2987-RM, rezoning the south 730 feet of the west 348 feet of the
2987-RM    10-13-1987 northwest quarter in Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2988-RMS, rezoning the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter
2988-RMS   10-13-1987 (except the south 660 feet) in Section 31, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of
                      the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2 with a special use permit for
                      floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 2989-RM, rezoning part of the east half of the northeast quarter in
2989-RM    10-13-1987 Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to C-3 and E-2.
                      Zoning case 2990-RS, rezoning part of the west half of Section 23, Township 36
2990-RS    10-13-1987 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from C-4 to C-4 with a
                      special sue permit for floodplain development with conditions.
                      Zoning case 2991-RS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
2991-RM    10-13-1987 quarter of Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 2992-RMV, rezoning the east half of the southeast quarter of the
2992-RMV   10-13-1987 northeast quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 2998-RS, rezoning the north 233 feet of the east 383 feet of the
2998-RS    10-13-1987 northeast quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian for a special use permit for a gas regulator station.
                      Zoning case 2981-RM, rezoning two parcels; one in Section 28, Township 36 North,
2981-RM    11-19-1987 Range 11 East of the third principal meridian and the second in Section 29,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2985-RMS, rezoning the south 418.08 feet of the north 748.08 feet of
2985-RMS   11-19-1987 the west 1,070 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 23,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to C-4.
2993-RMV   11-19-1987 Zoning case 2993-RMV, rezoning part of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 2997-RM, rezoning the south 544.50 feet of the east 800.00 feet of
2997-RM    11-19-1987 the west three-quarters of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
2903-RM    12-17-1987 Zoning case 2903-RM, granting a 180-day extension of the special use permit
(amended)             previously granted.
                      Zoning case 3001-RM, rezoning the southwest quarter (excluding the north 250 feet
3001-RM    12-17-1987 and the east 385 feet) of the southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3004-RM, rezoning the part of the east half of the northwest quarter
3004-RM    12-17-1987 of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-2 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3005-RM, rezoning the south 305.0 feet of the north 1,164.0 feet as
3005-RM    12-17-1987 measured on the east and west lines of the southwest quarter of Section 6,
                      Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3006-RM, rezoning the south 302.8 feet of the east 205 of a tract of
3006-RM    12-17-1987 land described as the western 40 rods of the southerly rods of the east half of
                      the southeast quarter of Section 24, excepting the westerly 440 feet, in Township
                      36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3007-RM, rezoning the north half of the northeast quarter of Section
3007-RM    12-17-1987 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, except the
                      east 30 acres and the south 823.32 feet of the west 796.82 feet from A-1 to C-3.
                      Zoning case 3008-RS2, rezoning the south 450 feet of the west half of the west
3008-RS2   12-17-1987 half of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian to C-4 with special use permit for package liquor and a special use
                      permit for a car wash with conditions.
                      Zoning case 3009-RM, rezoning the south 90 acres (except the west 20 acres and
3009-RM    12-17-1987 the east 50 acres) of the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-4.
3011-RM    12-17-1987 Zoning case 3011-RM, rezoning two parcels in Section 20, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 2996-RMS, rezoning the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
2996-RMS   1-21-1988  Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12 and part of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12, lying both north and south of the Indian
                      Boundary Line from A-1 ro R-4.
                      Zoning case 3013A-RM2, rezoning the west half of the northwest quarter of the
3013A-RM2  1-21-1988  northwest quarter of Section 11, except the north 920 feet of the west 477.84
                      feet in Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-
                      1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3014-RMV2, rezoning the west 111.12 feet of the south 196.00 feet of
3014-RMV2  1-21-1988  part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 32, Township 35 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
3018-RM    1-21-1988  Zoning case 3018-RM, rezoning the north 125 feet of Lot 8 in Schrage’s Estates
                      from R-2 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3019-RM, rezoning the westerly 350.0 feet of the easterly 845.79 feet
3019-RM    1-21-1988  (both as measured along the north line) of the northeast quarter of Section 10
                      which lies north of the northerly line of Wheatland Heights in Township 37 North,
                      Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from C-1 and A-1 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3022-RM, rezoning the west 462.00 feet of the north 660.00 feet of
3022-RM    1-21-1988  Lot 1 in the subdivision made by the School Trustees of Section 16, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East in the third principal meridian from A-2 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3023-RM, rezoning the north half of the north half of the northeast
3023-RM    1-21-1988  quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 12 East
                      of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3024-RMV   1-21-1988  Zoning case 3024-RMV, rezoning two parcels in Homer Township both in Section 24,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East in the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-3.
3026-RM    1-21-1988  Zoning case 3026-RM, rezoning the north 220 feet of Lot 29 in Reed Rolling
                      Meadows Subdivision with exceptions from R-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 2934-RMS, rezoning the northerly 490 feet of the east 165 feet of the
2934-RMS   2-18-1988  east 330 feet of the west 660 feet of the south 660 feet of the southeast quarter
                      of the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian for a special use permit for mini-warehousing.
                      Zoning case 2982-RM, rezoning the west 100 feet of part of the southwest quarter
2982-RM    2-18-1988  of Section 8, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to C-3.
                      Zoning case 2982-RM, rezoning the west 3.25 acres of the east half of the west
3012-RMSV2 2-18-1988  half of the north half of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-5.
                      Zoning case 3020-RMV, rezoning the south 624 feet of the east 208 feet of the
3020-RMV   2-18-1988  southwest quarter of Section 29, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3029-RMSV2, rezoning the south 145 feet of the north 363 feet of the
                      west half of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17 (except
3029-RS    2-18-1988  the east 260 feet), Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian for a special use permit for sale and storage of electronic and computer
                      parts and computer programs.
                      Zoning case 3030-RM, rezoning the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
3030-RM    2-18-1988  (except the north 910 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter) in Section
                      11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      R-4.
3031-RM    2-18-1988  Zoning case 3031-RMV, rezoning the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 34
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3030-RMV, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
3032-RM    2-18-1988  meridian (a parcel containing 4.030 acres, more or less) and the northeast corner
                      of the northwest quarter of Section 21 (a parcel containing 3.027 acres, more or
                      less) from A-1 to R-2.
3033-RM    2-18-1988  Zoning case 3033-RM, rezoning two parcels in Section 21, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-2.
3034-RS    2-18-1988  Zoning case 3035-RM west half of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-4.
3035-RM    2-18-1988  Zoning case 3035-RM west half of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3036-RM, rezoning the east 615.86 feet of the south 707.30 feet of
3036-RM    2-18-1988  the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3037-RM, rezoning two parcels in Joliet Township in Section 11,
3037-RM    2-18-1988  Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from C-2 and R-
                      5 to C-3.
                      Zoning case 3040-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter (except the easterly
                      845 feet as measured along the north line) of Section 10, which lies north of the
3040-RM    3-17-1988  northerly line and east of the west line, extended north, of Wheatland Heights,
                      except that part falling within the northerly 600.0 feet of the west 1,420.93
                      feet of the northeast quarter all in Township 37 North, Range 9 east of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to C-1.
                      Zoning case 3041-RMV2, rezoning the north 165 feet of the east 165 feet of the
3041-RMV2  3-17-1988  northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from R-3 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3042-RM, rezoning the east third of the west three-quarters of the
3042-RM    3-17-1988  west half of the east half of the north half of the northeast quarter of Section
                      24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to
                      C-2 with a special use permit for residence.
3044-RM    3-17-1988  Zoning case 3044-RM, rezoning property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3046-RMV, rezoning the south half of the west half of the southwest
3046-RMV   3-17-1988  quarter of Section 28, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-2 to CE-1.
                      Zoning case 3048-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 2,
3048-RM    3-17-1988  Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian (except the east
                      510 feet and except the south 500 feet) from A-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3050-RMV, rezoning the north 1,088.71 feet of the south 1,344.94 feet
                      of the east 150 feet of Lot 2, also the west 10 feet of the east 180 feet of the
3050-RMV   3-17-1988  south 583.50 feet of Lot 2 and also the west 20 feet of the east 170 feet of the
                      north 327.27 feet of the south 583.50 feet of Lot 2 in the Boyer Subdivision of
                      the northwest fractional quarter of Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3010-RM, rezoning the west half of the southwest quarter of Section
3010-RM    4-21-1988  23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      E-1 with a special use permit for a PUD.
3013-RM2              Zoning case 3013-RM2(A), rezoning the west half of the northwest quarter of the
(A)        4-21-1988  northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3039-RM, rezoning the north 528 feet of the east 1,650 feet of the
3039-RM    4-21-1988  northeast quarter in Section 21, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3053-RS, rezoning the east 75 feet of the north 150 feet of the south
3053-RS    4-21-1988  750.12 feet of the west 254 feet of the east 664 feet of the east half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian for a special use permit.
                      Zoning case 3054-RMS, rezoning the south 164.30 feet of the north 657.02 feet of
3054-RMS   4-21-1988  the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to I-1.
                      Zoning case 3055-RM, rezoning part of the west 259.53 feet of the northwest
3055-RM    4-21-1988  quarter of Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3057-RM, rezoning that part of the east 20 acres of the northwest
3057-RM    4-21-1988  quarter of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2.
3058-RMV   4-21-1988  Zoning case 3058-RMV, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 36,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3059-RMS, rezoning the north 185 feet of the east 235.45 feet of the
3059-RMS   4-21-1988  east half of the northeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from R-2 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3060-RM, rezoning the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter
                      (except the south 507.21 feet of the east 288.17 feet and the south 660 feet of
3060-RM    4-21-1988  the west 660 feet and that part of the south 633.04 feet lying west of the west
                      line of the east 288.17 feet) of Section 31, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of
                      the third principal meridian from E-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3064-RS, rezoning that part of the northwest fractional quarter of
3064-RS    4-21-1988  Section 19, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian for
                      a special use permit for the sale of package liquors.
                      Zoning case 3073-RM, rezoning the west half of the east half of the northeast
3073-RM    4-21-1988  quarter of Section 5, and the east half of the west half of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 5, all in Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 2968-RM, rezoning the east 808.42 feet of the south 808.42 feet of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 21, (except the east 544.50 feet of the south
2968-RM    5-19-1988  400 feet), Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian for an
                      extension of a special use permit for outdoor storage and special use permit for
                      residence of a proprietor.
                      Zoning case 3065-RMV, rezoning the west 299 feet (as measured along the south
3065-RMV   5-19-1988  line) of the south 729 feet (as measured along the west line) of the west half of
                      the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3069-RM, rezoning the west half of the southeast quarter of Section
3069-RM    5-19-1988  27, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, except the
                      south 240.0 feet, from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3070-RSV, rezoning the south half of Lot 14 in Hiram A. Rowland’s
3070-RSV   5-19-1988  Lakeside Farms in Section 9, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from R-2 to R-2 with a special use permit for the stabling of
                      two horses.
                      Zoning case 3071-RM, rezoning Lots 225 and 226 in the East Lawn Subdivision part
3071-RM    5-19-1988  of the southeast quarter of Section 12 in and part of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from
                      C-4 to C-1.
                      Zoning case 3072-RM, rezoning the westerly 610 feet (as measured perpendicular to
3072-RM    5-19-1988  Parker Road) except the northerly 30 feet of part of the northeast quarter of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3076-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 7, lying
3076-RM    5-19-1988  south of the center of the highway known as Oswego and Napierville Road, Township
                      37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3077-RS, rezoning the east 970.56 feet of the northwest quarter of
3077-RS    5-19-1988  Section 3, and the northeast quarter of Section 4, Township 37 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian, known as Lot 5, for a special use permit
                      for a riding stable with conditions.
3087-RM    5-19-1988  Zoning case 3078-RM, rezoning the east 225 feet of Lot 14 in unit 4 in Reeds
                      Rolling Meadow Farms from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3088-RM, rezoning the south one acre of the east 207.10 of the west
3088-RM    5-19-1988  235.70 feet of the north 540.80 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 10,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
3097-RM    5-19-1988  Zoning case 3097-RM, rezoning three parcels in Section 21, Township 36 North,
                      Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3048-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 2,
3048-RM    6-16-1988  Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian (except the east
                      510 feet and except the south 500 feet) from A-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3051-RMS, rezoning the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 14 East (with exceptions) and part of the
3051-RMS   6-16-1988  southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 31, Township 34 North,
                      Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-4 with a special use
                      permit.
                      Zoning case 3052-RMS, rezoning the north half of the northwest fractional quarter
3052-RMS   6-16-1988  of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      (with exceptions) from A-1 to R-3.
                      Zoning case 3062-RMV, rezoning the north 100 feet of the south 300 feet of Lots
                      76 and 77 in Robert Bartlett’s Spring Creek Woods, a subdivision of the northeast
                      quarter and the southeast quarter of Section 4, the west half of the southwest
3062-RMV   6-16-1988  quarter of Section 3 and the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 3 (except all that part of the sections lying north of the centerline of
                      Long Run Creek), all in Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from R-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3079-RM, rezoning the south 8.00 feet of the west 70.38 feet of the
                      east 1,048.38 feet of the north half of the southeast quarter of the southeast
3079-RM    6-16-1988  quarter of Section 9, and the south half of the southeast quarter of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 9, except the east 978.00 feet and also except the
                      31.00 feet of the west 270.00 feet in Township 36 North, Range 11 east of the
                      third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
3080-RMV2  6-16-1988  Zoning case 3080-RMV2, rezoning the part of the southeast quarter of Section 4,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3085-RM, rezoning the part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
3085-RM    6-16-1988  quarter of Section 23, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian from R-3 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3086-RM, rezoning the west half of the southeast quarter of Section
3086-RM    6-16-1988  11, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      E-2.
                      Zoning case 3089-RM, rezoning the east half of the southeast quarter of the
3089-RM    6-16-1988  southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to C-3 except the west 240 feet of the south 660 feet
                      which was rezoned from A-1 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3091-RM, rezoning the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter
3091-RM    6-16-1988  except the east 900.74 feet of the north 174 feet of Section 18, Township 34
                      North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to I-2.
                      Zoning case 3092-RM, rezoning Lot 4 in the subdivision of the northeast quarter
3092-RM    6-16-1988  of Section 7, Township 34 North, Range 15 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3095-RM, rezoning that part of the east half of the northeast quarter
3095-RM    6-16-1988  of Section 25, Township 25 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to I-1.
                      Zoning case 3096-RM, rezoning the northwest quarter of Section 33 lying west of
3096-RM    6-16-1988  the west line of the Chicago and Alton Railroad Company’s right-of-way in
                      Township 35 North, Range 10 east of the third principal meridian (with
                      exceptions) from A-1 to I-1.
                      Zoning case 3098-RM, rezoning the north 378 feet of the south 663 feet of the
3098-RM    6-16-1988  east 575 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3102-RM    6-16-1988  Zoning case 3102-RM, rezoning eight parcels in Crete Township in Sections 5, 6
                      and 7, Township 34 North, Range 15 East from A-1 to R-3.
                      Zoning case 3104-RM, rezoning the west 760 feet of the south 573.15 feet of the
3104-RM    6-16-1988  northeast quarter (except the west 48 acres) of Section 20, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3107-RM, rezoning the east 660 feet of the north 330 feet of the
3107-RM    6-16-1988  northeast quarter (except the west 48 acres) of Section 20, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, containing 5.00 acres more or
                      less, from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3110-RS, rezoning the east half of the east half of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
3110-RS    6-16-1988  meridian and the west half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 17 and the west half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 17 (with exceptions), containing 74.799 acres more or less of the third
                      principal meridian for a special use permit for a planned unit development.
                      Zoning case 3111-RMS3, rezoning four parcels in DuPage, Lockport, Plainfield and
3111-RMS3  6-16-1988  Wheatland Townships, with exceptions, from A-1 to R-6 and C-2 with a special use
                      permit for floodplain development, a special use permit for hotel/motel and a
                      special use permit for a planned unit development.
3056-RM    7-22-1988  Zoning case 3056-RM, rezoning three parcels in Plainfield Township from A-1 to E-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 3105-RS, rezoning the west half of the east half of the northeast
3105-RS    7-22-1988  quarter of Section 5, and the east half of the west half of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      from R-2 to R-2 with a special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 3106-RS, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 19,
3106-RS    7-22-1988  Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-
                      1 with a special use permit for single-family detached dwelling built or under
                      construction on or before November 20, 1986.
3109-RM    7-22-1988  Zoning case 3109-RM, rezoning two parcels in Section 4, Township 37 North, Range
                      10 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3112-RMV, rezoning the southwest quarter if the southwest quarter
3112-RMV   7-22-1988  (excepting the west 20 acres and the north 250 feet and the east 244.2 feet) in
                      Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-2 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3113-RMV2, rezoning that part of Sections 9 and 10 beginning at a
                      point on the north line of Section 9, 316.7 feet west of the northeast corner of
                      the Section, thence south at right angles to the north line of that Section, a
3113-RMV2  7-22-1988  distance of 630.8 feet to the north line of Section 10, thence west along the
                      north line of Section 10 and the north line of Section 9, a distance of 345.3
                      feet to the point of beginning, all in Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3115-RMS, rezoning the south 300 feet of the west 1,452 feet of part
3115-RMS   7-22-1988  of the northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian from A-1 to I-2 with a special use permit for outdoor
                      storage.
                      Zoning case 3117-RM, rezoning the north 150 feet of the south 530.56 feet of the
3117-RM    7-22-1988  east 468.6 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3118-RSV, rezoning the part of the west half of fractional Section 5,
3118-RSV   7-22-1988  Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to A-
                      1 with a special use permit for agribusiness, i.e. seed corn operation.
                      Zoning case 3119-RMS, rezoning part of the south fraction of the west half of
                      Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from
3119-RMS   7-22-1988  A-1 to C-6 with a special use permit for floodplain development contingent upon
                      approval of a floodplain development permit by the County Subdivision Engineer on
                      property in Crete Township.
                      Zoning case 3123-RM, rezoning the north 325.61 feet of the south 1,304.12 feet of
3123-RM    7-22-1988  the east half of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township
                      36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3125-RM, rezoning the east half of the southeast quarter (excepting
3125-RM    7-22-1988  the north 82.5 feet) and also the east 660.00 feet of the west half of the
                      southwest quarter (excepting the north 742.50 feet) in Section 1, Township 34
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3128-RM, rezoning the north 392 feet of the northeast quarter of the
3128-RM    7-22-1988  northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 8, Township 33 North, Range
                      13 East of the third principal meridian (except the east 384 feet) from A-1 to E-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 3052-RMS, rezoning the north half of the northwest fractional quarter
3052-RMS   8-18-1988  of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      from R-3 to R-3 with a special use permit for floodplain development contingent
                      upon IDOT-DWR approval.
                      Zoning case 3114-RMV2, rezoning the west half of the northeast quarter of the
                      northwest quarter in Section 18, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
3114-RMV2  8-18-1988  principal meridian, excepting the petroleum under the surface and right to mine
                      the same, from A-1 to E-2 with a special use permit for floodplain development of
                      driveways contingent upon IDOT reviewing the proposal.
                      Zoning case 3126-RM, rezoning the east 165 feet of the west 710 feet of the
3126-RM    8-18-1988  southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 33 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3129-RM, rezoning part of the east half of the northeast quarter of
3129-RM    8-18-1988  Section 1, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3133-RM, rezoning the south half of the northwest quarter of Section
3133-RM    8-18-1988  15, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3134-RM, rezoning part of the south half of the southwest fractional
3134-RM    8-18-1988  quarter of Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3136-RM, rezoning the east 6.24 acres of the west three-quarters of
3136-RM    8-18-1988  the northwest quarter (except the west 12 acres and except the east 11.338 acres)
                      of Section 6, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to E-1.
3137-RM    8-18-1988  Zoning case 3137-RM, rezoning the part of the southeast quarter of Section 11,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3138-RM, rezoning the west 667.52 feet of the southwest quarter of
3138-RM    8-18-1988  the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian (except the south 669.22 feet) from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3145-RS, rezoning Lot 1, Wolf Creek Industrial Park Unit 2, a
3145-RS    8-18-1988  subdivision of that part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 27,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from I-1 to I-
                      1 with a special use permit for outdoor storage.
3090-RMVSV 9-15-1988  Zoning case 3090-RMVSV, rezoning two parcels in Joliet Township from R-5 to C-
                      2 with a special use permit for an automobile laundry with seven conditions.
                      Zoning case 3108-RS, rezoning the west 2.90 chains of that part of the southeast
                      quarter of Section 7, lying south of the public highway, in Township 37 North,
3108-RS    9-15-1988  Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from R-5 to R-5 with a special use
                      permit to allow a commercial nursery and greenhouse and outside storage of bulk
                      materials with two conditions.
                      Rezoning case 3130-RM, rezoning the south 284.00 feet of the northwest quarter of
3130-RM    9-15-1988  Section 32, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2.
3132-RM    9-15-1988  Rezoning case 3132-RM, rezoning four parcels in Green Garden Township, all in
                      Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3135-RS, rezoning the west half of the southwest quarter of Section
3135-RS    9-15-1988  17, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian for a
                      special use permit for floodplain development on property in Frankfort Township.
                      Zoning case 3139-RMS, rezoning Lot 27 in Robert Bartlett’s Home Acres Subdivision
3139-RMS   9-15-1988  in Section 10, Township 34 North, Range 13 East from R-1 to C-3 with a special
                      use permit for residence for employee-caretaker with the condition no trucks be
                      parked overnight.
3140-RMS2  9-15-1988  Zoning case 3140-RMS2, rezoning the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3142-RMV, rezoning four parcels in Homer Township located in Section
3142-RMV   9-15-1988  25, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      E-2.
                      Zoning case 3143-RM, rezoning the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter
                      lying north of the south 680 feet and west of the east 840 feet and south of the
3143-RM    9-15-1988  property conveyed to the Joliet and Southern Traction Company by warranty deed
                      dated July 2, 1908 all recorded in book 440, page 148 (except the north 40 feet)
                      all in the northwest quarter of Section 29, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of
                      the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3144-RM, rezoning that part of the east half of the northeast quarter
3144-RM    9-15-1988  of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      from R-3 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3146-RM, rezoning the property commencing at the southeast corner of
                      the southwest fractional quarter then northerly along the east line of the
                      southwest fractional quarter, 1,019.02 feet to the centerline of Wolf’s Crossing
3146-RM    9-15-1988  Road for the point of beginning; then southerly along the east line 371.31 feet;
                      then northerly parallel with the east line 288.69 feet to the centerline; then
                      northeasterly along the centerline 340.19 feet to the point of beginning in
                      Wheatland Township, containing 2.500 acres, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3148-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of fractional Section
3148-RM    9-15-1988  6, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-
                      2.
                      Zoning case 3149-RM, rezoning the north 402.70 feet of the east 642.38 feet lying
3149-RM    9-15-1988  westerly of the west line of the east one- third, northeast quarter (except the
                      west 48 acres) of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian, consisting of 5.939 acres, more or less, from A-1 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3150-RM, rezoning the west half of the west 470.0 feet of the east
3150-RM    9-15-1988  1,412.70 feet of the south 466.70 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 16,
                      Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3151-RM, rezoning the west half of the southwest quarter, except the
                      east 25 acres of the south 45 acres and the east half of the southwest quarter
3151-RM    9-15-1988  and the west half of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter all in
                      Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3152-RM, rezoning the northeast quarter (except the west 48 acres) of
3152-RM    9-15-1988  Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian,
                      with exceptions, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3153-RS, rezoning all the following in Section 12, Township 34 North,
3153-RS    9-15-1988  Range 12 East of the third principal meridian in Green Garden Township from A-
                      1 to A-1 with a special use permit for floodplain development for driveways only
                      with the condition that there be no change in the topography:
                    1. The south 327.9 feet of the north 655.8 feet of the west half of the southwest
                      quarter;
                    2. The south 327.9 feet of the north 1,311.6 feet of the west half of the
                      southwest quarter;
                    3. The north 327.9 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter;
                    4. The north 327.9 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter;
                    5. The part of the west half of the southwest quarter (lying south of the north
                      1,639.5 feet), with exceptions; and
                    6. The part of the west half of the southwest quarter (lying south of the north
                      1,639.5 feet, with exceptions.
                      Zoning case 3154-RM, rezoning the part of the west 20 chains of the southwest
3154-RM    9-15-1988  quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2.
Res. 88-   9-15-1988  Technical map correction to the official zoning maps.
116
                      Zoning case 3155-RS, rezoning the north 445.71 feet of the south 1,463.39 feet
                      (as measured along the westerly right-of-line of Interstate Route 55) of part of
3155-RS    10-20-1988 the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North,
                      Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from I-1 to I-2 to I-1 and I-2 with
                      a special use permit to allow floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 3156-RM, rezoning the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
3156-RM    10-20-1988 Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3158-RS, rezoning the south 781.83 feet of the east 1,324.17 feet of
3158-RS    10-20-1988 the southeast quarter of Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit for an agribusiness
                      for fresh spinach processing.
                      Zoning case 3159-RMSV, rezoning the westerly 65 feet of the northerly 400 feet of
3159-RMSV  10-20-1988 Lot 8 in County Clerk’s Subdivision of part of the north half of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 7, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from C-6 to C-4 with a special use permit for a mini-warehouse.
                      Zoning case 3160-RM, rezoning the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 36
3160-RM    10-20-1988 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian, with exceptions, from A-
                      1 and R-3 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3161-RMS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 31,
3161-RMS   10-20-1988 Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-
                      4 with a special use.
                      Zoning case 3162-RSV, rezoning the north 329 feet of the south 337 feet of the
                      east 650 feet of the north half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter
3162-RSV   10-20-1988 of Section 9, and the west 33 feet of the south 1,003.03 of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 10, all in Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit for a township highway
                      department building and outdoor storage.
                      Zoning case 3163-RMS, rezoning two tracts of land in Green Garden Township
3163-RMS   10-20-1988 located in Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian from C-6 to R-2A with a special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 3164-RM, rezoning the north 663.00 feet of the west 463.00 feet of
3164-RM    10-20-1988 the northwest quarter of Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian from C-6 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3165-RM, rezoning the west 150 feet and the south 198 feet of the
3165-RM    10-20-1988 north 726 feet of the east 1,800 feet and the south 300 feet of the north 1,026
                      feet of the east 726 feet of the third principal meridian in Wesley Township from
                      A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3167-RMV, rezoning Lot C and Lot D in Arthur T. McIntosh and
3167-RMV   10-20-1988 Company’s Lincoln Estates, a subdivision of the west half of the west half
                      Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from
                      R-2 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3170-RMV, rezoning three tracts in Plainfield Township in Section 20,
3170-RMV   10-20-1988 Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known
                      as the southwest corner of River and Fraser Roads from A-1 to E-2 with special
                      use permits for a planned unit development and for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 2996-RMS, rezoning the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
2996-RMS   11-17-1988 Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12, lying both north and south of the Indian
                      Boundary Line from A-1 to A-4 with a special use permit for floodplain
                      development.
                      Zoning case 3166-RM, rezoning the south 295.00 feet of the east 330.00 feet
3166-RM    11-17-1988 (except the part taken for Laraway Road) of the southwest quarter of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3173-RM, rezoning the south two and one-half acres of Lot 9, the
                      south two and one-half acres of Lot 10, all of Lot 11 and all of Lot 12 in Pack’s
3173-RM    11-17-1988 Subdivision of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known as the east
                      side of Parker Road, approximately 1,630 feet south of Illinois Route 7, from A-
                      1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3174-RMS, rezoning three parcels in Homer Township all in Section 21,
3174-RMS   11-17-1988 Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, containing
                      2.375 acres, more or less, from R-3 to C-1 with a special use permit for a drive-
                      in banking and savings and loan facility.
                      Zoning case 3175-RM, rezoning the north half of the northwest quarter of Section
3175-RM    11-17-1988 24, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3176-RSV2, rezoning Lots 17 and 18 and the vacated alley lying
                      between Lots 17 and 18 of the James J. Smiley Subdivision of part of Section 21,
3176-RSV2  11-17-1988 Township 35, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known as the
                      north side of Woodruff Avenue, approximately 475 feet west of McKinley Avenue,
                      from R-3 to R-3 with a special use permit for floodplain development to allow
                      construction of an addition to an existing church.
                      Zoning case 3178-RM, rezoning part of the east half of the northwest quarter of
3178-RM    11-17-1988 Section 6, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to C-3.
                      Zoning case 3180-RM, rezoning the west half the southwest quarter of the
3180-RM    11-17-1988 southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3181-RS, rezoning the south 250 feet of the east 200 feet of Lot 4 in
                      the subdivision made by the School Trustees of Section 16, Township 36 North,
3181-RS    11-17-1988 Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, containing 10.11 acres, more or
                      less, from A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit for inside storage of landscape
                      and excavation equipment.
                      Zoning case 3182-RM, rezoning the east 408.30 feet of the west 458.30 feet of the
                      north 493.70 feet of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
3182-RM    11-17-1988 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian, commonly
                      known as the south side of 103rd Street, approximately 900 feet west of Mayre
                      Avenue from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3183-RS, rezoning of Lot 8 in the Highlands, a subdivision of part of
3183-RS    11-17-1988 the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 34 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian for a special use permit in an R-2 district
                      for Echo housing.
                      Zoning case 3184-RS, rezoning part of the east 440 feet of the east half of the
                      east half of the southeast quarter of Section 6, Township 33 North, Range 12 East
3184-RS    11-17-1988 of the third principal meridian, commonly known as the west side of Main Street
                      (U.S. Route 45) approximately 600 feet north of Adams Street, from R-2 to R-
                      2 with a special use permit for a pre-school facility.
                      Zoning case 3185-RM, rezoning the west 456.60 feet of the east 913.20 feet of the
3185-RM    11-17-1988 north 477 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian, containing 5.00 acres,
                      more or less, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3186-RS, rezoning the north 330.00 feet of the south 1,056.00 feet of
                      the east 1,320.00 feet of the north five- eighths of the southeast quarter of
3186-RS    11-17-1988 Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian,
                      commonly known as the west side of Scheer Road, approximately 1,680 feet north of
                      Delaney Road for a special use permit in an A-1 district for Echo housing.
                      Zoning case 3185-RM, rezoning the west 456.60 feet of the east 913.20 feet of the
3185-RM    12-15-1988 north 477 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3187-RMS2, rezoning granting a special use permit for landscaping
                      service and residential sprinkling sales contingent upon no on-site burning and a
                      special use permit for pre- existing residence in an A-1 district of less than
3187-RMS2  12-15-1988 ten acres on property located in part of the west half of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian,
                      commonly known as the south side of Caton Farm Road, approximately 4,190 feet
                      west of Illinois Route 59.
                      Zoning case 3188-RM, rezoning the east 158.04 feet of the west 985.04 feet of the
                      south 380 feet of the north 605 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of
3188-RM    12-15-1988 Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian,
                      commonly known as the south end of Jessie Street, approximately 130 feet east of
                      Pearle Street, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3189-RS, rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
                      22, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian and that part
3189-RS    12-15-1988 of the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the
                      third principal meridian, lying westerly of the centerline of the DuPage River,
                      commonly known as the southeast and southwest corners of 111th Street and Book
                      Road, for a special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 3190-RMS, rezoning that part of Lot D in Adams Acre, a subdivision in
                      the west half of Section 5 and the east half of Section 6 all in Township 34
3190-RMS   12-15-1988 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known as the
                      southwest side of Richton Road approximately 500 feet south of 235th Street, from
                      R-2 to R-1 with a special use permit for an existing kennel.
                      Zoning case 3194-RM, rezoning Lots 4, 8 and 11, all of Lot 10, with exceptions
3194-RM    12-15-1988 and all of Lot 9 with exceptions, commonly known as the north side of Manhattan
                      Road, approximately 1,300 feet east of Bush Road, from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3195-RS, rezoning the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 11, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian,
3195-RS    12-15-1988 commonly known as the northwest corner of Dralle Road and 80th Avenue for a
                      special use permit for floodplain development in an A-1 district contingent upon
                      county engineering approval.
                      Zoning case 3191-RS, rezoning property in Crete Township, located in Section 26,
3191-RS    1-19-1989  Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian for a special
                      use permit for floodplain development in an R-2 district.
                      Zoning case 3193-RS, rezoning Lot 4 in OHTI Subdivision, being a resubdivision of
                      Lots 132 and 133 in Andermann Acres Unit No. 5, a subdivision of part of the
3193-RS    1-19-1989  northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian, commonly known as the northwest corner of Alice Lane and
                      Route 59, for a special use permit for packaged liquor limited to within the
                      walls of the building.
                      Zoning case 3196-RM, rezoning two parcels in New Lenox Township located in
                      Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 11 East and Section 24, Township 35 North,
3196-RM    1-19-1989  Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known as the east side of
                      Schmuhl Road, approximately 3,200 feet south of U.S. 30, from A-1 to R-2A with a
                      special use permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 3197-RM, rezoning the east 104.9 feet of that part of the northwest
3197-RM    1-19-1989  quarter of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township
                      36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from C-1 and R-3 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3201-RM, rezoning the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
3201-RM    1-19-1989  Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3202-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
3202-RM    1-19-1989  Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      R-2 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3203-RMS, rezoning three parcels in Frankfort Township, Section 12
                      and Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian,
3203-RMS   1-19-1989  commonly known as approximately 2,700 feet south of 191st Street and
                      approximately 1,380 feet east of 80th Avenue, from A-1 to R-4 with a special use
                      permit for floodplain development.
                      Zoning case 3204-RMS2, rezoning the east 300.00 feet of the west 775.00 feet of
                      the north 400.00 of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 21,
3204-RMS2  1-19-1989  Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known
                      as the south side of Renwick Road, approximately 1,740 feet east of River Road,
                      from A-1 to E-2 with a special use permit for indoor storage of farm-type
                      equipment and a special use permit for non-retail business office of owner.
                      Zoning case 3205-RMS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 34,
3205-RMS   1-19-1989  Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-
                      2 with a special use permit for a public building.
                      Zoning case 3206-RS, rezoning two parcels in Frankfort Township in Section 23,
3206-RS    1-19-1989  Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian, commonly known
                      as the southeast corner of 84th Avenue and North Avenue, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3208-RS, rezoning beginning at the southwest corner of the north half
3208-RS    1-19-1989  of the southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the
                      third principal meridian for a special use permit to allow the sale of pet feed
                      and supplies in an A-1 district.
Res. 89-1  1-19-1989  Technical map corrections to the official zoning map.
                      Zoning case 3118-RS, rezoning part of the west half of the fractional of Section
3118-RS    2-16-1989  5, Township 37 North, Range 9 East for an extension of a special use permit for
                      agribusiness; seed corn and dry fertilizer.
                      Zoning case 3210-RS, rezoning the south 30 acres of the north 55 acres of the
                      west half of the northwest quarter of Section 33 North, Range 10 East of the
3210-RS    2-16-1989  third principal meridian for a special use permit to allow construction and
                      operation of a thoroughbred training, boarding, sales preparation and breeding
                      facility.
3211-RMS   2-16-1989  Zoning case 3211-RMS, rezoning two parcels in Crete Township from C-6 and R-3 to
                      R-4 with a special use permit for a planned unit development.
                      Zoning case 3213-RM, rezoning part of Lot 17 in the subdivision of Section 16,
3213-RM    2-16-1989  Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-
                      2A.
                      Zoning case 3214-RM, rezoning the east half of the northwest quarter of Section
3214-RM    2-16-1989  6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      R-2.
                      Zoning case 3220-RM, rezoning the west 220.00 feet of the south 573.15 feet of
3220-RM    2-16-1989  the northeast quarter (except the west 48 acres) of Section 20, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from E-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3221-RM, rezoning the 160.00 feet of the west 380.00 feet of the
3221-RM    2-16-1989  south 573.15 feet of the northeast quarter (except the west 48 acres) of Section
                      20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from E-1 to
                      R-2.
                      Zoning case 3223-RM, rezoning Lot 9, Harvest Hills Unit 2, being a subdivision of
3223-RM    2-16-1989  part of the north half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-2 to E-2.
3207-RM    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3207-RM, rezoning part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from R-2 to R-2A.
3216-RMS   3-16-1989  Zoning case 3216-RMS, rezoning park of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
                      Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to C-2.
3217-RS    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3217-RS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 6,
                      Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from R-3 to R-3 with a special use permit.
3224-RM    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3224-RM, rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 22, Township
                      35 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to I-1.
3226-RMS   3-16-1989  Zoning case 3226-RMS, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 19,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from R-2 and A-1 to R-2 with special use permit.
3227-RM    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3227-RM, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 19,
                      Township 33 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3229-RM    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3229-RM, rezoning part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 30, Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from R-3 to I-1.
3231-RM    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3231-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3235-RM    3-16-1989  Zoning case 3235-RM, rezoning part of east half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 10, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2, R-3 and R-4.
3236-RMV   3-16-1989  Zoning case 3236-RMV, rezoning part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3090-RMV   4-20-1989  Zoning case 3090-RMV, rezoning part of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East, to extend special use permit.
3198-RMV   4-20-1989  Zoning case 3198-RMV, rezoning part of the east half of the northeast quarter to
                      Section 33, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3234-RSV2, rezoning part of the north half of the northeast quarter
3234-RSV2  4-20-1989  of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-3 to C-3 with a special
                      use permit.
3237-RMV   4-20-1989  Zoning case 3237-RMV, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 36 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to C-3.
3238-RMV   4-20-1989  Zoning case 3238-RMV, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 34 North, Range 13 East, from R-3 to C-3.
3240-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3240-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 12,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3241-RMS   4-20-1989  Zoning case 3241-RMS, rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 13,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-4 with a special use permit.
3243-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3243-RM, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from R-1 to R-2.
3244-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3244-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3245-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3245-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3246-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3246-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3248-RS    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3248-RS, rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 10 to
                      provide special use permit for outdoor storage in an I-1 District.
3250-RMS   4-20-1989  Zoning case 3250-RMS, rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, to C-3 with special use permit.
                      Zoning case 3251-RMS, rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
3251-RMS   4-20-1989  Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to C-6 with a special use
                      permit.
3252-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3252-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from R-2A to C-6.
3253-RS    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3253-RS, rezoning part of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9
                      East, from C-3 to C-3 with a special use permit.
3254-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3254-RM, rezoning part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
3256-RS    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3256-RS, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 16,
                      Township 37 North, Range 10 East, from C-1 to C-1 with a special use permit.
3257-RS    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3257-RS, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-1 with a special use permit.
3258-RM    4-20-1989  Zoning case 3258-RM, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 14,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-4.
                      Zoning case 3242-RS2, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 26,
3242-RS2   5-18-1989  Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-1 with special use for ancillary
                      use and for sale of alcohol.
                      Zoning case 3247-RM, rezoning two parcels, both part of the southwest quarter of
3247-RM    5-18-1989  the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-
                      1 to C-1 with special use for auto dealership for Parcel II.
3260-RM    5-18-1989  Zoning case 3260-RM, rezoning part of Lot 5 in Unit 1 of Reed’s Rolling Meadow
                      Farms from A-2 to R-2A.
3262-RM    5-18-1989  Zoning case 3262-RM rezoning two parcels, both in Section 27, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3265-RM    5-18-1989  Zoning case 3265-RM, rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 19,
                      Township 33 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3266-RM    5-18-1989  Zoning case 3266-RM, rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 6,
                      Township 34 North, Range 15 East, from A-1 to R-3.
3267-RM    5-18-1989  Zoning case 3267-RM, rezoning Lot 47, except the north 235 feet, in Arthur T.
                      McIntosh and Company’s Lemont Farms, from R-2 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3269-RM, rezoning the east half of Lot 14 in the subdivision of the
3269-RM    5-18-1989  northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to E-
                      1.
                      Zoning case 3275-RMS, rezoning part of the north half of Section 4, Township 37
3275-RMS   5-18-1989  North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to C-6 with special use for sale and consumption of
                      liquor on premises.
3270-RM    6-15-1989  Rezoning the west 325 feet of south 200 feet of southwest quarter of northwest
                      quarter of Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from R-3 to C-3.
3273-RMS   6-15-1989  Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 29, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East, from A-1 to C-1 with special use permit for burglar alarm system company.
3274-RMS   6-15-1989  Rezoning Lots 1 and 2 of Twin Lakes Subdivision Unit No. 1 in Homer Township,
                      from R-4 to C-3 and C-2.
3276-RMS   6-15-1989  Rezoning east half of southwest fractional quarter, north and south of Indian
                      Boundary Line of Section 32, Township 33 North, Range 10 East, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning south half of north half of east half of southeast quarter of Section
3277-RMS   6-15-1989  35, and south half of east half of southeast quarter of Section 35 in Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning part of northeast quarter of southeast quarter and north half of
3278-RM    6-15-1989  southeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 32 North, Range 10
                      East, lying southwest of Route 113-S, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning south 250 feet of north 1185.50 feet of part of southeast quarter of
3280-RM    6-15-1989  Section 20 lying south and west of center line of DuPage River in Township 36
                      North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3281-RS    6-15-1989  Rezoning to grant a special use permit for residence of a caretaker in an A-
                      1 District on property in Green Garden Township.
3285-RM    6-15-1989  Rezoning south 330 feet of north 1,980 feet of east 660 feet of northeast quarter
                      of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to E-1.
3286-RM    6-15-1989  Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 3, Township 32 North, Range 9 East,
                      from A-1 to R-3.
3293-RMV2  6-15-1989  Rezoning part of west 20 chains of southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East, from A-2 to R-3.
3294-RM    6-15-1989  Rezoning south half of west 330.22 feet of southeast quarter of Section 27,
                      Township 33 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to I-2.
Res. 89-99 6-15-1989  Technical map correction to official county zoning map, by zoning Parcel 4-12-
                      301-001 from B-2 to C-2.
                      Rezoning southeast quarter of northeast quarter of Section 16, Township 34 North,
3239-RMS   7-20-1989  Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2, but with special use permit for floodplain
                      development denied.
3261-RMS   7-20-1989  Rezoning Lot 17 in Wolf Creek Industrial Park Unit Two, from I-1 to I-1 with
                      special use permit for auto body repair facility and for outdoor storage.
                      Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 29, Township 36 North, Range 9 East
3268-RS2V4 7-20-1989  (19.695 acres), from A-1 to A-1 with special use permit for mini-warehousing with
                      certain conditions.
                      Rezoning north 544.51 feet of east 160 feet of west 990 feet of west half of
3272-RM    7-20-1989  northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from R-5 to C-
                      1.
3295-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning part of east half of northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 37 North,
                      Range 10 East, from A-1 and R-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning north 335 feet of west 325 feet of west half of north half of north half
3297-RM    7-20-1989  of west 80 acres of northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North, Range 13
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3298-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning north 605 feet of east 360 feet of that part of west half of northeast
                      quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning west 330 feet of south half of southeast quarter of northwest quarter of
3299-RSV   7-20-1989  Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to A-1 with special use
                      permit for storage of vehicles and recreational commodities under certain
                      conditions.
3301-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning three-fourths acre, including mobile home, in Wilmington Township, from
                      R-3 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning north 600 feet of east 601.26 feet of west half of northeast quarter of
3302-RMS   7-20-1989  northeast quarter of Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to C-
                      3 with special use permit for outdoor storage of nursery stock.
3303-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning certain property in Manhattan Township located in Section 12, Township
                      34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3304-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning certain property in Manhattan Township located in Section 2, Township 34
                      North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
3305-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning certain property in Troy Township located in Section 28, Township 35
                      North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning west 330.68 feet of east 825.68 feet of southeast quarter of Section 27,
3306-RMS2  7-20-1989  Township 33 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to C-4 with special use permit for
                      outdoor storage and for residence of proprietor.
3307-RS    7-20-1989  Rezoning two parcels in Troy Township from A-1 to A-1 and I-1 with special use
                      permits for outdoor storage with proper screening.
3308-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning portion of east half of northwest quarter in Section 35, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3310-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning certain property commencing at intersection of west line of Section 11,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to C-6.
3312-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning certain property lying east of the west 50 acres of southeast quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 123 East, from A-1 to R-4.
3313-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning two parcels in Homer Township from A-1 to R-2.
3315-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning part of north half of northeast quarter of Section 15, Township 33
                      North, Range 13 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3317-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 14
                      East from A-1 to R-2A.
3320-RM    7-20-1989  Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 28, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East, from A-1 to E-1.
3300-RM    8-17-1989  Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East, lying north of the Indian Boundary Line from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning property commencing at intersection of west line of Section 11, Township
3309-RMS   8-17-1989  36 North, Range 11 East, except for two parcels, from A-1 and C-1 to C-1 with
                      special use permit for nursing and garden center.
3316-RS    8-17-1989  Rezoning property in Section 16, Township 33 North, Range 9 East in Wilmington
                      Township, from C-4 to C-4 with special use permit for motel.
3318-RM    8-17-1989  Rezoning west 660 feet of northeast quarter of Section 29, Township 33 North,
                      Range 12 East from A-1 to E-1.
3321-RMS   8-17-1989  Rezoning west 726 feet of southwest quarter of Section 32, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3323-RM    8-17-1989  Rezoning west 200 feet of east 400 feet of south 200 feet of northwest quarter of
                      Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
3325-RS    8-17-1989  Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 10
                      East, for a special use permit for Echo Housing.
3327-RM
(as        8-17-1989  Rezoning commercial parcel in Frankfort Township, from A-1 to C-2.
amended)
3328-RM    8-17-1989  Rezoning single-family parcel in Frankfort Township, from A-1 to R-4.
3329-RM    8-17-1989  Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East, in Homer Township, from R-2A to R-3.
                      Rezoning north 548 feet of east 795 feet of north half of northeast quarter of
3331-RM    8-17-1989  Section 11, Township 33 North, Range 13 East, for special use permit for Echo
                      Housing in A-1 District.
3335-RM    8-17-1989  Rezoning Lot 1 in Cherry Hill Heights Subdivision in New Lenox Township, from C-
                      5 to C-2.
3287-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning part of west half of east half of northwest quarter of Section 27,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
3289-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning part of west half of east half of northwest quarter of Section 27,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
3290-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning part of north 100 acres of southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to I-1.
3291-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning part of north 100 acres of southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
3314-RM    9-21-1989  Part of a tract lying south of the southerly right-of-way line of F.A.I. Route 80
                      and located in New Lenox Township, from A-1 to R-2A.
3322-RM               Rezoning part of west half of southeast quarter of Section 27, Township 35 North,
(as        9-21-1989  Range 11 East, from R-2A to C-2.
amended)
3326-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning property in Section 8, Township 35 North, Range 11 East in New Lenox
                      Township, from A-1 to R-1.
3333-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning two parcels in Homer Township from A-1 to R-3 and R-4.
3336-RS    9-21-1989  Rezoning two areas in Section 25, Township 34 North, Range 13 East in Monee
                      Township, for special use permit for non-agricultural purposes with conditions.
                      Rezoning part of north ten acres of east 112 of northeast 114 of Section 14,
3338-RS    9-21-1989  Township 36 North, Range 9 East for special use permit for construction of
                      governmental building.
3340-RMS   9-21-1989  Rezoning west 200 feet of north 340 feet of northeast quarter of Section 15,
                      Township 35 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to C-2.
3345-RS    9-21-1989  Rezoning Lot 1 in OHTI Subdivision in Wheatland Township, for special use permit
                      for child care nursery.
3346-RM    9-21-1989  Rezoning part of Lot 15 in Assessor’s Subdivision in Homer Township from A-1 to
                      R-2.
                      Rezoning property in Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, in New Lenox
3330-RMS   10-19-1989 Township, from A-1 to R-2 with a special use permit for floodplain development
                      with conditions.
3342-RM    10-19-1989 Rezoning west half of east half of southwest quarter of Section 24, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to C-2.
3343-RM    10-19-1989 Rezoning west half of east half of southwest quarter of Section 24, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to R-4.
3347-RMV   10-19-1989 Rezoning property in north half of southeast quarter of Section 14 lying south of
                      Indian Boundary Line in Township 34 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3351-RMSV2 10-19-1989 Rezoning Lot 4 in block 18 in Runyan’s Addition to Lockport, from R-3 to R-6 with
                      special use permit to allow a duplex.
3353-RM    10-19-1989 Rezoning property in Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, located in
                      Homer Township, from R-1 to R-2.
3356-RS    10-19-1989 Rezoning property in the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, for a special use permit for pre- school child care nursery.
                      Rezoning part of west half of northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North,
3357-RM    11-16-1989 Range 11 East, from R-3 to C-1 with special use permit for landscaping and gutter
                      business.
                      Rezoning north 2,640.1 feet of east 165 feet of west half of northeast quarter of
3359-RS    11-16-1989 Section 20, Township 37 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to A-1 with special use
                      permit for agribusiness.
3360-RMV   11-16-1989 Rezoning south 330 feet of part of east half of southeast quarter of southwest
                      quarter of Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
3361-RM    11-16-1989 Rezoning part of east half of southeast quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3362-RS    11-6-1989  Rezoning two lots in Green Garden Township from A-1 to A-1 with special use
                      permit for private landing strip subject to conditions.
3366-RS    11-16-1989 Rezoning Lot 75 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s “Prestwick” Unit No. 3, from
                      R-3 to R-3 with special use permit for floodplain development.
3367-RM    11-16-1989 Rezoning two parcels in Florence Township from A-1 and R-3 to E-1.
3368-RMS   11-16-1989 Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 16, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-1 to R-2 with special use permit for a community residence.
3369-RS    11-16-1989 Rezoning three parcels in Joliet Township from R-4 to R-4 with special use permit
                      for community residence facility.
3373-RM    11-16-1989 Rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East, from R-3 to C-2.
                      Rezoning south 30 acres of west half of northeast quarter of Section 2, Township
3374-RS    11-16-1989 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-2 to A-2 with special use permit for community
                      residence facility.
Res. 89-   11-16-1989 Correction of Case 3333-RM (a map amendment in Homer Township).
292
Res. 89-   11-16-1989 Technical map correction to official county zoning maps.
293
3370-RM    12-21-1989 Rezoning west half of southwest quarter of Section 8, Township 37 North, Range 9
                      East lying south of center line of Wolf’s Crossing Road, from A-1 to I-1.
3375-RM    12-21-1989 Rezoning west 660 feet of south half of southwest quarter of Section 10, Township
                      33 North, Range 13 East, from A-2 to E-2.
3387-RM    12-21-1989 Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-1 to R-2.
3394-RM    12-21-1989 Rezoning Lots 1 through 6 of subdivision of west half of northwest quarter of
                      Section 16, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning north 468.6 feet of east 538 feet of northeast quarter of northwest
3334-RMS   1-18-1990  quarter of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to C-3 with
                      special use permit for residence of proprietor.
                      Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 9
3358-RM    1-18-1990  East, lying north of Indian Boundary Line, for special use permit for
                      construction of barn.
3388-RS    1-18-1990  Rezoning Lot 8 in Sugarbrook Estates Unit 5 in New Lenox Township, for special
                      use permit for small architectural firm.
                      Rezoning west five acres of south ten acres of west half of southwest quarter of
3389-RM    1-18-1990  Section 17, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, to R-1 with special use permit for
                      small kennel.
                      Rezoning as per plat of survey of part of southeast quarter of Section 7,
3401-RS    1-18-1990  Township 34 North, Range 14 East, for special use permit for building handling
                      recyclable materials.
3403-RM    1-18-1990  Rezoning two parcels in Homer Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning part of north half of east half of northeast quarter of Section 14,
3406-RMS   1-18-1990  Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to E-1 with special use permit for
                      church, with conditions.
                      Rezoning west 430.37 feet of north 250 feet of south 1740.35 feet of west half of
3407-RS    1-18-1990  northeast quarter of Section 29, Township 37 North, Range 9 East, for special use
                      permit for restaurant/ lounge/tack shop.
3408-RM    1-18-1990  Rezoning part of south half of southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 35
                      North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning part of northwest quarter of southeast quarter of Section 14 south of
3378-RM    2-15-1990  Indian Boundary Line, and northwest quarter of southeast quarter of Section 14
                      north of Indian Boundary Line, Township 35 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to C-2.
3379-RM    2-15-1990  Rezoning [same description as for 3378-RM above] from A-1 to R-6 with special use
                      permit.
3380-RM    2-15-1990  Rezoning property in Section 13 and Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 12 East,
                      in Frankfort Township, from A-1 to R-4 with special use permit.
                      Rezoning part of east 500 feet of south 200 feet of north half of southeast
3391-RS2V  2-15-1990  quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, for special use permit
                      for outdoor storage of portable toilets.
3404-RM    2-15-1990  Rezoning two parcels in Homer Township from A-1 to C-2.
3409-RMV   2-15-1990  Rezoning Lots 21 and 22 in Smiley’s Resubdivision in Joliet Township, from R-3 to
                      C-1.
3411-RM    2-15-1990  Rezoning various properties in Manhattan Township, from A-1 to R-2.
3399-RS    3-15-1990  Rezoning part of west half of southwest quarter of Section 5, Township 35 North,
                      Range 9 East, for special use permit for sale/storage of anhydrous ammonia.
3405-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning south 188 feet of north 949 feet of east 1,158.08 feet of northeast
                      quarter of Section 18, Township 34 North, Range 13 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3412-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning south half of east half of southeast quarter of Section 33, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3421-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning Lot 3 in Tamarack Fairways Unit 2 in Wheatland Township, from R-2A to C-
                      3.
3430-RMV   3-15-1990  Rezoning east 208.71 feet of north 417.42 feet of east half of northwest quarter
                      of Section 31, Township 33 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3431-RMV   3-15-1990  Rezoning part of Lot 15 of the Assessor’s Subdivision of Section 8, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3432-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning north 445 feet of south 1,331 feet of east 489.44 feet of southeast
                      quarter of Section 11, Township 32 North, Range 9 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3434-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning part of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, in Crete Township,
                      from A-1 to R-2.
3435-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning part of Lot 1 in Fuller and Woodruff’s Subdivision in Joliet Township,
                      from A-1 to R-2A.
3439-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning tract of land in northwest quarter of Section 8, Township 34 North,
                      Range 15 East, in Crete Township, from R-1 to R-3.
3441-RM    3-15-1990  Rezoning east side of New Avenue, two- thirds mile north of intersection of Route
                      171 and New Avenue, in Lockport Township, from I-3 and A-1 to I-3.
3328A-RM   4-19-1990  Rezoning single-family property in Frankfort Township, from C-4 to R-4.
3365-RM    4-19-1990  Rezoning west fifth of south 817.23 feet of west half of southwest quarter of
                      Section 14, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning part of west three-quarters of northwest quarter of Section 6, Township
3433-RMS   4-19-1990  35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2 with special use permit for private horse
                      arena.
                      Rezoning part of south 450 feet of east 340 feet of west half of west half of
3438-RMS   4-19-1990  Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from R-2 to C-3 with special use
                      permit for residence of proprietor.
3440-RMS   4-19-1990  Rezoning certain property in New Lenox Township, from A-1 to R-2 with special use
                      permit for floodplain development.
3442-RM    4-19-1990  Rezoning part of Lot 94 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lockport Farms, from
                      A-1 to R-1.
3444-RS    4-19-1990  Rezoning part of Lot 18 in County Clerk’s Subdivision of Steven and Page’s
                      Subdivision in Joliet Township, for special use permit for two-family dwelling.
3445-RM    4-19-1990  Rezoning parts of Lots 6 and 7 of subdivision lying east of center line of
                      Richton Road in Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3447-RS    4-19-1990  Rezoning part of Lot 57 in Arby Hills Subdivision in Section 6, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East, for special use permit for community residence facility.
                      Rezoning Parcel B of south 301.18 feet of north 1,625.86 feet of east half of
3448-RM    4-19-1990  southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-
                      2.
3453-RM    4-19-1990  Rezoning part of west half of southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 32 North,
                      Range 9 East, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 11
3455-RMS2  4-19-1990  East lying north of north line of premises conveyed to Public Service Company of
                      Northern Illinois, from A-1 to I-1 with special use permit for residence of
                      proprietor and for outdoor storage, with conditions.
3451-RM    5-17-1990  Rezoning part of west half of southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North,
                      Range 10 East, from A-1 to C-2.
3459-RM    5-17-1990  Rezoning east 300 feet of north 734.17 feet of northeast quarter of Section 36,
                      Township 36 North, Range 10 East, from A-2 to R-2.
3462-RS    5-17-1990  Rezoning Lots 53, 54 and part of 55 in Hobb’s Highland Woods, in Joliet Township,
                      for special use permit for community residence facility.
3463-RMSV  5-17-1990  Rezoning part of east half of southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 35 North,
                      Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3465-RM    5-17-1990  Rezoning property in Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 12 East, in Peotone
                      Township, from A-1 to I-2.
                      Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 13
3480-RSV   5-17-1990  East, in Monee Township, for special use permit for drive-in bank, with
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning east 303 feet of part of southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 36
3446-RS    6-19-1990  North, Range 10 East, for special use permit for retail sales of landscaping
                      products.
3466-RMV   6-19-1990  Rezoning four parcels of property in Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 9 East,
                      in Wilmington Township, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning south 571 feet, measured along west line, of part of northwest quarter
3341-RMV   6-21-1990  and of northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-
                      1 to E-2.
3385-RS2   6-21-1990  Rezoning 13.973 acres in Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, in New
                      Lenox Township, for special use permit for golf driving range, with conditions.
3467-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning part of west half of northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, in Homer Township, from A-1 to R-2.
3468-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning Lot 67 in Arthur T. McIntosh’s New Lenox Acres in New Lenox Township,
                      from R-2 to R-2A.
3470-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning south 252.5 feet of parcel in northwest quarter of Section 11, Township
                      35 North, Range 11 East, in New Lenox Township, from A-1 to R-2.
3471-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 3 and northwest quarter of Section
                      2, Township 33 North, Range 11 East, in Wilton Township, from I-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning Parcels 1 through 17 in the east half of northwest quarter in Section
3472-RS    6-21-1990  35, Township 35 North, Range 11 East for special use permit to develop lake in a
                      floodplain area.
3475-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning part of Lots 1 through 6 of subdivision of west half of northwest
                      quarter of Section 16, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3477-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning part of Section 8, Township 33 North, Range 12 East, in Peotone
                      Township, from A-1 to E-2.
3481-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning certain parcels of property in Green Garden Township, from A-1 to E-2.
3482-RM    6-21-1990  Rezoning north 180 feet of east 605 feet of southeast quarter of northeast
                      quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 13 East, from A-1 to E-2.
Res. 90-   6-21-1990  Map correction of official county zoning maps by rezoning Streamwood Estates
114                   Subdivision from A-2 to R-2A.
Res. 90-   6-21-1990  Correction of legal descriptions in Zoning Cases 3290-RM and 3291-RM.
115
3476-RS    7-19-1990  Rezoning Lot 138 and part of Lot 139
                      lying east of west line of Lot 138 extended north in McIntosh and Company’s
          8-16-1990  Addition to Lincoln Estates, in Frankfort Township, for special use permit to
                      allow Echo Housing.
3457-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning part of west 473.4 feet of part of southeast quarter of Section 7,
                      Township 34 North, Range 14 East, in Crete Township, from A-1 to R-2.
3458-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning west 473.4 feet of part of southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 34
                      North, Range 14 East, in Crete Township, from A-1 to C-1.
3496-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning part of west half of northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, in Homer Township, from A-2 to C-3.
3497-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning west 258 feet of east 706 feet of Lot 14 in Unit 4 in Reed’s Rolling
                      Meadow Farms, in Homer Township, from A-2 to R-2.
3498-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East, in New Lenox Township, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning three parcels in Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, in Homer
3499-RM3   8-16-1990  Township, from C-4 and A-1 to C-2 on first parcel; from C-4 and A-1 to R-2 on
                      second parcel; and C-4 and A-1 to C-3 on third parcel.
3503-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning part of southeast quarter of northeast quarter of Section 20, Township
                      33 North, Range 9 East, in Wilmington Township, from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning part of west half of southeast quarter lying east of west line of east
3505-RS    8-16-1990  28.50 acres of southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 11 East,
                      for special use permit for restricted landing area with conditions.
                      Rezoning northwest quarter of northwest quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North,
3506-RS    8-16-1990  Range 9 East, for special use permit for riding stables and horse training
                      facility with conditions.
                      Rezoning north half of Lot 9 in County Clerk’s Subdivision in northwest quarter,
3507-RS    8-16-1990  and west half of northeast quarter, of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East, for special use permit for retail sales of fishing equipment.
3508-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning part of west 376 feet of east 416 feet of south 975.80 feet of northwest
                      quarter of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3509-RM    8-16-1990  Rezoning west 169.5 feet of east 350 feet of south 296.75 feet of northwest
                      quarter of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning east 190 feet of west 620 feet of north 290 feet of west half of west
3511-RMS   8-16-1990  half of northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 9 East, from C-
                      3 to R-2 with special use permit for Echo Housing.
                      Rezoning part of Lot 37 and all of Lots 38 and 39 in George H. Munroe’s Addition
3514-RSV   8-16-1990  to Ridgewood Subdivision, in Joliet Township, for special use permit for multi-
                      family dwelling with conditions.
                      Rezoning west 503 feet of part of southwest quarter of northeast quarter of
3515-RMS   8-16-1990  Section 9, Township 33 North, Range 14 East, from A-1 to C-2 with special use
                      permit for construction of gallery and studio.
                      Rezoning part of north half of northeast quarter of Section 27, Township 34
3519-RS    8-16-1990  North, Range 11 East, in Manhattan Township, for special use permit to allow
                      boarding of horses.
3493-RM    9-20-1990  Rezoning west half of east half of southwest quarter of northwest quarter of
                      Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3494-RM    9-20-1990  Rezoning east 15 acres of west 25 acres of southwest quarter of southwest quarter
                      of Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-1 to R-2.
3500-RM    9-20-1990  Rezoning 9 acres in Joseph Laughton Reservation in Township 33 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-1 to E-2.
3520-RM    9-20-1990  Rezoning south 494.3 feet of east 220.31 feet of west half of southeast quarter
                      of Section 27, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3528-RS    9-20-1990  Rezoning 1.584 acres of northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range
                      9 East, in Plainfield Township, for special use permit.
3530-RS    9-20-1990  Rezoning Lot 15, Airport Industrial Park Unit 2, in New Lenox Township, for
                      special use permit for residence of proprietor.
3531-RM    9-20-1990  Rezoning part of northeast quarter of Section 7, Township 33 North, Range 13
                      East, in Will Township, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning part of south half of southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 33
3533-RS2   9-20-1990  North, Range 12 East, in Will Township, for special use permit for existing
                      residence and for Echo Housing.
Res. 90-   9-20-1990  Correction of legal description for case 3481-RM.
181
3526-RMV   11-15-1990 Rezoning north 726 feet of north 100 acres of Assessor’s Subdivision of northwest
                      quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-2 and E-2.
                      Rezoning part of south half of south half of east half of southwest quarter of
3535-RMS   11-15-1990 Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 13 East, in Monee Township, from A-1 to E-
                      2 with special use permit for group care home/half-way house, with conditions.
3537-RS    11-15-1990 Rezoning east six acres of west 15 acres of northeast quarter of northwest
                      quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from A-2 and R-2 to E-2.
3538-RMV   11-15-1990 Rezoning 1.344 acres in northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 35 North, Range
                      12 East, in Frankfort Township, from R-1 to R-2.
3541-RS    11-15-1990 Rezoning part of east half of northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North,
                      Range 10 East, for special use permit for floodplain development with conditions.
3550-RM    11-15-1990 Rezoning part of north 210.65 feet of south 2286 feet of east half of southwest
                      quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning north 220 feet of east 130 feet of northeast quarter of southeast
3552-RS    11-15-1990 quarter of Section 10, Township 34 North, Range 10 East for special use permit
                      for mini- warehouse.
3553-RMV   11-15-1990 Rezoning Lot 7 in School Trustees Subdivision in Section 16, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, from A-1 to E-1.
3554-RMSV  11-15-1990 Rezoning part of Lot 5 in Reading
          12-20-1990 Subdivision Unit One in Joliet Township, from C-6 to C-3 with special use permit
                      for outside storage with conditions.
3555-RM    11-15-1990 Rezoning two parcels in southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range
                      10 East, in Jackson Township, from A-1 to R-2A.
3557-RMV   11-15-1990 Rezoning part of west half of northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, in Homer Township, from R-2 to C-2.
3559-RS    11-15-1990 Rezoning two parcels in Lockport Township, for special use permit for heavy
                      equipment training facility with conditions.
3560-RS2   11-15-1990 Rezoning part of Lot 2 in School Trustees Subdivision, in Crete Township, for
                      special use permit for single-family home and tool shed.
3561-RMS   11-15-1990 Rezoning two parcels in Homer Township, from C-1 to C-2 with special use permit
                      for drive through restaurant.
                      Rezoning part of east half of northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36 North,
3564-RMS   11-15-1990 Range 11 East, in Homer Township, from C-2 to C-3 with special use permit for
                      automobile laundry.
3566-RS    11-15-1990 Rezoning two parcels in Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, in Homer
                      Township, for special use permit for automobile laundry with conditions.
3567-RM    11-15-1990 Rezoning south 300 feet of east 435.6 feet of southeast quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to C-1.
                      Rezoning west half of northwest quarter of northwest quarter of Section 11,
3517-RMS   12-20-1990 Township 36 North, Range 11 East, for special use permit for planned unit
                      development.
3542-RM    12-20-1990 Rezoning three parcels in New Lenox Township, from A-1 to R-2.
3563-RMS   12-20-1990 Rezoning part of south half of northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East, in Green Garden Township, from A-1 to E-2.
3568-RM    12-20-1990 Rezoning residential property in Section 23, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, in
                      Homer Township, from A-1 to R-3.
3569-RM    12-20-1990 Rezoning commercial property in Section 23, Township 36 North, Range 11 East, in
                      Homer Township, from A-1 to C-2.
3572-RM    12-20-1990 Rezoning part of northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North, Range 15
                      East, in Crete Township, from A-1 to R-2.
3573-RMV   12-20-1990 Rezoning two parcels in Lot 2 of Assessor’s Subdivision in Section 26, Township
                      33 North, Range 9 East, in Wilmington Township, from A-1 to R-2A.
3495-RMS   1-17-1991  Rezoning property in Manhattan Township from A-1 to R-2 with special use permit
                      for floodplain development.
                      Rezoning part of southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 35 North, Range 12
3575-RMS   1-17-1991  East, in Frankfort Township, from A-1 to E-2 with special use permit for
                      greenhouse.
                      Rezoning north 210 feet of west 210 feet of east half of west half of northwest
3576-RM    1-17-1991  quarter of northeast quarter of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 10 East, from
                      A-1 to R-2.
3577-RM    1-17-1991  Rezoning part of west half of southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East, in Homer Township, from C-1 to C-2.
                      Rezoning part of southeast quarter of southwest quarter of Section 21, Township
3581-RS    1-17-1991  34 North, Range 10 East, in Jackson Township, for special use permit for single-
                      family home.
3582-RM    1-17-1991  Rezoning two parcels in Section 29, Township 33 North, Range 13 East, in Will
                      Township, from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning part of southeast quarter of Section 28, Township 34 North, Range 13
3583-RS    1-17-1991  East, in Monee Township, for special use permit for restricted landing area with
                      conditions.
3586-RMV   1-17-1991  Rezoning various parcels in Crete Township, from A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning property in Wilton Township commencing at the northwest corner of the
3591-RMV   2-21-1991  southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 33 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3593-RMS   2-21-1991  Rezoning the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-6.
3594-RM    2-21-1991  Rezoning the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township
                      33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3597-RM    2-21-1991  Rezoning various parcels in Crete Township from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning the south 320 feet of the north 848 feet of the west 680.65 feet of the
3598-RM    2-21-1991  southeast quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
3565-RM    3-21-1991  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to I-1.
                      Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 21 and the northwest quarter of
3599-RMS8  3-21-1991  Section 28 in Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to E-2.
3604-RM    3-21-1991  Rezoning certain property from A-1 to E-2.
3605-RM    3-21-1991  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 20,
                      Township 33 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3587-RM    4-18-1991  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 7,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-1.
                      Rezoning the south 300.0 feet of the east 363.0 feet of the south half of Section
3603-RMS   4-18-1991  19, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      E-2.
                      Rezoning the east 330 feet of the west 990 feet of the north 660 feet of the east
3606-RM    4-18-1991  half of the northeast quarter of Section 29, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of
                      the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning the north 258.71 feet of the west 256.71 feet of the northwest quarter
3612-RMS   4-18-1991  of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to C-2.
3613-RMV   4-18-1991  Rezoning a seven-acre parcel from A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning the east 150 feet of the west 966 feet of the south 392.67 feet of the
3618-RM    4-18-1991  southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range
                      10 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
3622-RM    4-18-1991  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter and the northeast quarter of Section 10,
                      Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-2.
                      Rezoning the south 996 feet of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section
3614-RM    5-16-1991  2, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      E-2.
                      Rezoning the south 614.68 feet of the east half of Lot 15 of the Assessor’s
3626-RMV   5-16-1991  Subdivision of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-2.
3628-RM    5-16-1991  Rezoning part of the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township
                      35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from R-3 to I-1.
                      Rezoning the west 8.1652 chains of those parts of Lots 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 in
3634-RM    6-20-1991  Assessor’s Subdivision of Lot 4k in the Assessor’s Subdivision of the southeast
                      quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 15 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to R-3.
                      Rezoning a parcel of land in the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
3636-RM    6-20-1991  Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to E-2.
3640-RM    6-20-1991  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 9
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning the north 400.00 feet except the easterly 279.95 feet and the westerly
3642-RM    6-20-1991  220.00 feet thereof, of Lots 2 and 3 in the subdivision of the west half of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from R-1 to R-2.
3645-RM    6-20-1991  Rezoning two parcels in Homer Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the east 460.00 feet of the south half of the south half of the north
3624-RMV   7-18-1991  half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the south half of the south half of the north half of the northeast
3625-RMV   7-18-1991  quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian from A-2 to E-2.
                      Rezoning the south 368 feet of the north 936 feet of the west 594 feet of the
3629-RMS2V 7-18-1991  southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North,
                      Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
3633-RMS3V 7-18-1991  Rezoning two parcels of land in Joliet Township from R-1 to I-1.
3646-RMS   7-18-1991  Rezoning Lots 7 and 8 in County Clerk’s Subdivision from A-2 to R-2.
                      Rezoning part of the west 1,160.00 feet of the east 1,510.00 feet of the
3647-RM    7-18-1991  southwest quarter of Section 18, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian from R-1 to I-1.
3648-RM    7-18-1991  Rezoning the southwest quarter of Section 28k Township 35 North, Range 10 East of
                      the third principal meridian from R-1 to I-2.
                      Rezoning the north two acres of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
3654-RM    7-18-1991  Section 6, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2.
3655-RMV   7-18-1991  Rezoning part of Lot 5, in Bover’s Subdivision from R-2 to C-3.
                      Rezoning the south 208.71 feet of the east 208.71 feet of the south half of the
3656-RM    7-18-1991  southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 35 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the east 396 feet of the south 550 feet of the south 60 acres of the
3660-RS    7-18-1991  south half of the southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 37 North, Range 9
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning the south 453.75 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of
3663-RM    7-18-1991  Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to C-2.
Res. 91-   7-18-1991  Parcels 8-22-203-002 and 003, described as Lots 3 and 4 in New Lenox Heights Unit
174                   #1, are hereby zoned C-1.
3666-RMS   8-15-1991  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to I-2.
3667-RM    8-15-1991  Rezoning part of lot in Goden’s Subdivision of Raccoon Grove Reservation from A-
                      1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning the east 327.63 feet of the west 655.25 feet of the northwest quarter of
3670-RM    8-15-1991  the southwest quarter of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-2 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the north 570.82 feet of the east 313.6 feet of the west 337 feet of the
3674-RMV   8-15-1991  east half of the northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 35 North, Range 9 East
                      of the third principal meridian from R-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the north 472.03 feet and also the west 20 feet south of the north
3677-RMV   8-15-1991  472.03 feet of the east half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning the west 300 feet of the east 900 feet of the north 726 feet of the
3679-RM    8-15-1991  northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township 36 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 and C-1 to E-1.
3681-RM    8-15-1991  Rezoning part of Laughton’s reservation in Township 33 North, Range 11 East of
                      the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3683-RM    8-15-1991  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 30,
                      Township 33 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning the east 200.00 feet of the north 544.50 feet of the west half of the
3684-RM    8-15-1991  northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3692-RM    8-15-1991  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 7, Township 34 North, Range 14
                      lying east of the center line of King Road from A-1 to R-1.
3650-RM    9-19-1991  Rezoning the north 663.82 feet of the east 520 feet of Section 12, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-3.
                      Rezoning the north half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
3651-RM    9-19-1991  Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-4.
3685-RMV   9-19-1991  Rezoning parcels in Troy Township from C-3 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the south 324.86 feet of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter
3687-RMS2  9-19-1991  of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      from R-2 to C-2.
3690-RMV   9-19-1991  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
3696-RMV3  9-19-1991  Rezoning four parcels of property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-3.
3697-RMSV  9-19-1991  Rezoning Lots 1 and 2 in Block 16 in Bonnie Brae Unit No. 3 from R-5 to R-6.
                      Rezoning the south 165.405 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter and the
3713-RMV   11-21-1991 north 165.59 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter excepting therefrom
                      the east 526.42 feet in Section 35, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
3714-RM    11-21-1991 Rezoning three tracts of property located in Will Township from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3689-RMSV, rezoning part of the south half of the northeast quarter
3689-RMSV  1-16-1992  of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian
                      from A-1 to I-2 with a special use permit for outdoor storage with six
                      conditions.
                      Zoning case 3736-RS2, rezoning the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter and
3736-RS2   1-16-1992  the southeast quarter of Section 22, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian for a special use permit for a polo club and a special use
                      permit for a golf driving range with two conditions.
                      Zoning case 3744-RM, rezoning the south 285 feet of the west 176.27 feet of the
3744-RM    1-16-1992  south 567.91 feet of that part of Lot 5 in Assessor’s Subdivision of the
                      southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from C-1 to C-2.
                      Zoning case 3678-RM(A), rezoning part (except for the south 204.41 feet of the
                      west 376.16 feet) of the south 16.375 chains (1,080.75 feet) of the north 18.875
                      chains (1,245.75 feet) of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter lying
3678-RM(A) 2-20-1992  west of the east 15 chains and 41 and a half links (1,017.9 feet) of the south
                      16.375 chains southwest quarter (except the east 250 feet) and also the south
                      66.00 feet of the north five acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest
                      quarter (except the east 250 feet) in Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3678-RM(B), rezoning the south 204.41 feet of the west 376.16 feet of
                      the part of the south 16.375 chains (1,080.75 feet) of the north 18.875 chains
                      (1,245.75 feet) of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter lying west of
3678-RM(B) 2-20-1992  the east 15 chains and 41 and a half links (1,017.39 feet) of the southwest
                      quarter and the south 66.00 feet of the north five acres of the northeast quarter
                      of the southwest quarter (except the east 250 feet) in Section 26, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3738-RS, rezoning of four tracts in Homer Township in Section 28,
3738-RS    2-20-1992  Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-
                      2 and a special use permit for a planned unit development with four conditions.
                      Zoning case 3739-RMS, rezoning the west half of the northeast quarter of Section
3739-RMS   2-20-1992  13, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      R-4 and a special use permit for a planned unit development with four conditions.
                      Zoning case 3743-RM, rezoning the east 58.0 acres of the northeast quarter of
3743-RM    2-20-1992  Section 19, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-2A.
3745-RM    2-20-1992  Zoning case 3745-RM, rezoning two parcels in Washington Township of Section 28,
                      Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3748-RS, rezoning part of the west 521.93 feet of the east half of
3748-RS    2-20-1992  the west half of Section 8, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian for a special use permit for outdoor storage equipment with
                      conditions.
                      Zoning case 3749-RM, rezoning the west 311.0 feet, as measured on the south line
3749-RM    2-20-1992  of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3752-RM, rezoning commencing at the southwest corner of the northeast
3752-RM    2-20-1992  quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian in Wilmington Township from A-1 to E-1.
                      Zoning case 3753-RS, rezoning Lots 56, 57 and half of 72 in Murphy Acres Estates,
3753-RS    2-20-1992  Unit 3 of Subdivision of part of the east half, southwest quarter of Section 1,
                      Township 35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian for a special use
                      permit for an illuminated sign.
                      Zoning case 3757-RMV, rezoning all of Lots 1 and 8 and the north 112 feet of Lot
3757-RMV   2-20-1992  9 in Goddard’s Subdivision of the north part of the southeast quarter of
                      Cenegewine Reserve all in Township 33 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian from A-1 to E-1.
3758-RMV   2-20-1992  Zoning case 3758-RMV, rezoning two parcels in Crete Township, Section 7, Township
                      34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian from A-2 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3754-RMSV, rezoning the east six acres of an irregular parcel located
3754-RMSV  3-19-1992  in the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 28, Township 33
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to C-1 with a
                      special use permit for a mini-warehouse.
                      Zoning case 3756-RMS, rezoning the west 368.25 feet of the east 934.00 feet of
3756-RMS   3-19-1992  the north 354.87 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 35 North,
                      Range 9 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2 with a special use
                      permit for Humane Society kennel with conditions.
                      Zoning case 3759-RS, rezoning the north 336.0 feet of the south half of the
3759-RS    3-19-1992  northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian for a special use permit for storage of commercial vehicles
                      with conditions.
                      Zoning case 3760-RS, rezoning the east half of the south half of the southeast
3760-RS    3-19-1992  quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian for a special use permit for community residence
                      with conditions.
                      Zoning case 3761-RM, rezoning the east 290.00 feet of the north 315.00 feet of
                      the east half of the southeast quarter and the east 96.00 feet of the south 29.00
3761-RM    3-19-1992  feet of the north 344.00 feet of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from
                      A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3762-RM, rezoning the east 290.00 feet of the north 855.01 feet of
3762-RM    3-19-1992  the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian with exceptions from A-1 to R-1.
                      Zoning case 3764-RM, rezoning Lot 1 except the eastern third in Arthur T.
3764-RM    3-19-1992  McIntosh and Company’s Lincoln Estates, a subdivision of the west half of the
                      west half of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian from R-2 to R-2A.
                      Zoning case 3765-RS, rezoning Lot 7 in Robert Bartlett’s Home Acres, a
                      subdivision of part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 9, and
3765-RS    3-19-1992  part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East of the third principal meridian for a special use permit for a
                      wedding chapel with conditions.
                      Zoning case 3766-RM, rezoning two parcels in Manhattan Township both in Section
3766-RM    3-19-1992  11, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to
                      E-2.
                      Zoning case 3767-RM, rezoning the south 410 feet of the north 650 feet of the
                      tract of land described as a portion of the southeast quarter of Section 2,
3767-RM    3-19-1992  Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian lying east of
                      the easterly right-of-way line of County State Aid Route 72 (New Lemont Road)
                      from A-1 to E-2.
                      Zoning case 3768-RM, rezoning the north 660 feet of the east 330 feet (except the
3768-RM    3-19-1992  east 20 feet) of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township
                      34 North, Range 15 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Zoning case 3770-RM, rezoning three parcels in Joliet Township in Section 22,
3770-RM    3-19-1992  Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian from R-2 and C-
                      1 to C-2.
                      Rezoning the east 74 feet of the north 272.25 feet of the west 1,064 feet of the
3773-RMV   4-16-1992  west half of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from R-5 to C-1.
                      Zoning case 3775-RS2, rezoning Unit 9 in Sky Corp. Industrial Park Condominium
3775-RS2   4-16-1992  for a special use permit for an indoor skateboard facility with retail sales with
                      conditions, a special use permit for residence of caretaker with conditions
3811-RM    6-16-1992  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3824-RM    6-16-1992  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to E-1.
3825-RM    6-16-1992  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
Res. 92-   6-18-1992  Zoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 2, Township 35 North, Range 10
120                   East as C-5.
3774-RMV   6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East from R-4 to C-3.
3778-RMS2  6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the south half of Section 12 and part of the north half of
                      Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 East from R-5 to C-1.
3802-RMV   6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township
                      36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to R-2.
3804-RMSV  6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the south half of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 10 East
                      from R-3 to C-3.
3805-RMV2  6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to R-2A.
3806-RM    6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East from A-1 to R-2A.
3809-RM    6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 32 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to E-1.
3810-RM    6-18-1992  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East from A-1 to R-3.
3814-RMV   6-18-1992  Rezoning part of Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2.
3792-RMV   8-20-1992  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 37 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to E-1.
3818-RMS   8-20-1992  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East from A-1 to R-1.
3819-RM    8-20-1992  Rezoning part of Sections 23 and 26, Township 35 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to
                      E-2.
3820-RMV   8-20-1992  Rezoning two parcels of property in Section 31, Township 33 North, Range 13 East
                      from A-1 to E-2.
3827-RMS   8-20-1992  Rezoning part of Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to C-4.
3828-RMV   8-20-1992  Rezoning part of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 15 East, from A-1 to E-2.
3829-RMV2  8-20-1992  Rezoning part of Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-2 to E-2.
3832-RMV   8-20-1992  Rezoning part of Township 35 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to I-1.
3835-RMS   9-17-1992  Rezoning different parcels of property from A-1 to R-2A.
3844-RMV2  9-17-1992  Rezoning part of Township 34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to E-2.
3849-RM    9-17-1992  Rezoning part of Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from R-2 to C-6.
3850-RMS   9-17-1992  Rezoning part of Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to C-6.
3857-RMV   9-17-1992  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East from A-1 to R-2.
3850-RMS   11-19-1992 Rezoning part of the southeast quarter in Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to C-6.
3859-RMV2  11-19-1992 Rezoning part of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
3870-RM    11-19-1992 Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to R-2A.
3872-RM    11-19-1992 Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 33 North, Range 14
                      East from A-1 to R-2.
3873-RM    11-19-1992 Rezoning part of Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to C-6.
3878-RMV   11-19-1992 Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 33 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning part of the southeast and southwest quarters of Section 29, and
3880-RMS   11-19-1992 northeast and northwest quarters of Section 33, all in Township 33 North, Range 9
                      East from I-1 to C-6.
3826-RMV   12-17-1992 Rezoning part of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2.
3885-M     12-17-1992 Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 9
                      East from R-1 and R-2 to E-2.
3889-RMV   1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest half of Section 7, Township 33 North, Range 15
                      East.
3890-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 13
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3894-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2.
3895-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to E-1.
3896-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to E-1.
3901-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 33 North, Range 13
                      East from A-1 to R-1.
3902-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East, from A-1 to R-1.
3903-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Range 9 East from A-1 to I-
                      1.
3904-RM    1-21-1993  Rezoning part of Section 16, Township 32 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to E-2.
3886-RM    2-18-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3893-RM    2-18-1993  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East from A-1 to R-2A.
3900-RMS2  2-18-1993  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range 13
                      East from R-2 to C-2.
3914-RM    2-18-1993  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 14
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3854-RMS   3-18-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to I-1.
3905-RM    3-18-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3906-RM    3-18-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 14
                      East from R-3 and A-1 to R-2A.
3909-RM    3-18-1993  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East from R-5 to I-2.
3911-RM    3-18-1993  Rezoning certain property in Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-
                      1 to R-2.
3920-RMS   3-18-1993  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to C-1.
3921-RMV2  3-18-1993  Rezoning two parcels of land in the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East from A-2 to E-2.
3922-RMS   3-18-1993  Rezoning part of Section 23, Township 37 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to I-1.
3924-RMS   3-18-1993  Rezoning part of the southeast quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East from A-2 to E-2.
3923-RMS   4-15-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 15
                      East from A-1 to R-2.
3925-RMV   4-15-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 34 North, Range 13
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3928-R     4-15-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East from A-1 to C-1.
3929-RMV2  4-15-1993  Rezoning parts of Sections 9 and 10 of Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-
                      2 to R-1.
3930-RM    4-15-1993  Rezoning parts of Sections 9 and 10 of Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-
                      2 to R-2.
3931-RM    4-15-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East, from A-2 to R-2.
3932-RMV   4-15-1993  Rezoning part of Section 32, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to R-2.
3933-RMV   4-15-1993  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10
                      East from A-1 to R-2.
3936-RMV2  4-15-1993  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
3939-RMV2  4-15-1993  Rezoning parts of the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 6 North, Range 11
                      East from A-2 to R-1.
3888-RMS   5-20-1993  Rezoning the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 29, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the north 720.0 feet and the south 180.00 feet of the east 605.00 feet,
3939-RM    5-20-1993  also the north 255.0 feet of the south 435.00 feet of the east 430.00 feet, of
                      the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East from A-1 to E-2.
3940-RM    5-20-1993  Rezoning part of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township
                      36 North, Range 10 East from A-1 to I-2.
3941-RM    5-20-1993  Rezoning the east 150 feet of the south one-third of the east half of the
                      southeast quarter in Township 35 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-2.
Res. 93-   5-20-1993  Amending an ordinance adopted and approved May 21, 1992 - Case No. 3769-RMSV5.
106
                      Rezoning Lots 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
3910-RM    6-17-1993  28, 29, 30 in the Stadtler Ridge Estates Subdivision, of the northwest quarter of
                      the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from R-2 to
                      R-3.
                      Rezoning the east 86 feet of the north 272.25 feet of the west 1150 feet of the
3942-RM    6-17-1993  west half of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East from R-5 to C-1.
3943-RS    6-17-1993  Granting a SUP for an Herbal Health Center in Green Garden Township.
3944-RM    6-17-1993  Rezoning part of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 32 North, Range 9
                      East from A-2 to R-2.
3945-RM    6-17-1993  Rezoning the south 654.25 feet of the south half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 14, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2.
3946-RMV   6-17-1993  Rezoning the north 811.27 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 19, Township
                      34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 35, and that part of the east half of the southeast quarter of the
3950-RM    6-17-1993  southeast quarter of Section 26, lying south and west of the gravel road running
                      in a northwesterly and southeasterly direction through the southeast quarter of
                      Section 26, known as Bruce Road, all in Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-
                      1 to R-2.
3954-RM    6-17-1993  Rezoning Lot 10 in Goddard’s Subdivision of part of the southeast quarter of
                      Cenagewine Reservation from A-1 to R-1.
3955-RS    6-17-1993  Granting a SUP to expand nonconforming total three unit in Lockport Township.
Res. 93-   6-17-1993  Technical map correction to the official zoning maps.
125
3888-RMS   7-15-1993  Granting a SUP for floodplain development with conditions.
3917-RMV4  7-15-1993  Rezoning property in Joliet Township from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning Lot 39 of the east 65.73 feet of Lot 40 and Lot 41 except the north
3918-RM    7-15-1993  73.55 feet, the east 65.73 feet of then north 73.55 feet of Lot 41 and all of Lot
                      42 in the School Trustee’s Subdivision, in Section 16, Township 32 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 to R-2.
3951-RSV   7-15-1993  Granting a SUP for floodplain development in Troy Township.
3956-RM    7-15-1993  Rezoning part of the north half of Section 29, Township 33 North, Range 9 East
                      from A-1 to R-2.
3959-RS2   7-15-1993  Granting a SUP for storage of commercial vehicles and equipment with conditions.
                      Rezoning the west 330 feet of the west 660 feet of the north 660 feet of the
3961-RM    7-15-1993  southwest fractional quarter of Section 32, fractional Township 34 North, Range
                      15 East from A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning Lot 1, in Green Garden Subdivision, being the south 208.71 feet of the
3962-RMS2  7-15-1993  east 208.71 feet, of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 14 North,
                      Range 12 East from C-5 to C-2.
3953-RS    8-19-1993  Granting a SUP for liquor in Peotone Township.
3959-RS2   8-19-1993  Granting a SUP for outdoor storage of commercial vehicles and equipment with
                      conditions.
3965-RMS   8-19-1993  Rezoning part of the west 20 chains of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to R-1.
3966-RMS   8-19-1993  Rezoning part of the west 20 chains of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to R-1.
3967-RMV   8-19-1993  Rezoning the east five acres of the northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
3969-RM    8-19-1993  Rezoning the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 34
                      North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2.
3953-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP for the sale of alcoholic beverages with conditions.
3970-MS    9-16-1993  Rezoning the north 595.06 feet of the south 1970.06 feet of the west half of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range 13 East from A-1 to I-1.
3972-MS    9-16-1993  Rezoning part of Lot 1, in the subdivision made by the school trustee of Section
                      16, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
3973-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP for floodplain development with conditions.
3974-RM    9-16-1993  Rezoning the west 332 feet of the north half of the northwest quarter of Section
                      13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-2.
3975-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP for floodplain development with conditions.
3976-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP for a contractor’s yard in an industrial area with conditions.
3979-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP for lawn and leisure sale and service with conditions.
3980-RS    9-16-1993  Rezoning two parcels of land located in Washington Township from A-1 to E-1.
                      Rezoning the south 208.71 feet of the north 417.42 feet of the east 248.71 feet
3981-RM    9-16-1993  of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East from A-1 to R-3.
3982-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district with the condition that E-2-
                      2 zoning district use restrictions be applied.
3984-RMSV  9-16-1993  Rezoning the south 165 feet of the north 515 feet of the west 660 feet of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to I-1.
3985-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP for a law office with conditions.
3986-RS    9-16-1993  Granting a SUP to construct a development rehabilitation center with conditions.
                      Rezoning the west 325 feet of the east 535 feet of the south 613.2 feet of Lot 2
3988-RM    10-21-1993 in the subdivision by Charles E. Boyer of the northwest fractional quarter of
                      Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2.
3990-RM    10-21-1993 Rezoning the easterly 173.68 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 7, Township
                      37 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to R-1.
                      Rezoning the east 720 feet of the south 605 feet of the west half of the
3968-RM    11-18-1993 southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-
                      2.
                      Rezoning the north 165 feet of the east 423 feet of the south 378 feet of the
3983-RMV2  11-18-1993 northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 36 North,
                      Range 10 East from A-1 to R-1.
3991-RSV   11-18-1993 Granting a SUP for Echo Housing with conditions.
3992-RS    11-18-1993 Granting additional conditions to the SUP.
3993-RM    11-18-1993 Rezoning the east half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to R-1.
3994-RM    11-18-1993 Rezoning two parcels located in Manhattan Township from A-1 to E-2.
3999-RS    11-18-1993 Granting a SUP for a commercial landscape business with conditions.
4000-RS    11-18-1993 Granting a SUP for floodplain development with conditions.
3992-RS    12-16-1993 Granting a SUP for floodplain development with conditions.
4003-RMV   12-16-1993 Rezoning the west 100.4 feet of the east 542.2 feet in the southwest quarter of
                      Section 26, Township 34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to R-1.
4005-RS    12-16-1993 Granting a SUP to allow for the boarding of two horses on Lot 26 in Winterset
                      Haven.
4009-RMS   12-16-1993 Rezoning the west 20 acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-3.
4011-RS    12-16-1993 Granting a SUP for Echo Housing.
4006-RS    1-20-1994  Granting a SUP for the replacement of a destroyed mobile home with a modular
                      home.
4007-RMV2  1-20-1994  Rezoning the north half of the east half of the west half of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to E-2.
4014-RM    1-20-1994  Rezoning Lots 15 through 18 in Township 33 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
4015-RM    1-20-1994  Rezoning part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 34, Township
                      34 North, Range 14 East from A-1 to R-1.
                      Rezoning the west 472.36 feet of the north 388.8 feet of the northeast quarter of
4020-RM    1-20-1994  the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-2 to
                      C-1.
4021-RM    1-20-1994  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 11
                      East from A-1 to E-2.
4013-RS    2-17-1994  Granting a SUP for a Billiard Parlor on Lot 53, 54 and 55 in Block 1, of Arthur
                      T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincolnwood.
                      Rezoning the south 309.70 feet of the east 160 feet of the west half of the east
4019-RMS   2-17-1994  half of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 356 North, Range 11 East
                      from A-1 to C-1.
4022-RS    2-17-1994  Granting a SUP for producing concrete lawn ornaments for that part of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 32 North.
                      Rezoning the east 913 feet of the west 1,245 feet of the north half of the
4024-RM    2-17-1994  northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East from A-1 to E-
                      2.
                      Granting a SUP for Echo Housing on the east 913 feet of the west 1245 feet of the
4027-RS    2-17-1994  north half of the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East in Jackson Township.
                      Rezoning the west five acres of the north 45 acres of the west half of the
3964-RMS   3-17-1994  northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to R-
                      2A.
4017-RM    3-17-1994  Rezoning the south 290 feet of the east half of the east half of the southeast
                      quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 11 East from R-2 to C-2.
4025-RM    3-17-1994  Rezoning the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 35 in Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East from A-1 to C-2.
4026-RM    3-17-1994  Rezoning the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 35 North,
                      Range 11 East from A-1 to R-2A.
4030-RM    3-17-1994  Rezoning the north quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 31, Township 35 North, Range 11 East from A-1 to I-2.
4037-RS    3-17-1994  Granting SUP to Lot 1 in Block 56 in Frankfort Square Unit 15 to allow operation
                      of a home dog grooming business.
4038-RS    3-17-1994  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
                      Granting SUP for a drive-in restaurant for the east 215 feet of the south 198.14
4040-RS    3-17-1994  feet of the north 429.42 feet of the south 1,059.86 feet of the east half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 11 East.
4034-RMS   4-21-1994  Rezoning a planned unit development from E-1 and A-1 to E-1 with a special use
                      permit.
                      Rezoning a tract of land in the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 4,
4035-RMV5  4-21-1994  Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third prime meridian containing 50.67
                      acres from A-1 to E-2.
4039-RM    4-21-1994  Rezoning part of the southwest fractional quarter of fractional Section 28,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
4043-RMV   4-21-1994  Rezoning that part of the set half of the northwest quarter of Section 6,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A the Plainfield Township property in the northwest
4045-RM    4-21-1994  quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 that part of east half of northwest quarter of Section
4048-RM    4-21-1994  25, lying south of center line of Chicago and Bloomington State Road, in Township
                      36 North, Range 11 East of third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning the east 300 feet of the 465 feet of the south 726 feet of the southwest
4012-RMV   5-19-1994  quarter of Section 1, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2, with a special use, Lot 8 (except the north 176.79 feet
                      thereof) and (except the east 372 feet thereof lying north of a line drawn 30
4029-RMS   5-19-1994  feet north of and parallel with the south line of Lot 8) together with the east
                      half of Lot 7 (except the north 176.79 feet thereof), all the above being in the
                      Assessor’s Subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 4, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4032-RMS   5-19-1994  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 with a SUP a part of the northeast quarter of Section
                      15, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning the south 164.24 feet of the north 328.45 feet of the west half of the
4041-RM    5-19-1994  southwest quarter of Section 17 Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to I-2.
                      Granting a SUP, with conditions, for floodplain development in that part of the
4047-RSV2  6-16-1994  northwest quarter and the southwest quarter of Section 3, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4058-RS    6-16-1994  Granting SUP for automotive repair facility with conditions for Lot 18 in Airport
                      Industrial Park Unit #Two.
                      Rezoning two parcels of land from A-1 to E-2. The first one is the east 195 feet
                      of the west 565 feet of the north 820 feet of the east half of the northwest
4059-RM    6-16-1994  quarter, and the second is the east 300 feet of the west 300 feet of west 370
                      feet of north 400 feet of east half of northwest quarter of Section 24, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4060-RM    6-16-1994  Rezoning the part of north 1050 feet of east half of northwest quarter of Section
                      12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of third principal meridian from A-1 to C-2.
4061-RM    6-16-1994  Rezoning Lot 60 in Waterford Place Unit Two from C-4 to R-4.
                      Granting a SUP for Echo Housing on the property on the west 328.67 feet of the
4065-RS    6-16-1994  east 1,129.67 feet lying north of the south 1,320 feet of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Granting a SUP for property in Wheatland Township described as the west 240 feet
4062-RS    7-21-1994  of the north 941 feet of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 21, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A with a SUP (granted on 9-15-1994) the northwest quarter
                      of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the
4068-RMS   7-21-1994  third principal meridian together with the southwest quarter of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 16, (excepting therefrom the south 42 rods thereof), all in
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Granting a rezoning for the east quarter of Lot 3, and the west 328.56 feet of
4072-RM    7-21-1994  Lot 2, the east quarter of Lot 6, and the west half of Lot 7, in the Assessor’s
                      Subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2A.
                      Rezoning the west 720 feet of the south 20 acres of the west half of the
4074-RM    7-21-1994  southwest quarter of Section 2, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of The third
                      principal meridian from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2, property located at that part of the west half of the
4075-RMV   7-21-1994  southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian beginning at the point in the south line
                      329 feet east of the southwest corner thereof.
4073-RS    8-18-1994  Special use approved for Aunt Martha’s Youth Service Center, Inc.
                      Granting map amendment from A-1 to E-2 along with a SUP for that part of
4085-RMS   8-18-1994  southwest quarter of southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East of third principal meridian described as commencing at the southwest corner
                      and containing 2.500 acres more or less.
                      Granting a SUP for the east 200 feet of west 734.73 feet of south 1089 feet of
4087-RS    8-18-1994  southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of third
                      principal meridian.
                      Granting a SUP for property commencing at northwest corner of the northwest
4089-RS    8-18-1994  quarter of Section 17, Township 33 north, Range 12 East of the Third Principal
                      meridian.
4096-RS    8-18-1994  Granting a SUP for the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township
                      33 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to C-2 that part of the southeast quarter of Section 14, and
4082-RM    9-15-1994  the northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian beginning at a point in the west line.
                      Granting map amendment from A-2 to C-1 on two parcels. Parcel 1 is the north
                      378.5 feet of east 316.7 feet of northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of third principal meridian together with the west 28.6 feet
4083-RM    9-15-1994  of north 378.5 feet of northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 36 North, Range
                      11, East of third principal meridian. Parcel 2 is the north 330.46 feet of east
                      207.1 feet of west 235.7 feet of northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of third principal meridian.
                      A map amendment with a SUP for two parcels from A-1 and R-2 to C-3. Parcel 1 is
                      located in the west half of southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 36 North,
4084-RMS   9-15-1994  Range 11 East of third principal meridian except therefrom the west 160 feet of
                      south 595 feet. Parcel 2 is the west 160 feet of south 595 feet of southeast
                      quarter of Section 15, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of third principal
                      meridian.
                      Granting a SUP for that part of northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36
4088-RS    9-15-1994  North, Range 9 East of third principal meridian beginning at a point on west
                      line.
                      Amending from A-1 to R-1 the property at the west 514.56 feet of the east 1065.56
4090-RM    9-15-1994  feet of north 436 feet of the north half of northeast quarter of Section 7,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East of third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A the east 144 feet of the north 500 feet of the
4092-RM    9-15-1994  northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A that part of the north 1832.31 feet of the northeast
4093-RM    9-15-1994  quarter of Section 7,Township 34 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Granting a SUP for duplex on Lot 4, in Block 18, in Runyon’s Addition to
4098-RSV2  9-15-1994  Lockport, being a subdivision in Section 14, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Lot 130 (except the north 100 feet thereof) and Lot 131 (except the north 100
                      feet thereof) in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Addition to Lincoln Estates
4054-RM    10-20-1994 being a subdivision of part of the east half of Section 23, Township 35 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian are granted rezoning from R-2 to C-
                      2 and special uses.
4070-RMS3  10-20-1994 Granting rezoning with a special use to a banquet hall for Michael Ragain from A-
                      1 to C-1.
                      Granting a SUP to the west 100 feet of the east 539.83 feet of the north 135 feet
4081-RS1   10-20-1994 of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 32 North, Range
                      9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from C-3 to I-1 and granting a SUP to Parcel 1 and 2. Parcel 1 is the
                      south 400 feet of west 310 feet, except south 320 feet of west 277 feet thereof,
4091-RMS   10-20-1994 of southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of third
                      principal meridian. Parcel 2 is the south eight acres of south three quarters of
                      west half of west half of southwest quarter of Section 27 in Township 33 North,
                      Range 9 East of third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from E-2 to R-2 the property located at the west 220 feet of the north
4099-RM    10-20-1994 495 feet of the west 20 acres of the north 60 acres of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 the north 500 feet of the west 200 feet of the northwest
4100-RS    10-20-1994 quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 10 East
                      of third principal meridian.
                      Granting map amendment from A-1 to R-1 the west half of northwest quarter and
                      west half of east half of northwest quarter, except the north 2,548.14 feet of
4102-RM    10-20-1994 west 589.45 feet and north 549.47 feet of east 454.18 feet of west 1043.68 feet
                      and north 499.81 feet of east 871.48 feet of west 1915.12 feet of northwest
                      quarter, all in Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 11, East of third principal
                      meridian.
                      Granting a map amendment from A-1 to R-1 for a parcel of land located on the west
4104-RM    10-20-1994 330 feet of the east 660 feet of the south 396 feet of the south half of the
                      southwest quarters of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      The west 528 feet of north 330 feet of Lot 6, in Section 24, Township 36 North,
4112-RMS   10-20-1994 Range 11 East of Third Prime Meridian is rezoned from A-1 to E-2 along with a
                      SUP.
                      Rezoning from I-1 to I-2 that part of northeast quarter of Section 26, Township
4115-RM    10-20-1994 35 North, Range 10 East of third principal meridian beginning at a point in north
                      right-of-way line.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the following two parcels. Parcel 1 is the north 726
                      feet of the west 1,200 feet of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section
                      34, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian containing
4066-RM    11-17-1994 20 acres more or less. Parcel 2 is the east 726 feet and the north 726 feet of
                      the west 507 feet of the east 1,233 feet (excepting therefrom the west 33 feet of
                      the east 933 feet of the north 726 feet) of the northwest quarter of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian containing 30 acres more or less.
                      Rezoning from A-1 R-4 and granting a SUP for a tract of land in the northwest
4069-RM    11-17-1994 quarter of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian, lying north of the Indian Boundary Line.
                      Granting a SUP to stay as A-1 with conditions for the south 300 feet of the east
4109-RS    11-17-1994 455 feet of the north half of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 33
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-3 to A-1 the north 20 acres of that part of northwest quarter of
4110-RM    11-17-1994 Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of third principal meridian, lying
                      west of east 48 acres of north 108 acres of northwest quarter of Section 12.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2, two parcels of land, the first being the east 598 feet,
                      excepting south 1,116 feet thereof, of the east half of southeast quarter of
4116-RM    11-17-1994 Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of third principal meridian. Parcel
                      2 is the south 515 feet, excepting east 830 feet thereof, of east half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of Third Prime
                      Meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 330 feet of west 1,650 feet of south 660 feet
4117-RM    11-17-1994 of south half of southwest quarter of Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of third principal meridian.
                      Granting map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for the north half of north half of
4120-RM    11-17-1994 southeast quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of third
                      principal meridian (excepting therefrom the north 242 feet of west 180 feet of
                      east 1,120 feet thereof).
                      Granting a SUP with conditions to the north half of northwest quarter of
4111-RM    12-15-1994 northwest quarter lying north of south 680 feet and west of east 840 feet and
                      south of property conveyed to Joliet and Southern Traction Company.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 330 feet of west 1,326 feet of north 660 feet
4121-RM    12-15-1994 of northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of third
                      principal meridian.
4124-RS    12-15-1994 Granting a SUP for the sale of alcohol at Carillon Golf Club.
4107-RS2   1-19-1995  Granting a SUP to the Phillips Petroleum Company.
4127-RS    1-19-1995  Granting a SUP to construct a residence alongside a business.
4128-RM    1-19-1995  Granting map amendment from A-2 to R-3 on that part of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 217, Township 34 North, Range 20 East of the third principal meridian.
4129-RM    1-19-1995  Granting map amendment from A-2 to A-1 on that part of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 217, Township 34 North, Range 20 East of the third principal meridian.
4131-RS    1-19-1995  Granting SUP for floodplain development in Channahon Township.
4113-RS3   2-16-1995  Granting a SUP for a tract of land in northeast quarter of northwest quarter of
                      Section 22, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of Third Prime Meridian.
                      Granting SUP for floodplain development to the east 296.85 feet of west 736.85
4130-RS    2-16-1995  feet (excepting therefrom the south 580 feet) of northeast quarter of northeast
                      quarter of Section 27, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-1 to C-1 the north 250 feet of south 482 feet of west 522.72 feet
4132-RM    2-16-1995  of northwest quarter of southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East of third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-2 that part of the east 320 feet of west 852.5 feet of
4133-RM    2-16-1995  south 794.17 feet of west half of southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East of third principal meridian, lying north of the right-of-way
                      line of Laraway Road.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the east 368 feet of the west 1,270 feet of the south
4136-RMV   2-16-1995  354 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 the east 161 feet of the west 268.09 feet of the north
4137-RM    2-16-1995  339.39 feet of the east half of the west half of the north half of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the north 330 feet of the east 660 feet of the northeast
4139-RM    3-16-1995  quarter of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4144-RM    3-16-1995  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 that part of the northwest quarter of Section 4,
                      Township 34 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Granting a SUP to allow the west 100 feet of the east 539.83 feet of the north
4081-RSV   4-20-1995  135 feet of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 32
                      North, Range 90 East of the third principal meridian to remain in A-1 Zoning
                      Ordinance with conditions.
4135-RSV   4-20-1995  Allowing a request for a SUP for a community residential facility for an seven-
                      acre parcel located in Crete Township.
4138-RS    4-20-1995  Granting SUP with conditions for a veterinary facility for the treatment of
                      horses only.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-1 the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
4141-RM    4-20-1995  Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      except for a strip of land.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-1 the south 467 feet of the north 1,615 feet of the west
4145-RM    4-20-1995  467 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter, Section 13, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-3 and A-1 to R-1 and granting a SUP to the south 153.50 feet of
                      the north 449.50 feet of the east 252.50 feet of the northeast quarter of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 9, East of the third
4147-RMSV  4-20-1995  principal meridian; and the south 343.83 feet of the north 689.83 feet of the
                      west 147.44 feet of the east 399.94 feet, excepting therefrom the south 153.50
                      feet of the north 449.50 feet of the east 252.50 feet thereof, of the northeast
                      quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 9 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4150-RM    4-20-1995  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 that part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2A property in Homer Township, the north 146-35 feet
4153-RM    6-15-1995  (except the south 23.35 feet) of Lot 15, in Unit No. 4, in Reed’s Rolling Meadow
                      Farms.
                      Rezoning from I-2 to I-3 the Seeler Lease Area in Joliet Township, parts of
4171-RMS   6-15-1995  northwest quarter of Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 property in Monee Township, the east 330.0 feet of the
4154-RM    7-20-1995  west 660.0 feet of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township
                      34 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 property in Green Garden Township, the south half of the
4155-RM    7-20-1995  east half of the northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian.
4164-RM    7-20-1995  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the following property in Green Garden Township:
                    (A) Parcel 1: A part of the northwest quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                    (B) Parcel 2: The part of the northwest quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 property in Wilmington Township, that part of the
4168-RM    7-20-1995  southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from I-1 to C-3 property in Wheatland Township, that part of the north
4152-RMS   8-17-1995  908.0 feet of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4151-RMS   8-17-1995  Rezoning from R-3 to C-6 in Crete Township, that part of the south half of
                      Section 28, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A in Wheatland Township, that part of the northwest
4156-RM    8-17-1995  fractional quarter of Section 31, Township 37 north, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4157-RM    8-17-1995  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A in Crete Township, that part of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 14, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Homer Township, the west half of the northwest
4159-RM    8-17-1995  quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 property in Green Garden Township, the east 660 feet of
4175-RM    8-17-1995  the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 34 Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from C-3 and I-1 to I-1 in Homer Township, Lot 1, in Annico Professional
4160-RMS   9-21-1995  Complex, being a subdivision of part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 14, Township 36 north, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Homer Township, the east half of the west half of the
4176-RMS   9-21-1995  northeast quarter of Section 17, and the west half of the east half of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 37 North and Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from E-2 to R-2 in New Lenox Township, that part of Parcel 2 of the
4181-RM    9-21-1995  southeast quarter of the northwest quarter, the northeast quarter of the
                      southwest quarter and the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
                      11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4184-RM    9-21-1995  Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 in Lockport Township, commencing on the south line of
                      Section 28, Township 36 North, Range 10, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township, the south half of the
4189-RM    9-21-1995  southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 in Wilton Township, Lots 5 and 6 in Block 10 in the
4188-RM    9-21-1995  Village of Wallingford, a subdivision in the northeast quarter of Cenagewine
                      Reserve.
4196-RMS   9-21-1995  Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Wilton Township, that part of the southeast quarter
                      of Section 9, Township 33 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 in Lockport Township, that part of the west half of the
4197-RM    9-21-1995  southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Will Township, commencing at a point on the east line
4198-RM    9-21-1995  of the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in New Lenox Township, that part of the south three-
4178-RM    10-19-1995 quarters of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 35
                      North, Range 11, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to C-3 in New Lenox Township, Lot 10 in Arthur T. McIntosh and
4179-RM    10-19-1995 Company’s New Lenox Farms, Unit No. 2, being a subdivision of part of the
                      southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4186-RMS   10-19-1995 Rezoning from A-2 to C-3 in Homer Township, the following parcels:
                      (A) Parcel 1: The north 25 acres of the northeast quarter of the southeast
                    quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 22 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      (B) Parcel 2: The south 15 acres of the northeast quarter of the southeast
                    quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      (C) Parcel 3: The west 15 acres of the north 55.57 acres of the west 141.50 acres
                    of the southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 in Homer Township, the west 550 feet of the following
4205-RM    10-19-1995 described property, that part of the north 1,050.00 feet of the east half of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11, East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-4 in Frankfort Township, the southwest quarter of the
4167-RMS   11-16-1995 southeast quarter of Section 22 excepting the south 248 feet of the east 380
                      feet, in Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoned from A-1 to R-2A in Troy Township, the east half of the southeast
4219-RM    11-16-1995 quarter, Section 6, Township 35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4177-RMV   12-21-1995 Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Homer Township, in two parcels:
                    (A) Parcel 1: (4.655 acres) The west ten feet of the East 210 feet of the south
                      603.50 feet of Lot 2.
                    (B) Parcel 2: (1.530 acres) The north 660.00 feet of the south 1,887.00 feet of
                      the west 101 feet of the east 565 feet of Lot 2.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township, Lot 14 of Harvest Hills, Unit
4193-RMV2  12-21-1995 #2, a subdivision of part of the north half of the southeast quarter and the
                      southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 34 North, Range
                      12, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township, the west half of the northwest
4212-RM    12-21-1995 quarter, and the north 328.72 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 36,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-3 in Frankfort Township, that part of the northwest
4218-RMS   12-21-1995 fractional quarter, north and south of the Indiana Boundary Line, (except the
                      East 40 acres thereof) of Section 333, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Crete Township, the southeast quarter of the
4226-RM    12-21-1995 southwest quarter (excepting therefrom the west 986.32 feet) of Section 35,
                      Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Washington Township, the south 590.0 feet of the west
4230-RM    12-21-1995 440.0 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 22, Township 33 North, Range 14
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-6 to I-1 in Plainfield Township, that part of the northwest
4232-RMS   12-21-1995 quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Washington Township, the north 545.26 feet of that
4210-RM    1-18-1996  part of the north half of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 33 North,
                      Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from C-2 to C-6 in Joliet Township, the north 212 feet of the south 378
4235-RMS4  1-18-1996  of the east 205 feet of the west 510 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 25,
                      Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4236-RM    1-18-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Custer Township, that part of the north half of
                      Section 11, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4238-RM    1-18-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in DuPage Township, that part of Section 6, Township 37
                      North, Range 20, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Custer Township, that part of the east half of the
4134-RMS   2-15-1996  southwest quarter and the southeast quarter of Section 27, Township 32 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4194-RM    2-15-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 in Joliet Township, the north 208.71 feet of that part
                      of Lot 3 in the Crescent Stone Company’s Subdivision.
4203-RM    2-15-1996  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 in Green Garden Township, the following parcels:
                    (A) Parcel 1: The north 1976.45 feet of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      (B) Parcel 2: The south 1811.45 of the north 1976.45 feet of the east half of the
                    southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      (C) Parcel 3: The south 1,646.45 feet of the north 1,976.45 feet of the east half
                    of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      (D) Parcel 4: The part lying north of a line drawn parallel and 172.0 feet north
                    of the south line of the south 1,481.45 feet of the north 1,976.45 feet of the
                      east half of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Crete Township, the east quarter of the south half of
4211-RM    2-15-1996  the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to E-2 in Crete Township, that part of the west 473.4 feet of
4246-RM    2-15-1996  that part of the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 34 North, Range 14,
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 in Homer Township, the east 615.76 feet of the southeast
4250-RM    2-15-1996  quarter of the southwest (except the north 687.08 feet thereof and except the
                      south 530.56 feet thereof) in Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Crete Township, the south 360 feet of the north 740
4253-RM    2-15-1996  feet of the west 605 feet of the south half of the fractional northwest quarter
                      of Section 1, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Crete Township, that part of the east half of the
4266-RM    2-15-1996  southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34 north, Range 14 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4227-RM    3-21-1996  Rezoning from A-2 to R-1 in Homer Township, that part of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Green Garden Township, the east third of the
4241-RM    3-21-1996  following described parcel: The 36.83 acres of the north half of the northwest
                      quarter (except the 10.00 acres thereof) of Section 1, Township 34 North, Range
                      12, East of the third principal meridian.
4247-RM    3-21-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Florence Township, that part of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 11, East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in New Lenox Township, a parcel of land in the northeast
4254-RMV   3-21-1996  quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4260-RM    3-21-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Joliet Township, that part of the east half of
                      Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 in Homer Township, the east half of the west half of the
4264-RM    3-21-1996  north half of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Will Township, the south half of the northwest
4267-RMV   4-18-1996  quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 33 North, Range 13 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4268-RM    4-18-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Wheatland Township, the following property:
                      (A) Parcel 1 (F): The west 286 feet of the east 1,000 feet of the south 209 feet
                    of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      (B) Parcel 2 (G): The west 286 feet of the east 714 feet of the south 209 feet of
                    the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4119-RM    5-16-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Peotone Township, the southwest quarter of Section
                      22, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from C-2 to C-3 in Homer Township, that part of the west 30 acres of the
4271-RMS2  5-16-1996  west half of the southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 14, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 in Homer Township, the north 45 acres (except that part
4272-RM    5-16-1996  dedicated for road by instrument dated January 15, 1930 and recorded July 29,
                      1932 as document 459381) of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 24,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-3 in Homer Township, the north 45 acres (except that part
4273-RMS   5-16-1996  dedicated by instrument dated January 25, 1930 and recorded July 29, 1932 as
                      document 459381) of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 24,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Washington Township, the west 1,320.0 feet of the
4280-RM    5-16-1996  south half of the southwest quarter of Section 29, Township 33 North, Range 14
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Crete Township, all that part of the south 233.0 feet
4284-RM    5-16-1996  of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range
                      14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township, the north 477 feet of the set
4286-RM    5-16-1996  half of the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Green Garden Township part of the North Half of the
4285-RS    6-20-1996  northwest quarter of Section 18 Township, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-2 in Green Garden Township part of the northeast quarter
4288-RMS2  6-20-1996  of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-4 to C-3 in H.A. Sanger’s Subdivision part of the southwest
4289-RMV2  6-20-1996  quarter and the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 10 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Homer Township the east 219 feet of the north 528
4290-RM    6-20-1996  feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning from R-3 to C-2 in Lockport Township a tract of land in the northeast
4291-RM    6-20-1996  quarter of Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 20 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 and I-1 to C-4 in Wilmington Township property commencing at
4298-RMV   6-20-1996  the southeast corner of Section 8, Township 22 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4078-RMS   7-24-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Green Garden Township part of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4257-RM    7-24-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Florence Township:
                    (A) Part of the northeast quarter of Section 29, Township 33 North, Range 10
                      East; and
                    (B) Part of the northwest fractional quarter, north of the Indian Boundary Line,
                      of Section 28, Township 33 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Florence Township the south part of the northwest
4258-RM    7-24-1996  fractional quarter, north of the Indian Boundary Line of Section 28, Township 33
                      North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Homer Township a parcel of land in the north half of
4276-RM    7-24-1996  the northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4295-RM    7-24-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 in Homer Township part of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 in Lockport Township part of the east half of the
4297-RM    7-24-1996  northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Wesley Township part of the west half of the
4300-RM    7-24-1996  northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4302-RM    7-24-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Homer Township part of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 22 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-5 to C-4 in Joliet Township Lots 77, 78, 79 and 80 in Mapleboro
4306-RMV   7-24-1996  part of the southwest quarter of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township part of the North Half of the
4307-RM    8-15-1996  southwest quarter of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4308-RM    8-15-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to C-1 in Green Garden Township part of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4309-RM    8-15-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township part of the southeast quarter
                      of Section 2, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4173-RM    9-19-1996  Rezoning from R-2 to A-1 in Wilmington Township part of the north half of Section
                      29, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4174-RM    9-19-1996  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Wilmington Township part of the north half of Section
                      29, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4281-RM    9-19-1996  Rezoning from R-1 to R-2 in Frankfort Township part of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 20, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Florence Township part of the south half of the
4293-RM    9-19-1996  southeast quarter of Section 28, Township 33 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4325-RM    9-19-1996  Rezoning from C-3 to R-2A in Wheatland Township part of Section 16, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4261-RM    10-17-1996 Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Jackson Township part of Section 15, Township 34
                      North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4331-RM2   10-17-1996 Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 in Lockport Township part of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 19, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Jackson Township part of the east half of the
4333-RM    10-17-1996 northwest quarter of Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4336-RM    10-17-1996 Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A part of the north half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 28, Township 35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4385-RMSV3 10-17-1996 Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 20 Township, 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4313-RMS   11-21-1996 Rezoning from R-1 to C-4 in Monee Township part of Section 10, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-2 in Joliet Township part of the west half of the
4316-RM    11-21-1996 northeast quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Monee Township part of the northeast quarter of the
4356-RM    1-16-1997  southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Will Township part of the southwest quarter of the
4359-RM    1-16-1997  southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4125-RMS2  2-20-1997  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Homer Township part of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 35, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Green Garden Township part of the southwest quarter
4365-RMV   2-20-1997  of the southeast quarter in Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4374-RMV   2-20-1997  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 property in Homer Township.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Will Township part of the north half of the northwest
4326-RM    3-20-1997  quarter of Section 1, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4369-RM    4-17-1997  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 Lot 8 in Homer Township part of Section 16, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in New Lenox Township part of the southwest quarter of
4379-RS    4-17-1997  the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4382-RM    4-17-1997  Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 in Custer Township part of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-1 to R-2 in Frankfort Township part of the southwest quarter of
4384-RM    5-15-1997  Section 5, and part of the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 35 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Manhattan Township part of the northeast quarter of
4389-RM    5-15-1997  the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4221-RS2   6-19-1997  Granting SUP for Echo Housing with two conditions.
4366-RSV   6-19-1997  Granting SUP for a public utility.
4383-RS    6-19-1997  Granting SUP for outdoor storage of fuel and commercial vehicles with six
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Custer Township the south 634 feet of that part of
4388-RM    6-19-1997  the north half of the northeast quarter of Section 30, Township 32 North, Range
                      10 East of the third principal meridian.
4395-RS    6-19-1997  Granting SUP for floodplain development with seven conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Homer Township that part of the north 100 acres of
4402-RMV   6-19-1997  the Assessor’s Subdivision of the northwest quarter of Section 8, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4415-SV4   6-19-1997  Granting SUP for government storage building.
4311-S2    7-17-1997  Granting SUP for automobile repair shop with five conditions.
4391-RSV   7-17-1997  Granting SUP with condition to construct a garage.
4392-RS    7-17-1997  Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,440 square feet to 3,410 square
                      feet.
4393-RS    7-17-1997  Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,152 square feet to 3,200 square
                      feet.
4394-RS    7-17-1997  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-6 in Joliet Township the west 205 feet of the east 705
4398-RM    7-17-1997  feet of that part of the northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North,
                      Range 10 East and part of the northwest quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 in Lockport Township beginning at the southwest corner
4399-RM    7-17-1997  of the southwest quarter of Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Homer Township the north 587.9 feet of the west
4400-RM    7-17-1997  quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4403-RS    7-17-1997  Granting SUP for floodplain development with the six conditions listed.
4404-S     7-17-1997  Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,152 square feet to 1,570 square
                      feet.
4406-S     7-17-1997  Granting SUP for a telecommunications reception and transmission facility.
4407-S     7-17-1997  Granting SUP to operate a dog kennel.
4408-S     7-17-1997  Granting SUP to allow the operation of children’s day care home.
4411-S2    7-17-1997  Granting SUP for outdoor storage.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Homer Township the north 613.5 feet of the south
4368-RMV   8-21-1997  1,227 feet of the west 355 feet of the east 355 feet of Lot 2 in subdivision by
                      Charles E. Boyer.
4410-S     8-21-1997  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with four conditions.
4412-S     8-21-1997  Granting SUP for outdoor storage in the I-1 zoning district with one condition.
4414-S     8-21-1997  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
4420-S     8-21-1997  Granting SUP for floodplain development with three conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Wesley Township the east two acres of the northeast
4435-MV    8-21-1997  quarter of Lot 12 in the subdivision of Section 16, Township 32 North, Range 10
                      East and the east half of the southeast quarter of Lot 12 in the subdivision of
                      Section 16, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Will Township the west 180 feet of the east 540 feet
                      of the south half of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section
4359-RM    9-18-1997  30, Township 33 North, Range 13 East and the east 424 feet of the southwest
                      quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 33 North, Range 13 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4416-S     9-18-1997  Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,440 square feet to 2,649 square
                      feet with six conditions.
4419-S     9-18-1997  Granting SUP to allow the operation of a retail furniture store (C-2 Commercial)
                      within the I-1 zoning district with two conditions.
4421-S     9-18-1997  Granting SUP for residence of caretaker.
4423-S     9-18-1997  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
4424-S     9-18-1997  Granting SUP for auto repair facility in an I-1 zoning district.
4426-S     9-18-1997  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Crete Township the east 487 feet of the north 590
4425-M     10-16-1997 feet of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 26, Township 34 North,
                      Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
4427-SV    10-16-1997 Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,152 square feet to 2,200 square
                      feet.
4428-S     10-16-1997 Granting SUP to remain in A-1 zoning district.
                      Granting SUP to remain in A-1 zoning district with less than ten acres. Res. 98-
4429-S     10-16-1997 97 adopted on 4-16-1998 grants extension of SUP. Res. 98-97, adopted 4-16-1998
                      grants extension of SUP for 180 days.
                      Granting SUP to construct a garage for additional storage from 1,440 square feet
4432-S     10-16-1997 to 3,684 square feet with seven conditions. Res. 98-50 extends time period for
                      180 days.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township the north 1335.52 feet of the
4433-M     10-16-1997 west half of the northeast quarter of Section 33, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian.
4436-S     10-16-1997 Granting SUP to allow operation of an irrigation business on an R-2 lot with ten
                      conditions.
4443-S     10-16-1997 Granting SUP for floodplain development with conditions listed.
4430-MS2V  11-20-1997 Granting SUP for proprietor residence and SUP for outdoor storage with five
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning from R-1 to C-2 in Lockport Township Lot 1 in plat of County Clerk’s
                      Subdivision of the south half of the southeast quarter and part of the southeast
4437-MV    11-20-1997 quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 12 and part of the north 20 acres of
                      the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4439-S     11-20-1997 Granting SUP for an automobile repair shop.
4441-S2    11-20-1997 Granting SUP for self service storage facility with six conditions. (Amended by
                      Res. 04-386, adopted 9-16-2004).
4442-S2    11-20-1997 Granting SUP for stabling of horses with four conditions.
4444-S     11-20-1997 Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district for a parcel less than ten
                      acres in size.
4446-S     11-20-1997 Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,152 square feet to 2,265 square
                      feet with conditions.
4447-M     11-20-1997 Rezoning from R-3 to I-2 in Joliet Township that part of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4450-S2    11-20-1997 Granting SUP to operate a landscaping business with four conditions and granting
                      SUP for outside storage of vehicles and equipment with one condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in New Lenox Township the north 300 feet of the
4467-M     11-20-1997 southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 35 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian.
4413-S     12-18-1997 Granting SUP for paintball game activities for limited recreational use with nine
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Custer Township the south 1030.60 feet of (the east
4449-M     12-18-1997 half of the northwest quarter and the west 577.42 feet of the northeast quarter)
                      except the west 1,689 feet thereof, in Section 33, Township 32 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian.
4453-S     12-18-1997 Granting SUP for additional storage space from 1,152 square feet to 1,892 square
                      feet with one condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Homer Township the west 425 feet of the north 45
4459-M     12-18-1997 acres of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to C-3 in Joliet Township that part of the southwest quarter of
4463-MS    12-18-1997 Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian and
                      granting SUP for outdoor storage with seven conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 in Homer Township the east 49,276 feet of the west
4466-M     12-18-1997 2,038.51 feet of the south 271 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 2,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4406-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP for telecommunications reception and transmission facility.
4454-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for a clubhouse with 12
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Crete Township the north 590 feet of the east half of
4457-M     1-15-1998  the southeast quarter of Section 26, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4458-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP for residence of proprietor with one condition.
                      Rezoning from C-6 to C-2 in Joliet Township the north 212 feet of the south 378
4460-M     1-15-1998  feet of the east 205 feet of the west 510 feet of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Monee Township with one condition that part of the
4464-M     1-15-1998  west half of the northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 13
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-3 in Green Garden Township the south 170 feet (except the
4465-M     1-15-1998  east 1,320 feet thereof) of the north half of the northwest quarter of Section
                      29, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4469-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP for a daycare home for children with one condition.
4470-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district on a parcel less than ten
                      acres.
4471-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP for an Echo Housing unit with five conditions.
4487-S     1-15-1998  Granting SUP for a planned unit development in the C-3 zoning district with three
                      conditions.
4472-S     2-19-1998  Granting SUP for floodplain development with seven conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Will Township a part of the northeast quarter of the
4473-M     2-19-1998  northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 33 North, Range 13 East and a part of
                      the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 33 North,
                      Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township the west 262.41 feet of the
4477-MV    2-19-1998  east 328.41 feet of the north 415 feet of the west half of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 11, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Homer Township the east 180 feet of the south half of
4480-M     2-19-1998  the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian.
4452-S2    3-19-1998  Granting SUP for landscaping business with six conditions and SUP for floodplain
                      development with six conditions.
4482-S     3-19-1998  Granting SUP for additional space from 1,152 square feet to 3,662 square feet
                      with two conditions.
4485-S     3-19-1998  Granting SUP for a land conservation office with three conditions.
4418-S2    4-16-1998  Granting SUP for operation of a concrete redi-mix plant with nine conditions and
                      SUP for outdoor storage.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A in Channahon Township that part of the west half of
4432-S     4-16-1998  Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 9 East and that part of the south fraction
                      of the west half of Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian and granting SUP for floodplain development.
4475-S3V   4-16-1998  Granting SUP for landscaping business and SUP for outdoor storage with three
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Crete Township all that part of the east 1,280.17
4481-M     4-16-1998  feet of the north two-thirds of the east fractional half (known as Lot 1 of
                      government survey) of fractional southwest quarter of fractional Section 19,
                      Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Washington Township the north 900 feet of the south
4483-M     4-16-1998  1031 feet of the west 726 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 1, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
4484-S     4-16-1998  Granting SUP for Echo Housing with three conditions.
4486-S     4-16-1998  Granting SUP for floodplain development with one condition.
4488-S     4-16-1998  Granting SUP to remain on a parcel less than ten acres in the A-1 zoning
                      district.
4489-S     4-16-1998  Granting SUP for retail sales within the I-1 zoning district with four
                      conditions.
                      Rezoning from R-3 to I-1 in Plainfield Township the south 120 feet of that part
4496-M     4-16-1998  of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4494-M     5-21-1998  Rezoning part of the east half of the northeast fractional quarter of Section 6,
                      Township 34 North, Range 9 East from A-1 to E-1.
4497-MSV   5-21-1998  Rezoning part of Lots 12 and 13 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincolnwood
                      Unit Number 2 from R-3 to C-2.
4499-M     5-21-1998  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of Section 32, Township 35 North, Range 9
                      East from A-1 To R-2.
4500-M     5-21-1998  Rezoning part of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 34 North, Range 10
                      East, from A-1 to C-2.
4501-M     5-21-1998  Rezoning part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East from R-2 and C-2 to C-2 and R-2.
4503-M     6-18-1998  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Crete Township the northwest quarter of the northwest
                      quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 14 East.
4504-MS2   6-18-1998  Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Green Garden Township part of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 12 East.
4505-2     6-18-1998  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Crete Township part of the west half of the northeast
                      quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 4 East.
                      Rezoning the north 605 feet of the west 180 feet of the east 360 feet of the
4506-M     6-18-1998  northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 34 North,
                      Range 14 East, from A-1 to E-2.
4507-M     6-18-1998  Rezoning from A-1 to C-3 in Crete Township part of the east half of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 14 East.
4510-MS    6-18-1998  Rezoning Unit No. 91, and the west nine feet of Unit No. 92 in Phelan Acres
                      Condominium, from C-1 to R-3.
                      Rezoning the south six acres of the east 411 feet of the west 661 feet of the
4468-MS    7-16-1998  south 1,059.85 feet of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 14,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East, from C-2 to R-6.
                      Rezoning Lot 2 in Berkshire Commerce Park, a subdivision of part of the north
4518-M     7-16-1998  fractional quarter, south of the Indian Boundary Line of Section 12, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East, from A-1 to C-2.
4519-M     7-16-1998  Rezoning two parcels of property commencing at the northwest corner of Section
                      12, Township 34 North, Range 14 East, from R-3 to R-2A.
4520-M     7-16-1998  Rezoning part of the northwest corner of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 14
                      East, from R-3 to A-2.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Crete Township the north 150 feet of the west half of
4527-MV    7-16-1998  the northeast quarter and the north 250 feet of the east 334 feet of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 14 East.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to R-1 in Homer Township Lot 1 in Larsen’s Subdivision, a
4528-MS    7-16-1998  subdivision of part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East.
4532-MV2   7-16-1998  Rezoning the north 300 feet of the east 1,017.80 feet of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 32, Township 33 North, Range 13 East, from A-1 to B-1.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 in Wilton Township the north 155 feet of the south
4539-M     8-20-1998  966.06 feet of the east 262 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 16, Township
                      33 North, Range 11 East.
4552-M     9-17-1998  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in New Lenox Township the south five acres of the east
                      half of the southeast quarter of Section 28 in Township 35 North, Range 1 East.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 in New Lennox Township part of the east half of the
4553-M     9-17-1998  southeast quarter of Section 14 and part of the east half of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 11 East.
4557-M     9-17-1998  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 various parcels of land in Frankfort Township.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Custer Township part of the west 700.84 feet of the
4569-M     9-17-1998  southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 32 North,
                      Range 10 East.
4476-MS    10-15-1998 Rezoning part of the south three-quarters of the southeast quarter of Section 7,
                      Township 34 North, Range 7 East.
4545-M     10-15-1998 Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the north 666.0 feet of the northeast quarter of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 33 North, Range 4 East.
4551-M     10-15-1998 Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Homer Township part of the northwest quarter of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 36 North, Range 11 East.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Homer Township the south 350 feet of the west 1,493
4555-MS    10-15-1998 feet of the south half of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East.
4775-MS2   10-15-1998 Rezoning property in Custer Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the north 550 feet of the south 797.5 feet of the west
4493-M     10-15-1998 465.96 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East.
4563-M     11-19-1998 Rezoning property in Monee Township from A-1 to E-1.
4568-MS    11-19-1998 Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 32
                      North, Range 9 East.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Peotone Township part of the southwest quarter of the
4517-MS    12-17-1998 northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4582-M     12-17-1998 Rezoning various parcels of land in Crete Township from E-1 to R-1.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Jackson Township part of the southwest quarter of the
4583-M     12-17-1998 southwest quarter of Section 25, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Jackson Township the east 4.5 chains of the south 5
4584-M     12-17-1998 chains of Lot 31, in the subdivision of Section 16, Township 34 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 in Manhattan Township part of the north half of the
4585-M     12-17-1998 northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4589-MV    12-17-1998 Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 in Homer Township part of Section 16, Township 36 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4594-MS2   12-17-1998 Rezoning parcels of land from C-2 to R-6.
4577-M     1-21-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in New Lenox Township part of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 16, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Green Garden Township part of the northeast quarter
4591-M     1-21-1999  of the northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4594-MS2   1-21-1999  Rezoning from C-2 to R-6 property in DuPage Township.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Crete Township part of the east half of the northwest
4597-MV    1-21-1999  quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4603-MS    2-18-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to I-2 in Frankfort Township part of Section 33, Township 38
                      North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 and I-1 to C-4 in Wilmington Township part of the southeast
4604-M     2-18-1999  quarter of Section 8, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Wilmington Township the south 1,350.95 feet of the
4605-M     2-18-1999  west 840.83 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range
                      9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Lockport Township the northwest quarter of the
4613-M     2-18-1999  northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 in Homer Township the north 290 feet of the east 200
4614-M     2-18-1999  feet of the west half of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4617-M     2-18-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 in Homer Township part of Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian.
4622-MSV   2-18-1999  Rezoning from A-1 and R-5 to E-1 in Crete Township part of the Township 34 North,
                      Range 15 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 in Jackson Township part of the northwest quarter of the
4595-M     3-18-1999  southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the west 237.91 feet of the north 270.00 feet of the
4606-S     4-15-1999  east half of the southeast quarter of Section 18, Township 34 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 in Will Township the east 560 feet of the north 380 feet
4621-M     4-15-1999  thereof, of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 33 North, Range 13 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to R-3 Lot 3 in County Clerk’s Subdivision of the northwest
4625-M     4-15-1999  quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian, with exceptions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the west 396 feet of the east 792 feet of the south 550
4631-MS    4-15-1999  feet of the southwest quarter of Section 27, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the north 222 feet of the south 585 feet of the east 600
4634-MV    5-20-1999  feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4636-M     5-20-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 a part of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township
                      33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
4637-M     5-20-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 a part of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township
                      33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 Lot 2 in Konow Korner, being a subdivision of part of
4640-M     6-17-1999  the northeast quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 a part of Lot 2 in the subdivision by Charles E. Boyer
4641-M     6-17-1999  of the northwest fractional quarter or Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to R-2A the easterly third of Lot 1 in Arthur R. McIntosh and
4651-M     6-17-1999  Company’s Lincoln Estates in the west half of the northwest quarter of Section
                      24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4629-MS    7-15-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter
                      of Section 13, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 the south 164.15 feet of the northeast quarter of
4654-M     7-15-1999  Section 19, and the north 33.00 feet of the southeast quarter of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4665-M     7-15-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 12, Township 34
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4666-M     7-15-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south half of the north half of the southeast
4667-M     7-15-1999  quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian, with exceptions.
4682-M     7-15-1999  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 32,
                      Township 35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 757.0 feet of the northeast quarter of the
4633-MV    8-19-1999  southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the east half of the west half of the southeast
4679-MS    8-19-1999  quarter of Section 19, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4681-MS    8-19-1999  Rezoning from R-3 to C-2 on the following parcels:
                    (A) The north 247.50 feet of the east 132.00 feet of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 11, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian; and
                    (B) The north 330.00 feet of the east 264.00 feet of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the north 500.00 feet of Lot 55 in the east half of
4686-MV    8-19-1999  Section 6 and the west half of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 east of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the north 330 feet of the south 660 feet of the east 660
4687-M     9-16-1999  feet of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 the south 571.0 feet of the east 253.84 feet of the west
4694-M     9-16-1999  503.83 feet of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 11,
                      Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 part of the east half of the west half of the northeast
4612-MS    10-21-1999 quarter of Section 5, Township 34 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the north 297 feet of the south 330 feet of the north
4635-MS    10-21-1999 1,650 feet of the west 366.67 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 36, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the easterly 382.33 feet of the northerly 533.35 feet of
4662-MV    10-21-1999 the southerly 1,103.05 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 the east 159.6 feet of the west 359.20 feet of the north
4693-MV    10-21-1999 165.5 feet of the south 2,446.9 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
4698-M     10-21-1999 Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, with
                      exceptions.
4706-M     10-21-1999 Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 part of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4699-MV    11-18-1999 Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 part of the west half of Section 5, Township 37 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-3 to A-1 Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Schumann’s third addition, being a
4700-M     11-18-1999 subdivision of the south 240 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
4701-M     11-18-1999 Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 part of the west half of Section 5, Township 37 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian, with exceptions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 the north 300 feet of the south 900 feet of the west
4702-M     11-18-1999 1,452 feet of that part of the northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4704-MV    11-18-1999 Rezoning from A-2 to R-2A three parcels of Lot 3 in Section 16, Township 34
                      North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from I-1 to I-2 the east 240.0 feet of the west 480.0 feet of the north
4709-MS    12-16-1999 941.0 feet of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 330 feet of the south 660 feet of the southwest
4710-M     12-16-1999 quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 33 North, Range 12 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4712-M     12-16-1999 Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the east half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 2, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south 900.00 feet of the west half of the northwest
4716-M     12-16-1999 quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 12 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4738-M     12-16-1999 Rezoning from C-4 to I-1 part of the northeast quarter of Section 31, Township 33
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 and R-2 to E-2 the east 190.02 feet of the west 325.02 feet of
4714-MS2V  1-20-2000  the south 687.74 feet of the east half of the east half of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 2, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 169.5 feet of the west 847.5 feet of the south
4715-MV    1-20-2000  half of the southwest quarter of Section 35, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the west 40 rods of the north half of the northwest
4719-M     2-17-2000  quarter of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4723-M     2-17-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 19, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-1 to I-2 Lot 5 in Reed’s Crest of Hill Estates, a subdivision of
4726-M     2-17-2000  that part of the east half of the north half of Section 23 lying east of the
                      center line of U.S. Highway Route 66-A, and of part of the northwest quarter of
                      the third principal meridian.
4729-M     2-17-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 two parcels in the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 27, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south 370.0 feet of the west 295.0 feet of the east
4731-M     2-17-2000  670.0 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 29, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian, in Green Garden Township.
4689-M     3-16-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 three parcels in the northeast quarter of Section 10,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-3 the north 314.106 feet of the south 1151.03 feet that
4713-MS    3-16-2000  lies west of the west right-of-way line of the Wabash Railroad, in Section 34,
                      Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4737-M     3-16-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 8, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4742-MS    3-16-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 part of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36
                      North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-1 to A-1 six parcels of property located in the east half of the
4746-M     3-16-2000  northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4749-M     3-16-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 the north 500.00 feet of the west 505.50 feet of the
4750-M     3-16-2000  northwest quarter of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the north half of the northwest quarter of the southwest
4752-M     3-16-2000  quarter excepting the easterly 375.00 feet of Section 9, Township 37 North, Range
                      9 East of the third principal meridian.
4753-M     3-16-2000  Rezoning from E-1 to A-1 the south half of the west half of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 28, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4756-MSV   3-16-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 that part of the north 666.43 feet of the south 841.43
4736-MV    4-20-2000  feet of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south 331.18 feet of the north 1655.86 feet of the
4757-MV    4-20-2000  east half of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from C-3 to I-2 Lot 1 in E.M.S. Subdivision, a subdivision of part of
4759-MV    5-18-2000  the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
4760-M     5-18-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 property located in Homer Township.
4763-MS    5-18-2000  Rezoning from I-1 to C-4 the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 21, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4766-M     5-18-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 34
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 the easterly 382.33 feet of the northerly 533.35 feet of
4768-MS    5-18-2000  the southerly 1103.05 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 37
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4761-M     6-15-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 an approximately 3.1-acre parcel located on the
                      northeast corner of Steger Road and Route 45 in Frankfort Township.
                      Rezoning from C-2 to C-3 Lot 53 in Robert Bartlett’s Meadowood, being a
4775-MV    6-15-2000  subdivision of the southwest quarter and part of the northwest quarter of Section
                      7, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the southeast quarter of the Reservation for
4778-M     7-20-2000  Joseph Laughton as shown in the government survey of the fractional Township 33
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-1 to R-2 the east half of the south half of the south half of the
4785-M     7-20-2000  north half of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 5,
                      Township 30 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from C-2 to R-3 Lot 65 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lockport
4789-M     7-20-2000  Farms, being a subdivision of parts of Section 13 and 14, Township 36 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4791-M     7-20-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 19, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4792-M     7-20-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 part of the southeast quarter and the northeast quarter
                      of Section 8, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4793-M     7-20-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 27, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 part of the south five acres of the north ten acres of
4780-MS    8-17-2000  the south three-quarters of the west half of the west half of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4799-M     8-17-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 35,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-3 to C-2 Lot 226 in Windermere Subdivision Unit No. 3, a
4803-M     8-17-2000  subdivision of part of the north half of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian.
4804-M     8-17-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to C-6 the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 2, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4806-M     8-17-2000  Rezoning from E-2 to R-3 three parcels located in Homer Township.
4810-M     9-21-2000  Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 15, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 the east 207.8 feet of the north 268.00 feet of Lot 3 in
4812-MV    9-21-2000  the subdivision of Section 16, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4813-MS    9-21-2000  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 part of the west half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of Lots 32, 38 and all of 34, 35, 36, 37, 43 in the
4824-M     10-19-2000 subdivision of Section 15, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4829-M     11-16-2000 Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 property located in Green Garden Township.
4830-M     11-16-2000 Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 two parcels located in Green Garden Township.
4835-M     11-16-2000 Rezoning from A-1 to C-3 three parcels located in Joliet Township.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 part of the west 740.82 feet of the west half of the
4838-MS    11-16-2000 southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 and A-2 to I-2 the south 438.13 feet of the north 617.88 feet
4854-M     11-16-2000 of the east half of the southeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 35,
                      Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the north half of the southeast quarter of
4817-MS    12-21-2000 Section 14, lying south of the Indian Boundary Line, in Township 34 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian.
4840-MV    12-21-2000 Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 two parcels located in Homer Township.
4846-M3S3  12-21-2000 Rezoning property from A-1 to C-3; A-l to R-3; and A-1 to R-6.
4848-MV    12-21-2000 Rezoning from R-2 to C-1 part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4849-MS    12-21-2000 Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 part of the east half of the north half of Section 23,
                      Township 37 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from I-2 to C-2 the south 551.35 feet of the west half of the southwest
4858-M     12-21-2000 quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the east 386.50 feet of the west 1143.00 feet of the
4859-M     12-21-2000 south 471.00 feet of the north 1,152.00 feet of the northwest quarter of Section
                      10, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
4860-M     1-18-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4862-M     1-18-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to C-6 the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 22,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A the north 100 feet of that part of the northwest
4867-MV3   1-18-2001  quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 20, Township 36 North, Range 9 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
4882-MV    1-18-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the south 311.40 feet of the north 900.00 feet of the
                      east 532.40 feet of the northeast quarter.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the east 300 feet of the south 190 feet of the northeast
4873-M     2-15-2001  quarter of Section 3, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 Lot 2 in Olofsson Subdivision, a subdivision of part of
4890-M     3-15-2001  the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 Parcel II commencing at the northeast corner of the
4893-M     3-15-2001  south half of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 18,
                      Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from E-2 to A-1 the south 590 feet of the east 255 feet of the west 440
4903-MV    4-19-2001  feet of the southeast quarter of Section 22, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the south 494.92 feet of the west half of the southwest
4904-M     4-19-2001  quarter of Section 35, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south 576.00 feet of the north 1,152.00 feet of the
4905-M     4-19-2001  west 756.50 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-6 to C-2 (Lot 65) and C-5 to C-2 (Lot 66) in the Highlands of
4907-MV    4-19-2001  Frankfort Unit No. 1, being a subdivision of part of the south half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 165 feet of the north half of the northwest
4909-M     4-19-2001  quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4920-M     4-19-2001  Rezoning from C-4 to I-1 part of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36
                      North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
4891-S     5-17-2001  Granting SUP for a dog kennel with three conditions.
4916-SV    5-17-2001  Granting SUP to operate a tack and feed store with one condition.
4918-S     5-17-2001  Granting SUP for a self-storage facility with seven conditions.
4949-S     5-17-2001  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with three conditions.
                      Correcting a scrivener’s error in Case Number 2685-R: Rezoning a parcel of land
Res. 01-              beginning at an iron pipe 14 feet east of the northwest corner of the southeast
176        5-17-2001  quarter of Section 25, Township 36 North, Range 9 East from R-3 to C-1 with a
                      special use for banquet hall and a special use for ancillary liquor and special
                      use for residence of proprietor.
Res. 01-   5-17-2001  Approving 180-day extension for SUP approved as Case Number 4627-SV.
177
4895-S2    6-21-2001  Granting SUP for a landscape waste recycler with five conditions and outdoor
                      storage of materials with three conditions.
4917-S     6-21-2001  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with one conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south 26 acres of the east half of the southwest
4921-MV    6-21-2001  fractional quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
4923-S     6-21-2001  Granting SUP for floodplain development with two conditions.
4925-S     6-21-2001  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with two conditions.
4928-S     6-21-2001  Granting SUP for campground/resort with nine conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the east 726 feet of the east half of the southeast
4931-MV    6-21-2001  quarter of Section 26, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4932-M     6-21-2001  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 a part of the northwest quarter of Section 8, Township
                      37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4933-S     6-21-2001  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with two conditions.
4937-S     6-21-2001  Granting SUP for sale of liquor with three conditions.
4935-S     7-19-2001  Granting SUP for floodplain development with two conditions.
4936-SV    7-19-2001  Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district with one condition.
4938-S2    7-19-2001  Granting SUP for car wash and restaurant with drive-in window.
4939-S     7-19-2001  Granting SUP for accessory structure without principal structure with five
                      conditions.
4944-M     7-19-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 a part of the northwest quarter of Section 25, Township
                      35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4945-S     7-19-2001  Granting SUP for Echo Housing with two conditions.
4913-M     8-16-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to C-1 a part of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 a part of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township
4914-MS    8-16-2001  34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian; and granting SUP for a
                      planned unit development.
4924-S     8-16-2001  Granting SUP for outdoors storage in I-1 zoning district with two conditions.
4929-S     8-16-2001  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with five conditions.
4947-MS    8-16-2001  Rezoning from A-2 to C-2 the south 457.8 feet of the southwest quarter of Section
                      14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4953-S     8-16-2001  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with three conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 two parcels, both in the east ten acres and the of the
4962-MV3   8-16-2001  southwest quarter of Section 4, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 two parcels; the east half of the southeast quarter of
4940-MV    9-20-2001  Section 10, Township 35 North, Range 11 East, and the east half of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 11 East, both in the third
                      principal meridian.
4941-S     9-20-2001  Granting SUP for floodplain development with two conditions.
4948-MV    9-20-2001  Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 a part of the west half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4957-S     9-20-2001  Granting SUP to operate an existing landscape business in a C-2 zoning district
                      with three conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-2 the north 30 acres of the west quarter of the northwest
4958-M     9-20-2001  quarter of Section 20, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
4959-S     9-20-2001  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
4960-M     9-20-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the north 252 feet of the southeast quarter of Section
                      35, Township 33 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4961-M     9-20-2001  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 22,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 the west 500 feet of the southwest quarter of Section
4963-MS2   9-20-2001  27, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian and granting
                      SUP for Echo Housing with one condition and SUP for accessory storage with one
                      condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 a part of the east half of the northwest quarter of
4964-MS    9-20-2001  Section 34, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian and
                      granting SUP for a church with two conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 a part of the northwest quarter of Section 22, Township
4970-MS    9-20-2001  35 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian and granting SUP for
                      liquid hydrocarbon storage with one condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 and I-2 to E-2 and a SUP for planned unit development with six
4973-MS    9-20-2001  conditions two tracts of land, both part of the southwest quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
4966-S     10-18-2001 Granting SUP for residence of proprietor with two conditions.
4967-S3    10-18-2001 Granting SUP for outdoor storage with four conditions, landscaping materials/
                      equipment with one condition and vehicle repair with two conditions.
4968-S     10-18-2001 Granting SUP for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages with four conditions.
4969-S     10-18-2001 Granting SUP for floodplain development with one condition.
4972-MS    10-18-2001 Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 District.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 two parcels of land, both part of the south 30 acres of
4975-M     10-18-2001 the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 35 north, Range 11
                      of the third principal meridian.
4977-SV2   10-18-2001 Granting SUP for accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 3,000 square feet.
4983-MV    10-18-2001 Rezoning from R-2 to C-1 Lot 3, in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Addition to
                      Lincoln Estates.
Res. 01-   10-18-2001 Correcting scrivener error in Case No. 4928-S pertaining to condition D of the
394                   SUP.
4978-S     11-15-2001 Granting SUP for outdoor storage with two conditions.
4979-S     11-15-2001 Amending SUP for outdoor storage in the I-1 District with three conditions.
4980-S     11-15-2001 Granting SUP for outdoor storage with two conditions.
4981-S     11-15-2001 Granting SUP for outdoor storage with two conditions.
4985-M     11-15-2001 Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 a part of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township
                      35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4988-S     11-15-2001 Granting amended SUP for contractor’s yard with four conditions.
Res. 01-   11-15-2001 Correcting scrivener error in amendment to the Will County Zoning Ordinance.
441
4986-M     12-20-2001 Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 the northwest quarter of Section 30, Township 35 North,
                      Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4987-MS    12-20-2001 Rezoning from R-2 to C-1 Lots 126 and 127 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
                      Addition to Lincoln Estates and granting SUP for floodplain development.
4899-S     12-20-2001 Granting SUP to remain A-1 and to allow a maximum square footage for accessory
                      structure of 3,000 square feet with one condition.
4990-S2V   12-20-2001 Granting SUP for residence of proprietor and an existing plumbing business with
                      four conditions.
4991-M     12-20-2001 Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the west 533.28 feet of the northwest quarter of Section
                      20, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4993-SV    12-20-2001 Granting SUP for outdoor storage with two conditions.
4995-SV    12-20-2001 Granting SUP for a dog kennel with three conditions.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 that part lying in Section 15 described as commencing
4996-MS    12-20-2001 the southwest corner of the Joseph Laughton Indian Reservation in Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
4997-M     12-20-2001 Rezoning from R-2 to R-2A Lot 20 in Carriage Manor Estates.
4998-S     12-20-2001 Granting SUP for outdoor storage with one condition.
5001-S     1-17-2002  Granting SUP for outdoor storage of nursery stock for a tenant.
5003-S     1-17-2002  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
5004-M     1-17-2002  Rezoning from R-1 to E-2 Lot 2 in Carsello’s Subdivision.
5007-M     1-17-2002  Granting SUP for fundraising events including the sale of alcoholic beverages.
5008-M     1-17-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 a part of the south half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 35, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5006-S     2-21-2002  Granting SUP for parking lot and overnight camping in the A-1 and A-2 zoning
                      district with eight conditions.
5010-M     2-21-2002  Rezoning from I-1 to E-2 a part of the northeast quarter of Section 26, Township
                      35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 two parcels of land, both in the northeast quarter of
5012-M     2-21-2002  the southeast quarter of Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5013-S2    2-21-2002  Granting SUP for a towing business with six conditions and for outdoor storage of
                      vehicles with six conditions.
5015-S     2-21-2002  Granting SUP for Echo Housing with three conditions.
5017-S     2-21-2002  Granting SUP for contractor’s yard in the R-2 zoning district with six
                      conditions.
5023-S     3-21-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development with one condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 two parcels of land, both in the north half of the
5024-M     3-21-2002  northwest quarter of Section 29, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5025-M     3-21-2002  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 a part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Granting SUP for special events parking for auto and RV’s (including overnight
5027-S2    3-21-2002  parking), vendors and hospitality tents for up to 12 special events per year with
                      13 conditions.
5029-S     3-21-2002  Granting SUP for overnight camping in the A-1 zoning district with 12 conditions.
5030-S     3-21-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5032-S     3-21-2002  Granting SUP for parking and overnight camping in the A-1 zoning district with
                      ten conditions.
4942-S     4-18-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development with one condition.
4982-S2    4-18-2002  Granting SUP for tavern in the C-1 zoning district with ten conditions.
5021-M     4-18-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 22, Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5031-S     4-18-2002  Granting SUP for outdoor storage with three conditions.
5033-S     4-18-2002  Granting SUP for overnight camping in A-1 zoning district.
5034-S     4-18-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development with one condition.
5036-S     4-18-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development with two conditions.
5038-M     4-18-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 a part of the northeast quarter of Section 29, Township
                      33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
5039-M     4-18-2002  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 Lot 12 in Edith C. Fuller’s Subdivision.
5041-S     4-18-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development and an existing church built prior to
                      1999 in the A-1 zoning district with one condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 12 and
5040-M     5-16-2002  the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 the south 383 feet of the west 383 feet of the southeast
5045-M     5-16-2002  quarter of Section 16, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
5011-MS    6-20-2002  Granting SUP for planned unit
Res. 03-   6-19-2003  development with one condition for property in Plainfield Township; and granting
241                   an extension to the effective period of the SUP.
5037-S2    6-20-2002  Granting SUP for a self-service storage facility with one condition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 two parcels of land in the east half of the northwest
5044-M     6-20-2002  quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
5048-S     6-20-2002  Granting SUP to allow food and alcohol sales during horse shows with three
                      conditions.
5049-S     6-20-2002  Granting SUP for auto repair shop in the I-1 district with two conditions.
5050-M     6-20-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 a part of the southwest quarter of Section 32, Township
                      37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
5052-M     6-20-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the west three- fourths of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 6, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5053-S     6-20-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5057-S     6-20-2002  Granting SUP for parking lot and overnight RV parking and camping in the A-
                      1 zoning district.
5079-S     6-20-2002  Granting SUP for ancillary liquor.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the south half of the northwest quarter and from
5059-M2    7-18-2002  A-1 to E-2 part of the south half of the northwest quarter of Section 23,
                      Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the south 115.00 feet of the north 179.75 feet of the
5060-MV3   7-18-2002  east half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 35,
                      Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian, excepting that
                      part taken for road purposes commonly known as 18130 South Briggs Street.
                      Rezoning from E-1 to A-1 the north 300 feet of the south 31.0 feet of the west
5063-M     7-18-2002  726.0 feet of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 33
                      North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 a part of Lot 52 in the east half of Section 6, and the
5064-MS    7-18-2002  west half of Section 5, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal
                      meridian, with SUP granted for floodplain development.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the west 116.675 feet of the south 466.70 feet of the
5065-MV3   7-18-2002  east 466.70 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 33 North, Range
                      13 East of the third principal meridian.
5067-M     7-18-2002  Rezoning from R-2 to E-2 two parcels in the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the north 544.0 feet of the west 401.0 feet of the
5069-M     7-18-2002  northwest quarter of Section 7, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5072-S     7-18-2002  Granting SUP for a parking lot and overnight camping in the A-1 zoning district.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 23,
5068-MS2   8-15-2002  Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian, except the
                      south 660 feet thereof, and also except the west 330 feet thereof, with SUP for a
                      planned unit development and floodplain development.
5070-S     8-15-2002  Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district and for outdoor storage of
                      materials, products and vehicles.
5073-M     8-15-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 a part of the south half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 21, Township 34 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the north 995 feet of the east 219 feet of a part of
5074-M     8-15-2002  Lots 5, 6 and 8 at the subdivision of the northeast quarter of Section 35,
                      Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 the north 300 feet of the southeast 726 feet of the
5080-MS    8-15-2002  northwest quarter, Section 30, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian, with SUP for residence of proprietor.
5090-S     8-15-2002  Granting SUP for additional accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 2,400
                      square feet.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the west 250 feet of the north 53.75 rods of the west
5092-M     8-15-2002  half of the southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
5081-S     9-19-2002  Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district.
5085-M     9-19-2002  Rezoning from A-1 to C-1 a parcel of land in the southeast quarter of Section 21,
                      Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
5086-SV    9-19-2002  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5087-S     9-19-2002  Granting SUP for office condominiums in the existing C-2 zoning district.
5089-S     9-19-2002  Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district.
5095-SV    9-19-2002  Granting SUP to allow a church in the A-1 zoning district.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the south half of the following described property taken
5096-M     9-19-2002  as a tract: The east half of Lot 1, all of Lot 2 and the north half of Lot 3, in
                      School Trustee’s Subdivision of Section 16, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
5097-S2    9-19-2002  Granting SUP to operate an adult day care center and to remain in the A-1 zoning
                      district.
5047-S2    10-17-2002 Granting SUP for a towing business and for outdoor storage.
5062-SV    10-17-2002 Granting SUP for a campground with ten conditions listed. (Amended by Res. 04-
                      422, adopted 10-21-2004).
5083-M     10-17-2002 Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 six parcels of land in Florence Township.
5091-S     11-21-2002 Granting SUP for a parking lot and overnight camping in the A-1 zoning district
                      for the VFW.
5103-S     11-21-2002 Granting SUP to operate an excavating business in the A-1 zoning district in
                      Green Garden Township.
5107-S     11-21-2002 Granting SUP for a floodplain development to build a pond on a five-acre parcel
                      in rural Green Garden Township.
Res. 02-   11-21-2002 Correcting a scrivener’s error in case number 4768-MS.
494
5093-MS    1-16-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to R-4 the southwest corner of North Avenue and 80th Avenue
                      with SUP for a planned unit development.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
5120-MS2   2-20-2003  Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian with SUP for
                      planned unit development and floodplain development.
5121-M     1-16-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 two parcels in the southeast corner of Section 7,
                      Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to I-1 part of the northwest quarter of Section 7, Township 34
5124-MS    1-16-2003  North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian with SUP for a self- service
                      storage facility.
5125-S     2-20-2003  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to A-1 the east 1155.0 feet of the north half of the east 100
5129-M     2-20-2003  acres of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 10 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
5105-S     3-20-2003  Granting SUP for an agribusiness with tractor trailers parked within the front
                      yard setback.
                      Granting SUP within the A-1 zoning district to permit construction of a church
5122-SV    3-20-2003  with the extension of the effective period to four years from County Board
                      approval.
5123-S2    3-20-2003  Granting SUP for landscape business and outdoor storage.
5128-S     3-20-2003  Granting SUP for accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 2,800 square feet.
5134-S     3-20-2003  Granting SUP for landscape business and garden center in the A-1 zoning district
                      with outdoor storage of material and equipment.
5102-MS    4-17-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 three tracts in the county with SUP for a planned unit
                      development including areas for floodplain development.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 the north 363.00 feet of the west 300.00 feet of the
5142-M     4-17-2003  east 1,341.70 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 32, Township 33 North,
                      Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the south half of the southeast quarter of the
5143-M     4-17-2003  southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5144-S2    4-17-2003  Granting SUP for recreational and outdoor vehicle storage and outdoor storage.
5147-S     4-17-2003  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5167-S     4-17-2003  Granting SUP for a landing strip.
5133-MS    5-15-2003  Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 part of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5136-SV    5-15-2003  Granting SUP for stabling animals for private use.
5148-S     5-15-2003  Granting SUP for overnight camping in the A-1 zoning district.
5152-M     5-15-2003  Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 Lot 11 in Streamwood Estates first addition.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 the north half of the northeast quarter of the northeast
5153-M     5-15-2003  quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 36 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
5154-S     5-15-2003  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
5155-S     5-15-2003  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
5161-S     5-15-2003  Granting SUP for recreational camping in the A-1 zoning district.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-3 approximately 0.247 acres commencing at the northwest
5157-M     6-19-2003  corner of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 35 North, Range 11 East
                      of the third principal meridian, adjacent S.B.I. Route 44 (United States 52).
                      Granting SUP for a dog kennel in part of Lots 1 and 8 in the School Trustee’s
5160-S     6-19-2003  Subdivision of Section 16 Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
5164-S     6-19-2003  Granting SUP for a group care home for 16 occupants with two apartments for
                      caregivers and their families at 12618 West Regan Road, Mokena, Illinois 60448.
                      Granting SUP for the north 429 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of
5166-S     6-19-2003  Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian,
                      with exceptions, to remain in the A-1 zoning district.
                      Granting SUP for outdoor storage of materials and equipment to operate a tree
5195-SV    6-19-2003  service, including onsite wood chipping with conditions, for the following
                      parcels:
                      (A) Parcel 1: Part of the west half of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                    the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian, lying north of the center line of Archer Road; and
                    (B) Parcel 2: The east half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5170-S     7-17-2003  Granting SUP for retail landscaping business.
5172-S     7-17-2003  Granting SUP for auto restoration business.
5173-MS    7-17-2003  Rezoning the following parcels:
                      (A) Parcel A: Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section
                    11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, and
                      granting SUP for accessory structures thereon.
                    (B) Parcel B: Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section
                      11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5175-S     7-17-2003  Granting SUP to remain in the A-1 District.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northeast quarter of Section 23, Township 34
5178-M     7-17-2003  North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian containing ten acres, more
                      or less.
5184-MS    7-17-2003  Rezoning from C-2 to R-6 part of Lot B in Rainford Farms Phase 1 and granting SUP
                      for a PUD for the same property, containing 13.52 acres, more or less.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 34
5159-MS    8-21-2003  North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian and granting SUP for a PUD
                      for the same property.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 part of the east fractional half of the northeast
5181-MS2   8-21-2003  quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian and granting SUP for banquet facility with ancillary liquor sales and
                      SUP for landscaping business with outdoor storage for the same property.
5183-S     8-21-2003  Granting SUP for landscape/agribusiness use.
5186-M     8-21-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the east half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5187-M     8-21-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 two parcels in the east half of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 and granting SUP for a PUD for part of the west half of
5145-MS    9-18-2003  the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter in Section 13, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 part of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 36
5165-M     9-18-2003  North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian, containing 1.925 acres, more
                      or less.
5177-M     9-18-2003  Rezoning from R-2 to C-4 part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 21, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
5190-S     9-18-2003  Granting SUP for construction of a church building.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the east half of the west half of the northeast
5192-M     9-18-2003  quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian, containing 5.872 acres, more or less.
5194-M     9-18-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 the following parcels, containing 11 acres, more or
                      less:
                    (A) Parcel 1: Part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 24,
                      Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian; and
                    (B) Parcel 2: Part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 24,
                      Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5196-MS    9-18-2003  Rezoning from A-1 to R-2 and granting SUP for a cemetery the following parcels:
                    (A) Parcel 1: Part of the west half of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian; and
                    (B) Parcel 2: Part of the west half of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section12, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 34
5197-M     9-18-2003  North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian, containing 10.38 acres,
                      more or less.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 34
5189-M     10-16-2003 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian, containing 40 acres, more
                      or less.
5198-S     10-16-2003 Granting SUP for outdoor storage.
5200-S     10-16-2003 Granting SUP for stabling of horses.
5204-S     10-16-2003 Granting SUP to remain in A-1 zoning district.
5169-S     11-20-2003 Granting SUP for PUD in Troy Township.
5207-M     11-20-2003 Rezoning from E-2 to A-1 part of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the northwest fractional quarter of Section 6,
5210-MV2   11-20-2003 Township 34 North, Range 15 East of the third principal meridian, containing 4.75
                      acres, more or less.
5211-S2    11-20-2003 Granting SUP for landscape business and SUP for outdoor storage.
5213-S2    11-20-2003 Granting SUP for auto repair shop and SUP for outdoor storage.
5215-S     11-20-2003 Granting SUP for outdoor storage.
5130-S     12-18-2003 Granting SUP for landscape and nursery business with outdoor storage of trucks
                      and landscaping materials.
5206-M     12-18-2003 Rezoning from A-1 to I-1 part of the northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5216-S     12-18-2003 Granting SUP for automobile repair shop including outdoor storage.
5217-S     12-18-2003 Granting SUP to remain in A-1 zoning district.
5218-S     12-18-2003 Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the south half of the east half of the southeast
5219-M     12-18-2003 quarter of Section 34, Township 35 North, Range 12 East in the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-1 part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter
5220-M     12-18-2003 of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian,
                      containing ten acres, more or less.
5222-M     12-18-2003 Rezoning from R-2 to C-3 part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 31, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5223-S     12-18-2003 Granting SUP for used car lot.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to R-3 part of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 35
5224-MSV2  12-18-2003 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian, and granting SUP for
                      floodplain development on Lots 45 and 46 of Cherry Hill Subdivision.
5226-MV    12-18-2003 Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 9, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5232-S     12-18-2003 Granting SUP for automobile repair shop.
5209-S     1-5-2004   Granting SUP for a residence of proprietor.
5212-S     1-15-2004  Granting SUP to bring four nonconforming residences on single parcel in
                      compliance with Zoning Code.
5225-M     1-15-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the southeast quarter of Section 30, Township 34
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5230-S     1-15-2004  Granting SUP for an auto body shop.
5231-M     1-15-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to C-2 part of the north half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 29, Township 34 North, Range 12 East, of the third principal meridian.
5235-S     1-15-2004  Granting SUP to paint commercial vehicles and trucks.
5241-S     1-15-2004  Granting SUP for package liquor sales.
Res. 04-01 1-15-2004  Extending SUP for Case No. 5101-S.
5227-S     2-19-2004  Granting SUP for child care facility.
                      Rezoning from R-2 to I-1 and granting SUP for outdoor storage of equipment and
5237-MS    2-19-2004  materials for construction yard part of west half of northeast quarter of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5239-S2    2-19-2004  Granting SUP for retail garden center and landscaping materials and SUP for
                      outdoor storage of materials, products and goods.
5162-MS    3-18-2004  Rezoning the following parcels:
                    (A) Rezoning from A-1 to C-1 3.93 acres in Section 21, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East of the third principal meridian.
                    (B) Rezoning from A-1 to R-1 49.68 acres in Section 21, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East of the third principal meridian.
                    (C) Granting SUP for PUD in R-1 and C-1 zoning districts in Section 21, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5208-MV4   3-18-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5245-S     3-18-2004  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5246-M2SV2 3-18-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to R-4 10.51 acres. Rezoning from C-4 to R-6 1.83 acres.
                      Granting SUP for PUD for above acreage with two variances.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-1 two parcels in part of the east half of the southeast
5248-M     3-18-2004  quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
5250-M     3-18-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 27, Township 34 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
5252-SV3   3-18-2004  Granting SUP to remain in A-1 zoning district.
5233-MS2V  4-15-2004  (A) Rezoning from A-1 to I-3 on Parcels 3 through 6 in Joliet Township.
                    (B) Granting SUP for mining and blasting on Parcels 2 through 8 and 11 in Joliet
                      Township.
                    (C) Granting SUP for concrete plant on Parcels 2, 3, 7 and 8 in Joliet Township.
5242-S     4-15-2004  Granting SUP for electrical contracting operation.
5251-M     4-15-2004  Rezoning from A-2 to R-3 three parcels in the northwest quarter of Section 26,
           5-20-2004  Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5260-MV    4-15-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to R-4 part of the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Granting SUP for PUD and rezoning from A-1 to E-2 for part of east half of the
5234-MS    5-20-2004  northwest quarter of Section 33, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5253-SV2   5-20-2004  Granting SUP for tavern and package liquor sales.
5262-M     5-20-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the north half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 22, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 two parcels in the northeast quarter of the northeast
5264-M     5-20-2004  quarter of Section 18, Township 33 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
5272-S     5-20-2004  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5283-S     5-20-2004  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
Res. 04-   5-20-2004  Extending SUP for Case No. 5147-S.
170
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 two parcels in the northeast quarter of the northeast
5255-M     6-17-2004  quarter of Section 20, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 part of the southeast quarter of Section 31, Township
5273-MV    6-17-2004  35, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian, containing five acres, more or
                      less.
5274-MV    6-17-2004  Rezoning from A-2 to E-2 part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 31, Township 35, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5275-MV    6-17-2004  Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the northwest quarter of Section 3, Township 33
                      North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
5276-M     6-17-2004  Rezoning from I-2 to C-3 part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 21, Township 37 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning from A-1 to E-2 part of the west half of the southwest quarter of
5277-M     6-17-2004  Section 7, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian,
                      containing 2.5 acres, more or less.
5281-S     6-17-2004  Granting SUP for landscape wholesale supply business with outdoor storage.
5290-M2S2  6-17-2004  (A) Granting SUP for PUD for Parcels 1 and 2.
                    (B) Granting SUP for floodplain development on Parcel 1.
                      (C) Rezoning from A-1 to R-2A Parcel 1 being part of the west half of the
                    northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      (D) Rezoning from A-2 to R-2A Parcel 2 being part of the east half of the
                    northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5267-M     7-15-2004  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2, being as described in
                      attachments to its enacting legislation.
5278-S     7-15-2004  Granting SUP to operate a landscape waste composting facility, with conditions,
                      in Wilton Township.
5280-S     7-15-2004  Granting SUP for a landscape contractor with outdoor storage of materials, with
                      conditions, in Joliet Township.
5284-S2V   7-15-2004  Granting SUP for an auto repair shop and outdoor storage, with conditions, in
                      Wheatland Township.
5285-S     7-15-2004  Granting SUP for a campground for race track events, with conditions, in Joliet
                      Township.
                      Rezoning property in Washington Township from A-1 to E-2, being the south half
5286-M     7-15-2004  (except the west 246 feet) of the southwest quarter of Section 35, Township 33
                      North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
5287-S     7-15-2004  Granting SUP for a private heliport landing pad, with conditions, in Monee
                      Township.
5288-S     7-15-2004  Granting SUP for an auto dealership and sales with outdoor storage, with
                      conditions, in Frankfort Township.
5267-MS    8-19-2004  Granting SUP for floodplain development, with conditions, in Green Garden
                      Township.
5295-S     8-19-2004  Granting SUP for Echo Housing in Wilton Township, containing 10.21 acres more or
                      less.
                      Rezoning from A-2 to R-2 property in Monee Township, being the south 274.75 feet
5296-M     8-19-2004  of the north 1064.75 feet of the west 825.73 feet (as measured along the North
                      and westlines) of the northwest quarter of Section 19, Township 34 North, Range
                      13 East of the third principal meridian.
5297-S     8-19-2004  Granting SUP for a landscape business with outdoor storage for Lot 28 in Robert
                      Barlett’s Home Acres in Monee Township.
5298-M     8-19-2004  Rezoning the following parcels in Will Township from A-1 to E-1, containing 5.023
                      acres and five acres, respectively:
                      (A) Parcel 1: The north 660 feet (except the east 990 feet thereof) of the west
                    half of the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of
                      the third principal meridian, subject to the road rights-of-way on the west and
                      north ends thereof.
                      (B) Parcel 2: The west 330 feet of the east 990 feet of the north 660 feet of the
                    west half of the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 33 North, Range 13
                      East of the third principal meridian.
5300-M     8-19-2004  Rezoning the following parcels in Monee Township from A-1 to E-2, each containing
                      2.52 acres:
                      (A) Parcel A: (The northwest parcel) the west half of the north 330 feet of all
                    that part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 27, Township 34
                      North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian, and further described as
                      abutting certain properties.
                      (B) Parcel B: (The northeast parcel) the east half of the north 330 feet of all
                    that part of the west half of the northeast quarter Section 27, Township 34
                      North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian, and further described as
                      abutting certain properties.
                      Rezoning 4.83 acres in Washington Township from A-1 to E-2, being a part of the
5301-MV    8-19-2004  northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third
                      principal meridian, and further described, subject to rights-of-way for roads,
                      drainage and easements apparent or of record.
5302--M    8-19-2004  Rezoning the following parcels in New Lenox Township from R-1 to R-2A:
                      (A) Parcel 1: The west 80 feet of the east 160 feet (except the north 16 feet
                    thereof and except the south 50 feet thereof) of Lot 57 in A.T. McIntosh’s New
                      Lenox Acres, a subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 35
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
                      (B) Parcel 2: The west 60 feet of the east 220 feet (except the north 16 feet
                      thereof and except the south 50 feet thereof) of Lot 57 in A.T. McIntosh’s New
                    Lenox Acres, a subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 10 and part of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5303-S     8-19-2004  Granting SUP for a landscaping and lawn irrigation system installation business
                      with outdoor storage, with conditions, in Joliet Township.
5305-MV3   8-19-2004  Rezoning the following parcels in Lockport Township from A-1 to E-2:
                      (A) Parcel I: The north 200 feet of that part of Lot 2 in the Assessor’s
                    Subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian, lying north and east of the center line of
                      Fraction Run Creek, and further described.
5305-MV3              (B) Parcel II: Easement for the benefit of Parcel I as created by deed recorded
(Cont’d) 8-19-2004  August 24, 1965, for passageway over the north 33 feet of the east 653.40 feet of
                      Lot 2.
                      (C) Parcel III: The part of the south 200 feet of the north 400 feet of Lot 2 in
                    the Assessor’s Subdivision of Section 26, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian, and further described.
5310-SV2   8-19-2004  Reclassifying the following parcels as a special use permit for a mobile office,
                      with conditions:
                      (A) Parcel I: Part of the west half of the west half of the southeast quarter of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third
                    principal meridian, lying north of the center line or Archer Road (except that
                      part taken for road purposes as disclosed by deed recorded as document number
                      R96-83165).
                      (B) Parcel II: The east half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
                    Section 6, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian
                      (except that part taken for road purposes as disclosed by deed recorded as
                      document number R96-83165).
5307-MV2   9-16-2004  Rezoning the following parcels in Reed Township from I-3 to R-2A:
                      (A) Parcel 1: The west 161.50 feet of the north 267 feet (except the north 49.5
                    feet dedicated as Smiley Road) of the northeast quarter of Section 20, Township
                      32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
                      (B) Parcel 2: The east 154.25 feet of the west 315.75 feet of the north 267 feet
                    (except the north 49.5 feet dedicated as Smiley Road) of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 20, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
5307-MV2              (C) Parcel 3: The east 154.25 feet of the west 470 feet of the north 267 feet
(Cont’d) 9-16-2004  (except the north 49.5 feet dedicated as Smiley Road) of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 20, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
5308-S     9-16-2004  Granting SUP for a landscape business and outside storage with screening, with
                      conditions, in Lockport Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to E-2: The north
                      494.9 feet (as measured along the east line) of the east 400 feet of the south
                      2.65 acres of Lot 2, and the east 400 feet of Lots 3, 4, 5 and the east 400 feet
5312-M     9-16-2004  of Lot 6, lying easterly of the center thread of Hickory Creek (specifically
                      excluding Alexander Duncan’s Subdivision), in the subdivision of part of the west
                      half of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning the following property in Crete Township from A-1 to R-1: The north 548
                      feet of the south 773 feet of the east half of the east half of the half of the
                      southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range
                      14 East of the third principal meridian; also the east ten feet of the west 30
5312-MV    9-16-2004  feet of the south 773 feet of the west half of the east half of the east half of
                      the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North,
                      Range 14 East of the third principal meridian; also the north ten feet of the
                      south 773 feet of the west half of the east half of the east half of the
                      southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 6, Township 34 North, Range
                      1 East of the third principal meridian, except the west 30 feet thereof.
                      Rezoning the following property in Green Garden Township from E-2 to A-1: The
                      south 446.48 feet of the east 60 acres of the south 100 acres of the southeast
5314-M     9-16-2004  quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian, except the north 20 feet of the south 446.48 feet of the east 100 feet
                      thereof.
5316-S     9-16-2004  Granting SUP for accessory storage in Troy Township.
                      Rezoning the following eleven acres, more or less, in Lockport Township from A-
5317-MS    9-16-2004  1 to R-4 and special use permit for a Group Care Home of seven to 16 residents:
                      Part of the north half of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North,
                      Range 10 East of the third principal meridian, and further detailed.
Res. 04-   9-16-2004  Amending a condition to SUP (Case No. 4441-S2) for a self-storage facility in New
386                   Lenox Township.
5306-S     10-21-2004 Granting SUP for outdoor storage in Wheatland Township, with conditions.
5319-S     10-21-2004 Granting SUP for floodplain development in Frankfort Township, with conditions.
5324-SV2   10-21-2004 Granting SUP for Echo Housing in Washington Township, containing approximately
                      5.514 acres.
                      Rezoning the following property in Green Garden Township from E-2 to A-1: The
5326-M     10-21-2004 north 336 feet of the south 642.5 feet of the east 778 feet of the south half of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5327-S     10-21-2004 Granting SUP for an existing second residence in Green Garden Township, with
                      conditions.
5263-S     11-18-2004 Granting SUP for a planned unit development in Reed Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Custer Township from A-1 to E-1: The east 880
5330-M     11-18-2004 feet of the west 1760 feet of the north one- fifth of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 23, Township 32 North Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
5331-S     11-18-2004 Granting SUP for floodplain development in Green Garden Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Reed Township from I-2 to E-1: The south half
                      of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 32 North, Range 9 East of the
5335-M     11-18-2004 third principal meridian, except the Section 17, Township 32 North, Range 9 East
                      of the third principal meridian 990 feet thereof and the coal and other minerals
                      beneath the surface with the right to mine and remove the same.
5342-S     11-18-2004 Granting SUP for a church in Wheatland Township, with conditions.
5339-MV3   12-16-2004 Rezoning three parcels of 12, 15.94 and 13.681 acres in Joliet Township, as
                      described in the resolution, from A-1 to C-4.
Res. 04-   12-16-2004 Refunding building permit application fees to J. Blackmon.
526
Res. 04-   12-16-2004 Refunding building permit application fees to J.W. Clements.
527
5337-S     1-20-2005  Granting SUP for accessory storage from 1,500 square feet to 2,400 square feet in
                      Joliet Township.
5341-M     1-20-2005  Rezoning two parcels in Lockport Township containing the Shiloh Missionary
                      Baptist Church from A-1 to R-4.
5349-S     1-20-2005  Granting SUP for a sports complex, concession stand, and parking in Troy
                      Township.
                      Granting SUP for a wholesale bakery and bar in Lockport Township, with
5353-MS2   1-20-2005  conditions, and rezoning territory described in Subsection 3.1 of Section 3 of
                      the Zoning Ordinance from R-2 to C-2.
5354-S     1-20-2005  Granting SUP for a dog training facility, with conditions, in Green Garden
                      Township.
5356-SV    1-20-2005  Granting SUP for outdoor storage, with condition, in Joliet Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to E-2: The south
5357-MV    1-20-2005  370 feet of the east 295 feet of the east half of the east half of the southwest
                      quarter of Section 36, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal
                      meridian.
5358-S     1-20-2005  Granting SUP for floodplain development for stormwater detention in Washington
                      Township.
5359-S     1-20-2005  Granting SUP for model railroad club to allow for a model railroad club facility
                      in New Lenox Township.
Res. 95-02 1-20-2005  Directing the Zoning Administrator to accept an application for a SUP for a
                      gymnastics center in the I-1 District, after appeal of initial denial.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to E-2: The part
5362-MV    2-17-2005  of the fractional southwest quarter of Section 14 lying north and south of the
                      Indiana boundary line, and further described in the resolution, containing
                      approximately 3.125 acres.
5363-S     2-17-2005  Granting SUP for a church with lot coverage not to exceed 40, with conditions, in
                      Monee Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Will Township from A-1 to E-1: A parcel in the
5364-M     3-17-2005  northeast quarter of Section 5, Township 33 North, Range 13 East of the third
                      principal meridian, and further described in the resolution, containing
                      approximately five acres.
                      Rezoning the following property in Crete Township from R-3 to A-1: The part of
                      vacated Willowbrook Estates Unit No. 5 in the southwest quarter of Section 8 and
5365-M     3-17-2005  the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 34 North, Range 15 East of the
                      third principal meridian, recorded March 20, 1988, and further described in the
                      resolution.
                      Rezoning the following property in Lockport Township from I-1 to I-2: Commencing
5366-M     3-17-2005  on the south line of Section 28, Township 36 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian, where the road from Joliet to Chicago crosses the line, and
                      further described in the resolution.
                      Rezoning the following property in Plainfield Township from A-1 to R-2: The east
5368-MV    3-17-2005  3634.8 feet of the west 1,292.8 feet of the north 200 feet of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 32, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal
                      meridian, and further described in the resolution, with exceptions.
                      Rezoning the following property in Plainfield Township from A-1 to R-2: The east
5369-MV    3-17-2005  208 feet of the west 928 feet of the north 245 feet of the northeast quarter of
                      Section 32, Township 36 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian, and
                      further described in the resolution, with exceptions.
                      Rezoning the following property in Channahon Township from A-1 to R-3: The part
                      of the north 1,832.31 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 7, Township 34
5370-MV    3-17-2005  North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian, lying east of the centerline
                      of the DuPage River and west of Unit No. 3 of McDonald’s Lake Estates
                      Subdivision, and further described in the resolution.
                      Rezoning the following property in New Lenox Township: Rezoning the one parcel
                      from A-1 to R-2; rezoning a second parcel from A-1 to C-1; and granting to a
5372-MS    3-17-2005  third parcel SUP for floodplain development, all in the east half of the east
                      half of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of
                      the third principal meridian, except the south 55 feet thereof, and further
                      described in the resolution.
5373-S     3-17-2005  Granting SUP for a camp and retreat center in Frankfort Township.
Res. 05-93 3-17-2005  Extending effective period of special use permit and variance granted by Case No.
                      5233-MSV.
                      Rezoning the following property in Lockport Township from R-4 to I-1: The
                      northwest and east Lots 5 and 6, 7 and 8 block 16, in Fairmont Subdivision, of
5360-M     4-21-2005  the west half of the southeast quarter, Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian, Township of Lockport. In addition, Lots 1
                      and 2 in block 3 in Stirling Pk.
                      Rezoning the following property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to E-2 for Parcel
5375-M     4-21-2005  2: The east 275.00 feet of the south 450.00 feet of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 31, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5376-S     4-21-2005  Granting a SUP for a drive-through automobile laundry (car wash).
5378-SV    4-21-2005  Granting a SUP for outdoor storage which includes proper screening.
5380-S     5-19-2005  Granting a SUP for a two unit building.
                      Rezoning the following property in Joliet Township from A-2 to R-2: Lot 15 in
5382-M     5-19-2005  Edith C. Fuller’s Subdivision of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian
                      known as 835 Hill Street.
5387-S     5-19-2005  Granting a SUP for floodplain development.
5388-S2    5-19-2005  Granting a SUP for a second residence and a SUP for accessory structure size from
                      3,000 square feet to 7,500 square feet.
                      Rezoning the following property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-2: The north
5391-MV    5-19-2005  150 feet of the west 348 feet of the following described tract of land, that part
                      of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 35 North, Range
                      11 East of the third principal meridian.
5398-S     5-19-2005  Granting a SUP for a church in Wilmington Township.
                      Rezoning certain property in Jackson Township owned by Gabor Kecskes and Marilyn
5395-M     6-16-2005  Kecskes from A-1 to R-2A: Part of the north half of the northwest quarter of
                      Section 4, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5397-S     6-16-2005  Granting a SUP for a mobile office.
5399-S     6-16-2005  Granting a SUP for a special event related campground/parking lot.
5401-S     6-16-2005  Granting a SUP for a landscape and retail garden center with outdoor storage in
                      the A-1 Zoning District.
                      Rezoning the following property in Custer Township from A-1 to R-3: Lots 3 and 4
5402-M     6-16-2005  of Eileen Acres, a part of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 32
                      North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
5406-S     6-16-2005  Granting a SUP for accessory storage from 1,800 to 2,717 square feet.
5408-S     6-16-2005  Granting a SUP to operate a resale ship (i.e. antiques, clothing and crafts).
5322-S     7-21-2005  Granting a SUP to increase accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 6,008
                      square feet.
                      Granting a SUP for a PUD including areas of floodplain development including all
5371-MS    7-21-2005  variances and rezoning the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 14,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from A-1 to R-2.
                      Rezoning the following property in Monee Township from A-1 to E-2: The east 165
5407-MV    7-21-2005  feet of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34
                      North, Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
5409-S     7-21-2005  Granting a SUP for auto repair.
5412-S     7-21-2005  Granting a SUP to remain A-1 on the existing house that was built in 1996.
                      Rezoning the following property in Jackson Township from A-1 to R-1: The north
5417-M     7-21-2005  931.74 feet west of the west 600 feet of the east half of the northeast quarter
                      of the southwest quarter of Section 15, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
Res. 05-   7-21-2005  Correcting an error in Ord. 5278-S as to the location of the SUP.
311
Res. 05-   7-21-2005  Extension of the effective period for a SUP adopted as Ord. 5278-S.
312
                      Rezoning the following properties in New Lenox Township from I-1 to C-3: Lot 1
5400-MV    8-18-2005  and Lot 5 in Schoolhouse Industrial Park Unit 1 being a subdivision of part of
                      the northeast quarter of Section 26, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning the following property in Wesley Township from A-1 to E-1: The part of
5419-M     8-18-2005  the northwest quarter of Section 14 lying east of the centerline of Danielson
                      Road, except the north 2,013 feet.
5420-S     8-18-2005  Granting a SUP for an auto repair shop.
                      Rezoning the following property in Joliet Township from R-1 to R-2: Lot 3 (except
5422-M     8-18-2005  the south 275.77 feet) in Fuller and Woodruff’s Subdivision of the east half of
                      the southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
5427-S     8-18-2005  Granting a SUP for floodplain development for areas 1, 2 and 3.
5428-S     8-18-2005  Granting a SUP for a lawncare/sealcoat business with outdoor storage of
                      equipment.
                      Rezoning the following property in Homer Township from A-1 to R-1: The north 692
5429-M     8-18-2005  feet of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 21 (excepting the south 180 feet) of the east 242 feet in Township 36
                      North, Range 11 East of the third principal meridian.
5421-MS    9-15-2005  Granting a SUP for a planned unit development in the E-2 zoning district
                      including areas of floodplain development.
5423-S     9-15-2005  Granting a SUP to operate as a landscape waste recycler and outdoor storage of
                      materials related to business.
5431-S2    9-15-2005  Granting a SUP for a landscape business with outdoor storage and proper screening
                      and SUP for a cartage business with outdoor storage and proper screening.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from C-4 to C-2: Part of
5432-M     9-15-2005  Lot 67 in Highlands of Frankfort Unit no. 1, being a subdivision part of the
                      south half of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian.
5435-S     9-15-2005  Granting a SUP for a non-hazardous wood construction material for storage.
5438-S     9-15-2005  Granting a SUP for outdoor storage with proper screening.
5439-S     10-20-2005 Granting a SUP for accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 2,200 square feet.
5440-SV5   10-20-2005 Granting a SUP for used car sales for Parcels 1 and 2.
                      Rezoning the following property in Joliet Township from A-1 to R-3: Part of the
5443-M     10-20-2005 northern 165 feet of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 35 North, Range
                      10 East of the third principal meridian.
5446-SV2   10-20-2005 Granting a SUP for maximum accessory structure square footage from 1,800 square
                      feet to 3,230 square feet.
                      Rezoning the following property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to E-2: The part
5447-MV    10-20-2005 of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 35 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
Res. 05-              Appealing the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding the
422        10-20-2005 initial denial of a SUP for cabinet manufacturing and granite/marble fabrication
                      business, hereby granted by the County Board.
                      Rezoning the following property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2 for
                      Parcel A and A-2 to E-2 for Parcel B: The south 331.18 feet of the north 1,987.04
5451-M     11-17-2005 feet of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 34 North,
                      Range 12, in Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian
                      known as 24552 South Harlem Avenue, Frankfort, IL 60423.
                      Rezoning the following property in Lockport Township from A-1 to R-2: The part of
5452-M     11-17-2005 the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 36 North, Range 10
                      East of the third principal meridian.
5455-MS    11-17-2005 Granting a SUP for maximum accessory structure square feet from 1,800 square feet
                      to 7,700 square feet and changing the zoning map from R-2 to R-3.
Res. 05-   11-17-2005 Authorizing an extension of the effective period for a SUP (passed as Ord. 5316-
464                   S).
                      Rezoning the following property in Will Township from A-1 to E-2: The part of the
5404-M     12-15-2005 southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 33 North, Range
                      13 East of the third principal meridian.
5454-MS    12-15-2005 Granting a SUP for outdoor storage and rezoning the property from A-1 to C-3.
5462-S2    12-15-2005 Granting a SUP for accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 15,226 square
                      feet.
5463-S     12-15-2005 Granting a SUP for a truck repair business with outdoor storage.
5464-MS    12-15-2005 Granting a SUP for a church in the E-2 Zoning District and rezoning the property
                      from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning the following property in Monee Township from A-1 to E-2: All of that
5465-M     12-15-2005 part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 313, Township 34 North,
                      Range 13 East of the third principal meridian.
5466-MS    12-15-2005 Granting a SUP for outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials with proper
                      screening and rezoning the property from A-1 to I-2.
                      Rezoning the following property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-1: The
5466-MS    12-15-2005 south 691.00 feet of the west 960.38 feet of the southeast quarter of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 35, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5470-MS    12-15-2005 Granting a SUP for a planned unit development for Parcels 1, 2 and 3 and rezoning
                      the property from C-2 and R-5 to R-6 for Parcel 1.
5437-S     1-19-2006  Granting a SUP for outdoor storage of equipment, products and goods.
5448-MSV2  1-19-2006  Granting a SUP for accessory structure from 1,800 square feet to 4,618 square
                      feet and rezoning the property from A-2 to R-1.
5466-MS    1-19-2006  Granting a SUP for outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials with proper
                      screening and rezoning the property from A-1 to I-2.
                      Rezoning the following property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2: The
5472-M     1-19-2006  east half of that part of the south half of the southeast quarter of Section 23,
                      Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5473-SV    1-19-2006  Granting a SUP for two mobile residences on a C-4 site.
                      Rezoning the following property in Crete Township from A-1 to R-1: The part of
5474-M     1-19-2006  the north half of fractional Section 5, fractional Township 34 North, Range 15
                      East of the third principal meridian.
5477-S     1-19-2006  Granting a SUP for a agricultural educational center.
5430-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for floodplain development.
5460-S2    2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for used motor vehicle sales and for an auto repair shop.
5469-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for a gymnastic school.
5480-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for outdoor storage of RV’s, boats and campers for rental with
                      proper screening.
                      Rezoning the following property in Wilmington Township from R-2 to E-2: The south
5481-MV    2-16-2006  245.89 feet of the north quarter of the west half of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 27, Township 33 North, Range 9 East of the third principal meridian.
5483-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for an auto repair and body shop.
5484-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP to remain as A-1.
5486-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for a second residence on Parcel C.
                      Rezoning the following property in Jackson Township from A-2 to R-2A: The west
5487-M     2-16-2006  130 feet of the south 5 acres of Lot 12, in the School Trustee’s Subdivision of
                      Section 16, Township 34 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5488-S     2-16-2006  Granting a SUP for accessory storage from 1,800 square feet to 2,184 square feet.
5430-S     3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for floodplain development.
5348-MS    3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for a church and rezoning the property from A-1 to E-2.
5441-S     3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for a landscape business including outdoor storage of bulk
                      materials and equipment.
5442-S     3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for floodplain development.
5471-S     3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for cargo storage containers.
5491-SV    3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for a fire station.
5492-S     3-16-2006  Granting a SUP for horses.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to R-2: Part of
5475-MV2   4-20-2006  the west half of the northwest quarter Section 20 described as the south 200 feet
                      of the north 750 feet lying west of the east 4.25 chains of the west half and
                      lying east of the west 884.06 feet of the west half.
5499-S     4-20-2006  Granting a SUP for ancillary liquor in Frankfort Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to R-4: The south
5500-M     4-20-2006  1122.00 feet of that part of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 35
                      North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5511-S     4-20-2006  Granting a SUP for floodplain development on Parcel 2 and Parcel 3 in Plainfield
                      Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Crete Township from A-1 to R-3: The east 465
5436-M     5-18-2006  feet of the south 468.39 feet (except the north 234.195 feet thereof) of the
                      north 993.39 feet of the southwest fractional quarter of Section 19, Township 34
                      North, Range 15 East of the third principal meridian.
5501-S     5-18-2006  Granting a SUP for a motorcycle repair shop in New Lenox Township.
5505-S     5-18-2006  Granting a SUP for a canine activity center and overnight resort including dog
                      day care, training, spa and retail in New Lenox Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Joliet Township from A-1 to I-1: Part of the
5506-M     5-18-2006  northwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
5509-S     5-18-2006  Granting a SUP for a drive-in banking facility in Frankfort Township.
5512-M2    6-15-2006  Rezoning property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-1.
                      Rezoning the following property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to R-1: The north
5513-MS    6-15-2006  1519.73 feet of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 12
                      East of the third principal meridian.
5515-S     6-15-2006  Granting SUP to operate a landscape business with outdoor storage for vehicle and
                      landscape materials in Will Township.
5456-S     7-20-2006  Granting a SUP for filtration plant/essential service in Washington Township.
5510-SV    7-20-2006  Granting a SUP to allow one horse per acre in Lockport Township.
5516-S     7-20-2006  Granting a SUP for an event parking lot for R.V.’s and camping in Jackson
                      Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Monroe Township from R-1 to I-1: Lot 30
5522-M     7-20-2006  (except the south 105 feet of Lot 30), in Robert Bartlett’s Home Acres, a
                      subdivision of part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 9, and
                      part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 34 North.
5524-SV    7-20-2006  Granting a SUP for floodplain development in Channahon Township and a variance
                      from the Stream and Wetland Protection Ordinance.
                      Rezoning the following property in Washington Township from A-1 to E-1: The south
5528-M     7-20-2006  half of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 14, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Rezoning the following property in Washington Township from A-1 to E-1: The north
5529-M     7-20-2006  half of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 14, Township 35 North, Range 14 East of the third principal meridian.
5531-S     7-20-2006  Granting a SUP for Echo Housing in Troy Township.
5361-S     8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for floodplain development in Manhattan Township.
5478-MS2   8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for stabling horses and riding facilities in Green Garden
                      Township.
5494-SV    8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for aircraft landing strip in Will Township.
5519-SM    8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for motor vehicle dealer parking lot in Frankfort Township.
5532-S     8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for package liquor sales in Frankfort Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Joliet Township from R-3 to C-2: Part of the
5534-M     8-17-2006  southwest quarter of Section 25, Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third
                      principal meridian.
                      Granting a SUP for equipment, buildings and structures for screening, crushing,
5535-S2V2  8-17-2006  mixing and storage of minerals, sand, gravel, soil and other aggregates on Tract
                      C in Troy Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to E-2: The north
5538-MS    8-17-2006  605.00 feet of the west 180.00 feet of the east 360.00 feet of that part of the
                      west half of the northeast quarter of Section 11, Township 35 North, Range 11
                      East of the third principal meridian.
5539-S     8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for additional accessory storage space in Manhattan Township.
                      Rezoning the following property in Joliet Township from A-1 to I-2: The part of
5543-M     8-17-2006  the west 800 feet of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 26,
                      Township 35 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
5557-S2V   8-17-2006  Granting a SUP for hosting events in Homer Township.
5546-S     9-21-2006  Granting a SUP to remain A-1 in Florence Township.
5547-MS    9-21-2006  Rezoning property in Peotone Township from R-2 and A-1 to C-2.
5549-M     9-21-2006  Rezoning property in Joliet Township from C-4 to I-2.
                      Rezoning the following property in Wilton Township from A-1 to C-2: The north 80
5550-M     9-21-2006  acres of the northeast quarter of Section 4, Township 33 North, Range 11 East of
                      the third principal meridian.
5523-S2    10-19-2006 Granting a SUP for outdoor storage in New Lenox Township.
5540-MS    10-19-2006 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2A and granting
                      a SUP for a planned unit development.
5552-S     10-19-2006 Granting a SUP for an automobile repair shop for Units 5, 6, 7 and 8 in Arrow
                      Industrial Condominium in New Lenox Township.
5555-SV2   10-19-2006 Granting a SUP for floodplain development in Jackson Township.
5558-MV    10-19-2006 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2.
5561-MV2   10-19-2006 Rezoning property located in Plainfield Township from A-1 to R-3.
5562-M     10-19-2006 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2.
5563-M     10-19-2006 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2 and R- 2A and
5545-MS    11-16-2006 granting a SUP for a planned unit development including areas of floodplain
                      development.
5554-M     11-16-2006 Rezoning property located in Jackson Township from A-1 to R-3.
5560-S     11-16-2006 Granting a SUP for floodplain development in Green Garden Township.
5568-S     11-16-2006 Granting a SUP to park vehicles and store inventory in a pole bard in Crete
                      Township.
5569-M     11-16-2006 Rezoning property located in Custer Township from A-1 to E-2.
                      Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2 and granting a
5497-MS    12-21-2006 SUP for a planned unit development in the R-2 District for conservation design
                      including .2 acres of floodplain development.
5577-MV3   12-21-2006 Rezoning property located in DuPage Township from A-1 to R-1.
5578-M     12-21-2006 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from R-1 to E-2.
5579-S     12-21-2006 Granting a SUP for landscape business with outdoor storage of equipment and
                      vehicles in Will Township.
5582-S     12-21-2006 Granting a SUP to allow construction of church in Monee Township.
Res. 06-   12-21-2006 Correction of scrivener’s error in Case 5478-MS2.
504
Res. 06-   12-21-2006 Appealing a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission in the Fairmont area
505                   (Case 5585-V2).
5574-S     1-18-2007  Granting a SUP for home day care in New Lenox Township.
5583-M     1-18-2007  Rezoning property located in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-2A.
5586-S     1-18-2007  Granting a SUP for landscaping nursery business in Green Garden Township.
5594-S     1-18-2007  Granting a SUP for a woodworking shop in a residential district in Joliet
                      Township.
5592-M     2-15-2007  Rezoning property located in Wesley Township from A-2 to R-1.
5588-M     3-15-2007  Rezoning property located in Crete Township from A-2 to R-2.
5595-SV    3-15-2007  Granting a SUP for floodplain development in DuPage Township.
5596-SV    3-15-2007  Granting a SUP for floodplain development in Homer Township.
5602-S     3-15-2007  Granting a SUP for the expansion of a transmitter building in Joliet Township.
Res. 07-87 3-15-2007  Extension of an effective period of a SUP (Case 5547-MS).
5589-S     4-19-2007  Granting a SUP for a lawn maintenance business with 13 conditions in Plainfield
                      Township.
5593-SV2   4-19-2007  Granting a SUP to remain in the A-1 zoning district in Wilton Township.
                      Granting a SUP for areas of floodplain development for sanitary sewer extension
5597-S2    4-19-2007  for Parcel 003 east of 135th Street, and a SUP for areas of floodplain
                      development for sanitary sewer extension for Parcel 015 west of Weber Road.
5607-M     4-19-2007  Rezoning property located on Illinois Route 171 and Oak Avenue in Lockport
                      Township from R-4 to I-1.
5611-S     4-19-2007  Granting a SUP for a farm building providing office, educational and meeting
                      space in DuPage Township.
5613-SV    4-19-2007  Granting a SUP for floodplain development and variance from Wetland/Stormwater
                      Ordinance in Homer Township.
5615-S     4-19-2007  Granting a SUP for a landscape business with outdoor storage for 6.33 acres
                      located within 74.15 acres in Green Garden Township.
5616-M     4-19-2007  Rezoning property located in Will Township from A-1 to E-1.
5587-MS2   5-17-2007  Rezoning property from A-1 to C-3 and granting a SUP for planned unit development
                      and for outdoor storage and/or accessory uses in Joliet Township.
5600-MS2   5-17-2007  Rezoning property from A-2 to R-2 and granting SUP for floodplain development and
                      for planned unit development in Green Garden Township.
5620-S     5-17-2007  Granting SUP for floodway development in Joliet Township.
5621-M     5-17-2007  Rezoning property in Florence Township from A-1 to E-2.
5622-M     5-17-2007  Granting SUP for floodplain development in Joliet Township.
5623-S     5-17-2007  Granting SUP for camping and parking of RVs and other vehicles in Jackson
                      Township.
5627-SV    5-17-2007  Granting SUP to remain in A-1 zoning district in Peotone Township.
5508-S     6-21-2007  Granting SUP for automobile repair shop with outdoor storage of vehicles with
                      proper screening for Units D and E only in Wheatland Township.
5629-S     6-21-2007  Granting SUP for school bus terminal including repair and maintenance of buses
                      with outdoor parking of buses and above ground fuel storage in Joliet Township.
5630-S     6-21-2007  Granting SUP for an existing mobile office in Channahon Township.
5632-M     6-21-2007  Rezoning property located in Crete Township from R-1 to E-2.
5634-SV    6-21-2007  Granting SUP to remain A-1 zoning district.
5639-SV    6-21-2007  Granting SUP to remain A-1 zoning district.
5626-S     7-19-2007  Granting SUP to 20024 Kahler Road, Wilmington, Illinois to remain A-1 zoning
                      district.
5637-M     7-19-2007  Rezoning property located in Florence Township from A-1 to A-1.
5638-MS2   7-19-2007  Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to C-2 and granting
                      SUP for a banquet facility with ancillary sale of alcoholic beverages.
5643-S     7-19-2007  Granting SUP for dog day care business in Wheatland Township.
5647-M     7-19-2007  Rezoning property located in Troy Township from A-1 to E-2.
5648-M     7-19-2007  Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from E-2 to A-1.
5650-SV    7-19-2007  Granting SUP for floodplain development in Wheatland Township.
5610-MS    8-16-2007  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2 and granting SUP for a
                      planned unit development.
5642-MV2   8-16-2007  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2.
5652-S     8-16-2007  Granting SUP for a drive through restaurant in Frankfort Township.
5655-S     8-16-2007  Granting SUP for property in Will Township to remain A-1 zoning district.
5458-S     9-20-2007  Granting SUP for a contractors yard with outdoor storage of trucks and equipment
                      with proper screening in Lockport Township.
5598-MS2   9-20-2007  Granting SUP for a planned unit development and for floodplain development and
                      rezoning from A-1 to R-2 in Green Garden Township.
5612-S     9-20-2007  Granting SUP for a landscaping business with outdoor storage and proper screening
                      in New Lenox Township.
5651-S     9-20-2007  Granting SUP for an auto repair facility in Lockport Township.
5659-M3    9-20-2007  Rezoning property in Monee Township from A-1 to E-2.
5660-SV2   9-20-2007  Granting SUP to remain A-1 zoning district to property in Monee Township.
5662-SV    9-20-2007  Granting SUP to remain A-1 zoning district to property in Wilton Township.
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Refund of zoning application fees in Case 5665-V (Maka).
353
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Extension of effective period for SUP in Case 5535-S2V2 (Lafarge).
354
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Extension of effective period for SUP in Case 5456-S (Beecher Development Co.).
355
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Correction of scrivener’s error in Case 5478-MS2 (Belle Meade PUD).
356
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Extension of effective period for SUP in Case 5538-MS (David H. and Jean Marie
357                   Cornwell).
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Refund of building permit application fees (Michael G. Kristina - permit
358                   0700557).
Res. 07-   9-20-2007  Refund of zoning application fees in Case 5680-SV (Darrell R. Gray, Jr. and
359                   Melissa Gray).
5514-M4S2  10-18-2007 Rezoning property in Green Township from A-1 to R-2A and C-1 and granting SUP for
                      floodplain development and a planned unit development.
5645-S2    10-18-2007 Granting SUP for landscape business and outdoor storage of equipment, vehicles
                      and materials in Homer Township.
5669-SV3   10-18-2007 Granting SUP for a dog kennel for personal use in Peotone Township.
5672-M     10-18-2007 Rezoning property in Monee Township from A-1 to E-1.
5673-M     10-18-2007 Rezoning property in New Lenox Township from A-1 to R-2.
Res. 07-   10-18-2007 Refund of zoning application fees in Case 5678-V2 (Floyd Catchpole).
393
5661-S2    11-15-2007 Granting SUP for landscape business and for outdoor storage.
5676-MV    11-15-2007 Rezoning property in Wheatland Township from A-1 to I-1.
5679-M     11-15-2007 Rezoning property in Manhattan Township from A-2 to E-2.
5681-S     11-15-2007 Granting SUP for a contractor’s yard.
5684-S     11-15-2007 Granting SUP for a powered parachute air park with sales, training, maintenance
                      and classroom.
5631-MS    12-20-2007 Rezoning property in Frankfort Township from R-5 to R-6 and C-1 to R-6 and
                      granting SUP for planned unit development.
5641-MS2   12-20-2007 Rezoning property in Wilton Township from A-1 to E-2 and granting SUP for planned
                      unit development.
5668-SV2   12-20-2007 Granting SUP for two accessory structures without a principal structure.
5674-S     12-20-2007 Granting SUP for Echo Housing in Washington Township.
5675-SV    12-20-2007 Granting SUP for outdoor storage.
5686-S2    12-20-2007 Granting SUP to allow for restoration of automobiles in I-1 District and for
                      motor vehicle dealer in I-1 District.
5687-M     12-20-2007 Rezoning property in Lockport Township from I-1 to C-4.
5688-S     12-20-2007 Granting SUP for group care home with eight beds.
5690-M     12-20-2007 Rezoning property in Wilton Township from A-1 to E-1.
5693-M     12-20-2007 Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to C-2 for part of property.
5694-MS    12-20-2007 Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-1 and granting SUP for
                      planned unit development.
5709-S     12-20-2007 Granting SUP for on-site living quarters for commercial aviation personnel.
5636-MS2   1-17-2008  Granting SUP for outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials and for a truck
                      terminal.
5682-MV2   1-17-2008  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2.
5698-SV    1-17-2008  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5699-SV    1-17-2008  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5700-SV    1-17-2008  Granting SUP for an equine veterinary clinic.
5702-S     1-17-2008  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
Res. 08-01 1-17-2008  Granting extension of SUP - Case 5582-S for Trinity Evangelical Christian Church.
Res. 08-02 1-17-2008  Replacing the data distribution policy with the County Geographic Information
                      System (GIS).
5703-M3    2-21-2008  Rezoning property in Jackson Township from A-1 to R-3.
5704-S     2-21-2008  Granting SUP for accessory structure without a primary structure.
5707-S     2-21-2008  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
Res. 08-45 2-21-2008  Refund of zoning application fees - Case 5691-S2 for Michael Bonifacio.
5708-S2V   3-20-2008  Granting SUP for excavating business.
5720-S     3-20-2008  Granting SUP to remain A-1.
5691-S2    4-17-2008  Granting SUP for existing landscaping business and SUP for outdoor storage in
                      Green Garden Township.
5714-MSV   4-17-2008  Rezoning property in Wilton Township from R-3 and A-1 to E-2 and granting SUP for
                      floodplain development.
5718-MS2   4-17-2008  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to I-1 and granting SUP for
                      outside storage of building materials and SUP for retail sales.
5719-SV    4-17-2008  Granting SUP for floodplain development.
5723-MV4   4-17-2008  Rezoning property in Joliet Township from C-1, C-2 and R-5 to C-3.
5725-S2    4-17-2008  Granting SUP for maintenance facility for trail equipment and crew/police staging
                      and SUP for outdoor storage of trail materials in bins.
Res. 08-   4-17-2008  Granting second extension of effective period of SUP (Case 5456-S).
139
5713-S     5-15-2008  Granting SUP for contractor’s yard and associated materials fabrication with
                      outdoor storage.
5721-SV    5-15-2008  Granting SUP for outside storage of cargo containers.
5730-MV2   6-19-2008  Rezoning property in Wesley Township from A-2 to E-2.
5731-M     6-19-2008  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to I-2.
5732-SV    6-19-2008  Granting SUP for riding stable.
5734-S     6-19-2008  Granting SUP for outdoor storage of gravel piles, culverts and plow equipment.
5736-M     6-19-2008  Rezoning property in Manhattan Township from E-1 to A-1.
5741-M     6-19-2008  Rezoning property in Troy Township from A-1 to R-2.
5742-S     6-19-2008  Granting SUP for park trailer.
5735-MV3   7-17-2008  Rezoning property in Homer Township from R-2 and C-1 to C-3.
5745-MSV2  7-17-2008  Rezoning property in Crete Township from A-1 to R-2 and granting special user
                      permit for sheltered workshop facility.
5746-SV    7-17-2008  Granting SUP to repair semi-tractors.
5747-S     7-17-2008  Granting SUP for Echo Housing.
5748-S2    7-17-2008  Granting SUP for agricultural supply business with outdoor storage and SUP for
                      mobile home office.
5750-S     7-17-2008  Granting SUP for fall festival.
5697-M     8-21-2008  Rezoning property in Troy Township from A-1 to R-4.
5749-MS    8-21-2008  Rezoning property in Will Township from E-1 to E-2 and granting SUP for dog
                      kennel.
5752-S     8-21-2008  Granting SUP for group care home with eight residents.
5756-MV2   8-21-2008  Rezoning property in Will Township from A-1 to E-1.
5757-MV3   8-21-2008  Rezoning property in Green Garden Township from A-1 to R-2.
5758-S     8-21-2008  Granting SUP for construction of sanitary system.
5761-M     8-21-2008  Rezoning property in Frankfort Township from R-2 to C-2.
5762-S2V2  9-18-2008  Granting SUP for landscape business and SUP for outdoor storage.
5765-M     9-18-2008  Rezoning property in Will Township from A-1 to E-1.
5767-S     9-18-2008  Granting SUP to remain A-1.
5764-S     10-16-2008 Granting SUP for trucking company.
5771-S     10-16-2008 Granting SUP to remain A-1.
5787-S2V4  10-16-2008 Granting SUP for township facilities and SUP for outdoor storage.
5772-SV    11-20-2008 Granting SUP to remain A-1.
5773-M     11-20-2008 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from R-1 to E-1.
5774-S     11-20-2008 Granting SUP for floodplain development on 2.61 acres.
5783-MV    11-20-2008 Rezoning property located in New Lenox Township from R-3 and A-2 to R-2.
5785-SV    11-20-2008 Granting SUP to remain A-1.
5788-M     11-20-2008 Rezoning property located in Homer Township from A-1 to R-1.
5802-M     11-20-2008 Rezoning property located in Jackson Township from A-1 to E-2.
5737-M     12-18-2008 Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2.
5789-M     12-18-2008 Rezoning property located in Peotone Township from I-1 to C-4.
5795-S     1-15-2009  Granting SUP to operate a collision repair and parts recovery shop with 15
                      conditions.
5796-S4V4  1-15-2009  Granting SUP for truck terminal, mobile office trailer, concrete redi-mix or
                      asphalt/concrete plant and floodplain development.
5797-M     1-15-2009  Rezoning two parcels in Washington Township from A-1 to E-1.
5801-S     1-15-2009  Granting SUP to expand a landscape waste composting business area with office
                      building and storage.
5803-S2    1-15-2009  Granting SUP for liquor sales in restaurant/bar and a beer garden.
5805-MS2   1-15-2009  Rezoning property located in Crete Township from R-4 to R-6 and granting SUP for
                      a PUD for a golf course.
5811-M     1-15-2009  Rezoning property located in Crete Township from A-1 to R-2.
5804-S     2-19-2009  Granting SUP to allow storage cargo containers.
5809-MS2   3-19-2009  Rezoning property located in Monee Township from A-1 to I-1, granting SUP for an
                      outdoor self-storage facility and indoor self-storage facility.
5812-M     3-19-2009  Rezoning property located in Green Garden Township from A-1 to E-2.
5813-MS    3-19-2009  Rezoning property located in Manhattan Township from A-1 to C-1 and granting SUP
                      for floodplain development.
5815-M2V2  5-21-2009  Rezoning property located in Manhattan Township from A-1 to R-2.
5816-SV3   5-21-2009  Granting SUP for a bus terminal on property in Lockport Township.
5818-S     5-21-2009  Granting SUP for floodplain development for property in Wilton Township.
5819-M     5-21-2009  Rezoning property in Will Township from A-1 to E-1.
5821-MV3   5-21-2009  Rezoning property in Channahon Township from A-1 to R-3.
5822-SV2   5-21-2009  Granting SUP for indoor commercial vehicle and equipment storage in Frankfort
                      Township.
5824-SV5   5-21-2009  SUP for bus lot on property located in Homer Township.
5825-MS2V8 5-21-2009  Rezoning property located in Wesley Township from A-1 and I-1 to I-1 and granting
                      SUPs for agribusiness and overnight parking of trucks.
5827-SV3   5-21-2009  Granting SUP for a fire station in Crete Township.
5829-S     5-21-2009  Granting SUP to expand campground area for overnight camping in A-1 district in
                      Joliet Township.
5830-SV    5-21-2009  Granting SUP for floodplain development in New Lenox Township.
5833-SV38  5-21-2009  Granting SUP for floodplain development in Florence, Manhattan, Wilmington and
                      Wilton Townships.
5817-M     6-18-2009  Rezoning property located in Florence Township from A-1 to E-2.
5831-M     6-18-2009  Rezoning property located in Joliet Township from R-4 to C-3.
5834-S     6-18-2009  Granting SUP for a kennel in Jackson Township.
5844-SV2   6-18-2009  Granting SUP for property in Wilton Township to remain A-1.
5845-M     6-18-2009  Rezoning property in Frankfort Township from A-1 to E-2.
5849-SV3   6-18-2009  Granting SUP for floodplain development in Florence and Wilmington Townships.
5793-S     7-16-2009  Granting SUP for outdoor storage in Lenox Township.
5832-S     7-16-2009  Granting SUP for cargo container storage with 13 conditions in Lockport Township.
5841-SV    7-16-2009  Granting SUP for a fire station in Monee Township.
5781-MS    8-20-2009  Granting SUP for a planned unit development in Plainfield Township.
5828-M2    8-20-2009  Map amendments from A-1 and E-2 to C-1 (Parcel 2) and from E-2 to R-1 (Parcel 1)
                      in Green Garden Township.
5836-S     8-20-2009  SUP for auto body repair business for condo unit in Wheatland Township.
5854-S     8-20-2009  SUP for a drive through in Frankfort Township.
-9-17-2009 SUP for floodplain development in Frankfort Township.
5840-SV    9-17-2009  SUP to allow storage of cargo containers in Channahon Township.
5856-SV    9-17-2009  SUP for floodplain development in Homer Township.
5857-MV    9-17-2009  Map amendment from A-1 to E-2 in Monee Township.
5858-SV    9-17-2009  SUP for continued use of existing overnight campground in Channahon Township.
5865-M     9-17-2009  Map amendment from R-2 and R-2A to R-3 for Veridian Subdivision in Green Garden
                      Township.
5842-SV    10-15-2009 SUP for horses with 14 conditions in Peotone Township.
5861-S     10-15-2009 SUP for outdoor storage of landscape materials and equipment with 12 conditions
                      in Peotone Township.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-1 for the west 255 feet of the north 360 feet of the
5863-M     10-15-2009 southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 34 North, Range 10 East in Jackson
                      Township.
5864-MV2   10-15-2009 Map amendment from A-1 to R-1 in Jackson Township.
5866-SV2   10-15-2009 SUP for outdoor storage (PIN# 01-07-400- 010 and 01-07-400-017) with three
                      conditions in Wheatland Township.
5867-SV    10-15-2009 SUP to remain A-1 zoning with two conditions in Manhattan Township.
Res. 09-
415; 5840- 12-17-2009 Correction of a scrivener’s error.
SV
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for the west 540 feet of the east 1,260 feet o the
5874-M     12-17-2009 south 605 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 34 North, Range
                      12 East of the third principal meridian, containing 7.5 acres, more or less.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
5875-M     12-17-2009 of the southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
5877-SV2   12-17-2009 Special use permit to allow two residences on two parcels/lots to be consolidated
                      into one with one condition (Lots 308 and 309 in Highland Parkside).
                      Map amendment from R-2 to C-2, Lot 150 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s second
5883-MV2   12-17-2009 addition to Lincoln Estates, a subdivision of part of the east half of Section
                      23, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian (Document
                      No. 441155).
5887-S2    1-21-2010  Special use permit for lawn maintenance business with 15 conditions and for
                      outdoor storage and parking with 15 conditions.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for Lots 49, 50, 51, 78, 79 and 80 in Thomas J.
5889-M     2-18-2010  Diven’s Subdivision, containing 20.600 acres more or less and that part of Walton
                      Road vacated by document number R 2006-022303, containing 0.624 acres more or
                      less.
5890-SV2   2-18-2010  Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition.
5893-M     3-18-2010  Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for the northwest quarter of Section 11, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian.
5895-S     5-20-2010  Special use permit to allow an indoor recreational facility with two conditions.
5898-SV    5-20-2010  Special use permit for floodplain development with five conditions and variance
                      of the stream and wetland protection ordinance.
                      Special user permit for events of public interest, including seasonal events,
5903-S2    5-20-2010  banquets, weddings, farm museum and temporary event parking with five conditions
                      and special use permit for liquor sales with six conditions.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for the east 341.58 feet of the south 382.57 feet
5905-M     5-20-2010  of the northeast quarter of Section 34, Township 36 North, Range 11 East of the
                      third principal meridian.
                      Special use permit for floodplain development (part of pin #04-10-01-300-002-
5908-S2V2  5-20-2010  0000) with four conditions; special use permit for floodplain development (part
                      of pin #04- 10-02-400-002-0000) with four conditions.
5910-SV    5-20-2010  Special use permit to remain A-1 with two conditions.
Res. 10-   5-20-2010  Extension of an effective period of a special use permit (Case 5809-MS2).
131
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-4 for the south 120 feet of the north 161.9 feet of
5902-M     6-17-2010  the east 150 feet of the part of the northwest quarter of Section 2, Township 35
                      North, and in Range 10 East of the third principal meridian.
                      Map amendment from A-2 to A-1 for the east half of the northwest quarter of
5911-M     6-17-2010  Section 18, Township 32 North, Range 10 East of the third principal meridian,
                      except the north 2,302 feet and the west 581 feet.
5917-S     6-17-2010  Special use permit for residential lease- hold use with one condition.
5918-S     6-17-2010  Special use permit for residential lease- hold use with one condition.
5919-SV    6-17-2010  Special use permit to allow a horse riding school in E-2 zoning district with six
                      conditions.
Res. 10-   6-17-2010  Refunding building permit application fees for BP Pipelines (North America).
165
5914-SV    8-19-2010  Special use permit for floodplain development with eight conditions and a
                      variance from the stream and wetland protection ordinance.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 Parcel B for that part of Lots 22 and 41 in the
5920-M     8-19-2010  subdivision of Section 15, being part of the southwest quarter of Section 15,
                      Township 32 North, Range 10 east of the third principal meridian.
                      Special use permit for floodplain development with three conditions (part of pin
                      # 01-17-500-002); special use permit for floodplain development with three
5922-S3V3  8-19-2010  conditions (part of pin #01-20-500-002, northeast; special use permit for
                      floodplain development with three conditions (part of pin #01-20-500-002,
                      southeast).
5023-S     8-19-2010  Special use permit for domestic animals with two conditions.
5924-MSV   8-19-2010  Map amendment from R-2 to C-2 for special use permit for residence of proprietor
                      with one condition.
                      Map amendment from R-2 to E-1 for the east 300 feet of the north 734.17 feet of
5927-MV    8-19-2010  the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township 36 North, Range 10 east of the
                      third principal meridian.
5930-S     8-19-2010  Special use permit for floodplain development with two conditions.
5931-S     8-19-2010  Special use permit for package liquor sales with three conditions.
5936-SV    8-19-2010  Special use permit for floodplain development with three conditions.
                      Map amendment from R-2 to C-3 for a tract of land in the south 6.47 chains of
                      that part of Lot 2, lying easterly of a line which is 50 feet east of and
5937-M     8-19-2010  parallel to the easterly right-of-way line of the Illinois Central Railroad, in
                      Ogden’s Subdivision of Raccoon Grove Reserve, in Township 34 North, Range 13 East
                      of the third principal meridian.
Res. 10-   8-19-2010  Correction of scrivener’s error for Case 5700-SV.
262
Res. 10-   9-16-2010  Extension of an effective period of a special use permit and variance for Case
293                   5840-SV.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-2 for the south 165 .50 feet of the west 330 feet of
5940-M     10-21-2010 the north half of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township
                      34 North, Range 12 east of the third principal meridian.
5932-SV2   10-21-2010 Special use permit for stabling of miniature horses with seven conditions.
5933-S     10-21-2010 Special use permit to allow an illegal non- conforming kennel within 75 feet of
                      the property line and 75 feet from the near residential use with 17 conditions.
5935-MS    10-21-2010 Map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for special use permit for floodplain development
                      with six conditions.
5913-S     11-18-2010 Special use permit for floodplain development with four conditions.
5946-S     11-18-2010 Special use permit for outdoor storage pursuant to § 5.3-4 of the Zoning Code
                      with two conditions.
5948-SV3   1-20-2011  Special use permit to operate a foster case facility for up to ten additional
                      animals within seven conditions.
5949-SV7   1-20-2011  Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition.
5950-S     1-20-2011  Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition.
5955-S     1-20-2011  Special use permit for private facility not accessory to principal use with nine
                      conditions.
5934-S2V4  2-17-2011  Special use permit for a contractor’s shop and contractor’s yard with 31
                      conditions.
5954-SV    2-17-2011  Special use permit for bus terminal with eight conditions.
5957-S2    2-17-2011  Special use permit for a church with six conditions and for a floodplain
                      development with two conditions.
5958-SV3   2-17-2011  Special use permit for a second residence with one condition.
                      Zoning case 5942-MV, rezoning part of the south half of the southeast quarter of
5942-MV    3-17-2011  Section 23, Township 34 North, Range 12 East of the third principal meridian from
                      E-1 to E-2.
5961-SV    3-17-2011  Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition and a variance
                      from stream and wetlands protection regulations.
Res. 11-88 3-17-2011  Extending the effective period for a special use permit and variance (5840-SV).
5963-SV    4-21-2011  Special use permit for residence of proprietor, caretaker or watchman with three
                      conditions.
5964-M2V   4-21-2011  Zoning case 5964-M2V, rezoning property in Peotone Township from C-2 to I-2 and
                      from A-1 to I-2.
5967-MV    4-21-2011  Zoning case 5967-MV, rezoning property in Troy Township from A-1 to R-2, part of
                      06-28-200-013-010.
5966-S     5-19-2011  Special use permit for nursery retail sales with five conditions.
5968-S     5-19-2011  Special use permit for bus terminal with eight conditions.
5969-M2    5-19-2011  Zoning case 5969-M2, rezoning property in Wilton Township from A-1 and I-1 to I-
                      2 and from I-1 to R-2.
5971-SV    6-16-2011  Special use permit for cargo containers with 11 conditions
5972-S     6-16-2011  Special use permit for residence or proprietor, caretaker or watchman with three
                      conditions.
5976-S     6-16-2011  Special use permit for an auto repair/auto body business with ten conditions.
5973-SV4   7-21-2011  Special use permit for a contractor’s yard with outdoor storage variance from
                      section 6.1-9-6 of the Zoning Code with four conditions.
5978-S     7-21-2011  Special use permit for floodplain development with three conditions.
5979-SV    7-21-2011  Special use permit for a contractor’s yard with two conditions.
5980-S     7-21-2011  Special use permit for a day care home for children with four conditions.
5981-SV    7-21-2011  Special use permit for a towing business with eight conditions.
5985-MV2   7-21-2011  Zoning case 5985-MV2, rezoning property in Lockport Township from R-4 to C-2.
5998-MV    7-21-2011  Zoning case 5998-MV, rezoning property in Monee Township from C-2 to R-2A.
5983-SV    8-18-2011  Special use permit for a contractor’s yard with seven conditions.
5986-MV5   8-18-2011  Zoning case 5986-MV5, rezoning property in Homer Township from C-2 and R-2 to C-
                      3.
5993-MS2V2 8-18-2011  Special use permit for outdoor storage with 12 conditions and special use permit
                      for residence of proprietor, caretaker or watchman with four conditions.
5990-S     9-15-2011  Special use permit for outdoor storage with five conditions located in Lockport
                      Township.
5994-MS    9-15-2011  Zoning map amendment from C-1 to C-2 and a special use permit for an existing
                      apartment with six conditions located in New Lenox Township.
                      Special use permit for contractors yard with two conditions, for residence of
5995-S3V2  11-17-2011 proprietor, caretaker or watchman with three conditions and for a camper, R.V.
                      and bus repair shop Lot 7 with four conditions
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-1 and a special use permit for general
5996-MS3V3 9-15-2011  construction and Demolition recycling facility with 20 conditions, a special use
                      permit for floodplain development, a special use permit for outdoor storage with
                      20 conditions located in Wheatland Township.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to C-4 and a special use permit for residence of
5997-MSV   9-15-2011  proprietor, caretaker or watchman with two conditions located in Wheatland
                      Township.
5999-MV    10-20-2011 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for property located in Custer Township.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2 and a special use permit for personal
6000-MS    10-20-2011 outdoor storage similar to a contractor’s yard with four conditions located in
                      Wilmington Township.
6001-S     10-20-2011 Special use permit for floodplain development with five conditions located in
                      Green Garden Township.
6002-SV    9-15-2011  Special use permit for a body shop with ten conditions located in New Lenox
                      Township.
6003-S     11-17-2011 Special use permit for a contractor’s yard with landscape outdoor storage with
                      eight conditions.
6004-S     9-15-2011  Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition located in Troy
                      Township.
6005-S     9-15-2011  Special use permit for Echo housing with one condition located in Washington
                      Township.
6007-S     9-15-2011  Special use permit for floodplain development with one condition.
6009-S     11-17-2011 Special use permit for a youth center with special events with two conditions.
6011-MV2   10-20-2011 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 located in Green Garden Township.
6012-S     12-15-2011 Special use permit for floodplain development.
6014-S     11-17-2011 Special use permit for packaged liquor sales with two conditions.
                      Special use permit for floodplain development and construction of a compensatory
6017-S     12-15-2011 storage area in accordance with the Will county Stormwater Ordiannce with one
                      condition.
6018-S     11-17-2011 Special use permit for a home day care with two conditions.
6021-M     11-17-2011 Map amendment in Jackson Township from A-2 to R-2A.
6022-SV    12-15-2011 Special use permit for automobile repair business with one condition.
6016-M     1-19-2012  Zoning case 6016-M, rezoning property in Troy Township from R-2A to A-1.
6024-S     1-19-2012  Special use permit to amend Unit 4, Pod 9, of the Lakewood Falls PUD with three
                      conditions.
6027-S     1-19-2012  Special use permit to remain A-1 with two conditions.
6019-S     2-16-2012  Special use permit for a house of worship and religious center with three
                      conditions.
                      Special use permit to allow a clean construction and demolition debris filling
                      operation (with 14 conditions); special use permit to allow outdoor concrete
6029-S3V2  3-15-2012  recycling with outdoor storage (with three conditions); special use permit for
                      floodplain development (with one condition); variance from boundary fencing
                      requirement.
6031-S     3-15-2012  Special use permit for the sale and consumption of alcohol as an accessory use to
                      the existing golf course with two conditions.
6032-M     3-15-2012  Zoning map amendment from R-1 to R-2 located in New Lenox Township.
6041-MV    3-15-2012  Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1 located in Manhattan Township.
6034-S     4-19-2012  Special use permit for a residence on nonconforming lease land with one
                      condition.
                      Zoning map amendment from I-3 and R-2 to I-2 (Parcel 1 and 2); special use permit
6035-MSV5  4-19-2012  for a self storage facility that includes indoor and outdoor storage with eight
                      conditions; variance for building height from 12 feet to 16 feet.
6037-MV2   4-19-2012  Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 (Parcel 2).
6042-S     5-17-2012  Special use permit to open a you pick your own apple orchard and vegetable stand
                      with one condition.
6043-S     5-17-2012  Special use permit for an auto repair shop with six conditions.
6046-S  �6-21-2012  Special use permit for stabling of horses or other domestic animals for private
                      use with six conditions.
6049-M     6-21-2012  Zoning map amendment from R-3 to E-2 (Parcel B).
6052-V2    6-21-2012  Variance for reduction of front yard fence from 90% see through to 0%.
6053-MV2   7-19-2012  Zoning map amendment from R-1 to A-1 (Parcel 1 and 2).
6055-SV2   7-19-2012  Special use permit to operate a bed and breakfast in an E-2 zoning district with
                      two conditions.
6056-MSV2  7-19-2012  Special use permit for a truck company, including office, truck repair and
                      outdoor truck storage with two conditions.
6033-SV    9-20-2012  Special use permit for outdoor storage with 11 conditions.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-3; special use permit for an asphalt concrete
                      plant and outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials with one condition;
                      special use permit for clean construction or demolition debris fill and outdoor
6051-MS3   10-18-2012 storage of uncontained bulk materials (entire site) with 17 conditions; special
                      use permit for landscape waste composting site and organic waste composting site
                      and outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials (entire site) with 11
                      conditions.
6067-MS    10-18-2012 Zoning map amendment from I-1 to I-2; special use permit for a truck terminal
                      with two conditions.
6068-MS    12-19-2013 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2.
6068-MS    12-19-2013 Special use permit for a concrete recycling facility with outdoor storage of
                      uncontained bulk materials with 11 conditions.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-3 to I-1 on Lot 2; special use permit to amend Unit 1
6070-MS2   10-18-2012 of Carlson Brothers Commercial Subdivision Planned Unit Development with one
                      condition on Lots 1, 2, 3; special use permit for outdoors storage and processing
                      with two conditions on Lots 1, 2, 3.
6072-S     10-18-2012 Special use permit for package liquor sales with two conditions.
6074-M     10-18-2012 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-2A.
6044-S     12-20-2012 Special use permit to expand existing landscape composting facility and to
                      compost food/organic waste, manure waste and tobacco waste with 14 conditions.
6082-S     1-17-2013  Special use permit for an outdoor storage yard with one condition.
6083-S     1-17-2013  Special use permit for a group care home with eight residents with one condition.
Res. 13-01 1-17-2013  Correction to a scrivener’s error Case 6067-MS.
6087-M     2-21-2013  Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1.
6088-S     2-21-2013  Special use permit for a bus terminal with one condition.
6089-S     2-21-2013  Special use permit for a bar with four conditions.
6090-SV9   3-21-2013  Special use permit for a cargo container storage and maintenance facility with
                      ten conditions.
6094-S     3-21-2013  Special use permit for the care and rehabilitation of native fauna with ten
                      conditions.
Res. 13-48 3-21-2013  Appealing a decision of the Will County Planning and Zoning Commission, Case
                      6090-SV9.
6095-SV9   4-18-2013  Special use permit for a cargo container storage and maintenance facility with
                      eight conditions.
6096-S     4-18-2013  Special use permit for sports and recreation facility with two conditions.
6097-S     4-18-2013  Special use permit for recreational vehicle park/RV campground with six
                      conditions.
6100-S     4-18-2013  Special use permit for overnight tent and pop-up camping with four conditions.
6101-S     4-18-2013  Special use permit for private recreational club with 12 conditions.
6102-SV    5-16-2013  Special use permit for conversion of a legal non-conforming two-unit with one
                      condition.
6104-S     6-20-2013  Special use permit for a trucking terminal with 9 conditions.
6105-S     5-16-2013  Special use permit for sports and recreation facility with two conditions.
6107-S     6-20-2013  Special use permit for a type 2 outdoor display with 5 conditions.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-3 to I-2; special use permit for outdoor processing
                      and storage of materials associated with a recycling center and scrap salvage
                      yard with 22 conditions; special use permit for residence of proprietor,
6108-MS2V7 6-20-2013  caretaker, or watchman with 1 condition; variance for maximum square footage per
                      sign face from 100 square feet to 288 square feet; variance for maximum fence
                      height in the front yard from 4 feet to 8 feet; variance to allow for a solid
                      opaque fence within the front yard; variance from Section 8.5-7(F) to allow for
                      barbed wire adjacent to residential zoning district.
6110-S     8-15-2013  Special use permit for light equipment sales and rental with 7 conditions.
6111-S     8-15-2013  Special use permit for the keeping of farm animals with 9 conditions.
6112-M     8-15-2013  Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-3.
6114-S     8-15-2013  Special use permit for a firearms dealer and gunsmithing services with 9
                      conditions.
6115-S2    8-15-2013  Special use permit for grain storage with 4 conditions; special use permit for
                      animal feed preparation, grinding, mixing and storing with 4 conditions.
6116-S     8-15-2013  Special use permit for landscaping and lawn maintenance business with 16
                      conditions.
6117-S     9-19-2013  Special use permit for sports and recreation center with 9 conditions.
6119-S     9-19-2013  Special use permit for craft brewing and distilling with 3 conditions.
6121-M     9-19-2013  Zoning map amendment from E-2 to R-2.
6123-M     10-17-2013 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2 (Tract 1 and Tract 2).
6125-S     10-17-2013 Special use permit for the keeping of horses, farm animals and livestock with 8
                      conditions.
6126-S     10-17-2013 Special use permit for an outdoor recyclable material processing facility with 20
                      conditions.
6130-MV2   11-21-2013 Zoning map amendment from C-2 to C-3 (Parcel 1 and Parcel 2).
6131-MV4   11-21-2013 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-1 (Parcel B).
6133-M     11-21-2013 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-1.
6144-M     11-21-2013 Zoning map amendment from C-4 to I-1.
Res. 13-   11-21-2013 Appealing decision of Will County Planning and Zoning Commission No. ZAA 2-13-02.
296
6146-S  �12-19-2013 Special use permit for the conversion of a legal nonconforming second residence
                      to a special use with four conditions.
6149-M     2-20-2014  Reclassifying Lot 128 in Eastmoreland from C-2 to R-5.
6153-S2    2-20-2014  Special use permit for sports and recreation with four conditions and a special
                      use permit for ancillary liquor service with four conditions.
6155-MV    1-16-2014  Reclassifying part of the west 665 feet of the southwest quarter of Section 29,
                      Township 33 North, Range 14 East of the Third Principal Meridian from A-2 to A-1.
                      Reclassifying the south half of the west half of the southwest one-quarter of
6158-M     3-20-2014  Section 9, Township 33 North, Range 11, east of the Third Principal Meridian from
                      E-2 to A-1.
6208-S     1-15-2015  Special use permit for animal care and boarding with four conditions for property
                      commonly known as 32510 S. Egyptian Trail, Peotone, IL.
                      Special use permit for an owner occupied accessory dwelling unit with five
6210-S     6-18-2015  conditions for dwelling unit commonly known as 22629 W. 143rd Street, Plainfield,
                      IL.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal with 14 conditions and a map amendment
6216-MS    1-15-2015  from A-1 to I-1 for Pin #30-07-26-100-036, and from C-6 to I-1 for Pin #30-07-26-
                      100- 035 and for Pin #30- 07-26-100-034 in Joliet Township, commonly known as
                      1110 Manhattan Road, Joliet, IL.
6217-S     1-15-2015  Special use permit for a bar with four conditions for property commonly known as
                      13410 U.S. Route 6, Mokena, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from I-2 to A-1, special use permit for a landscaping and
6220-MSV   8-20-2015  lawn maintenance business with eight conditions and variance for lot frontage
                      from 300 feet to 10 feet for property commonly known as 2225 Maple Road, Joliet,
                      IL.
                      Special use permit for manufacturing and industrial services, general with three
6223-SV2   4-16-2015  conditions and variance for east side yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet and
                      variance for rear yard setback from 10 feet to 0 feet for property commonly known
                      as 18500 W. 9th Street, Romeoville, Il.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-1 and a variance for maximum accessory
6226-MV    5-21-2015  building area from 1,800 square feet to 2,025 square feet for property commonly
                      known as 21741 W. Old Renwick Road, Plainfield, IL.
6228-M     4-16-2015  Zoning map amendment from R-2 to C-3 for property commonly known as 24325 Western
                      Avenue, University Park, IL.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales/rental in an I-1 zoning district
6236-S     8-20-2015  with seven conditions for property commonly known as 24137 W. 111th Street, Suite
                      F, Naperville, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-2 to C-3 with a variance for west front yard setback
6239-MV3   7-16-2015  from 100 feet to 69.54 feet, a variance for south front yard setback from 100
                      feet to 47.68 feet and a variance for north side yard setback from 10 feet to
                      7.06 feet for property commonly known as 1901 East Washington Street, Joliet, IL.
                      Special use permit for a drive-in/drive- through facility with two conditions
                      with a variance for menu board sign setback from residential zoning district from
6240-SV2   7-16-2015  75 feet to 72.09 feet and a variance for 1,000 feet or greater of street frontage
                      to 574.22 feet of street frontage required for 2 free standing signs for property
                      commonly known as 16360 S. Lincoln Highway, Plainfield, IL.
6241-M     6-18-2015  Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1 for property commonly known as 0.5 miles
                      south of East Eagle Lake Road, west of South Yates Avenue, Beecher, IL.
6242-M     7-16-2015  Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-1 for property commonly known as 23132 E. Main
                      Street, Plainfield, IL.
6246-S     6-18-2015  Special use permit for sports and recreation participant with three conditions
                      for property commonly known as 25553 Wolf’s Crossing Road, Plainfield, IL.
6249-M     6-18-2015  Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1 for property commonly known as 31500 S.
                      Smith Road, Wilmington, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-2 to I-1 and a variance for front setback from 30
6252-MV    8-20-2015  feet to 11.80 feet for property commonly known as 13706 S. Archer Avenue, Lemont,
                      IL.
6253-S     7-16-2015  Special use permit for light equipment sales/rentals with three conditions for
                      property commonly known as 9740 S. Route 59, Naperville, IL.
6262-S     11-19-2015 Special use permit for major entertainment and spectator sports with liquor with
                      15 conditions for property commonly known as 3431 E. Brunswick Road, Beecher, IL.
6269-MS2   11-19-2015 Zoning map amendment from C-3 to C-2 for Parcel 1.
6272-S     11-19-2015 Special use permit for keeping of chickens with one condition for property
                      commonly known as 2416 Suffolk Lane, Joliet, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-2 to R-3 and special use permit for a drug and
6273-MS    12-17-2015 alcohol addiction recovery home with four conditions for property commonly known
                      as 2319 Manhattan Road, Joliet, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2, variance for side yard setback from 50 feet
6281-MV2   1-21-2016  to 13.4 feet and variance for side yard setback from 50 feet to 32.2 feet for
                      property commonly known as 15506 West 151st Street, Homer Glen, IL.
                      Special use permit for landscape and lawn maintenance business in the A-1 zoning
6283-S     2-18-2016  district with eight conditions for vacant property on West 187th Street, Mokena,
                      IL.
6285-M     2-18-2016  Zoning map amendment from E-2 to A-1 for property commonly known as 11345 W.
                      Pauling Road, Manhattan, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-2 to I-1 and special use permit for a self-service
6261-MS    3-17-2016  storage facility with outdoor storage for Pin # 23-15-07-100-002 in Crete
                      Township, vacant land on West Norfolk
6299-S     5-19-2016  Special use permit for sports and recreation participant with one condition for
                      25553 Wolf’s Crossing Road, Plainfield, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from E-2 to A-1, variances for lot area from 10 acres to
6287-MV2   6-16-2016  9.18 acres and for lot frontage from 300 feet to 290.64 feet for property
                      commonly known as 37448 S. River Lane, Custer Park, IL.
6304-M     7-21-2016  Zoning map amendment from R-3 to A-1 for Pin #13-19-10-303- 026-0000 in Wilton
                      Township commonly known as 29455 S. Quigley Road, Manhattan, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for Pin #23-16-17-300- 034-0000 and from R-
6306-M2    7-21-2016  1 to E-2 for Pin #23-16-17-300-035-0000 in Crete Township commonly known as 3514
                      E. Danne Road, Crete, IL.
6312-SV    7-21-2016  Special use permit for animal care and boarding with 5 conditions for property
                      commonly known as 30936 S. Indian Trail, Wilmington, IL.
                      Special use permit for conversion of non-conforming towing business to allow for
6314-SV2   7-21-2016  expansion with 12 conditions for property commonly known as 23808 S. Center Road,
                      Frankfort, IL.
ZC-16-002  8-18-2016  Special use permit to operate a landscaping business for property commonly known
                      as 17416 Bluff Road, Lemont, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-6 to C-3 and special use permit for PUD-Dollar
ZC-16-005  8-18-2016  General Store for property commonly known as 1610 and 1620 S. Chicago Street,
                      Joliet, IL.
ZC-16-006  5-18-2017  Special use permit for exotic animals and special use permit for animal care/
                      boarding for 1301 E. Offner Road, Beecher, IL.
ZC-16-007  11-17-2016 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-1 for property commonly known as 24000 S.
                      Route 45, Frankfort, IL.
                      Special use permit for the conversion of a non-conforming use with 2 conditions
ZC-16-009  9-15-2016  for property in Wesley Township, commonly known as 1839 S. Water Street,
                      Wilmington, IL.
ZC-16-011  10-20-2016 Zoning map amendment from R-4 and R-5 to Special Purpose Parks and Open Space
                      District for property commonly known as 7540 W. Braemar Lane, Frankfort, IL.
                      Special use permit for an outdoor storage yard with 7 conditions for property in
ZC-16-012  10-20-2016 New Lenox Township, commonly known as vacant property on Cherry Hill Road, New
                      Lenox, IL.
                      Special use permit for a recreational club with campground with 4 conditions for
ZC-16-014  10-20-2016 property in Custer Township, commonly known as vacant property on South Shenk
                      Road, Braidwood, IL.
ZC-16-017  12-15-2016 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-5 with variances for property commonly known
                      as northeast corner of Green Garden Place and Barry Avenue, Lockport, IL.
ZC-16-022  11-17-2016 Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1 for property commonly known as 9939 Stuenkel
                      Road, Frankfort, IL.
ZC-16-025  12-15-2016 Special use permit to keep horses on the property commonly known as 26944 S.
                      Beverly Drive, Monee, IL.
ZC-16-027  12-15-2016 Zoning amendment from A-1 to E-1 for property commonly known as 19145 W. Donohue
                      Road, Wilmington, IL.
Res. 17-25 2-16-2017  Extending special use permit 17-001 for ZC 6262-S, Richard and Marie Volek, for
                      property commonly known as 3431 E. Brunswick Road, Beecher, IL.
ZC-16-036  3-16-2017  Zoning amendment from A-1 to C-4 for property commonly known as 27641 South Route
                      52, Manhattan, IL.
ZC-16-040  3-16-2017  Special use permit for a truck terminal for property commonly known as 2842 S.
                      State Street, Lockport, IL.
ZC-16-042  3-16-2017  Special use permit for a lawn maintenance business for property known as 26154 W.
                      Shepley Road, Minooka, IL.
ZC-17-001  6-15-2017  Special use permit for auto sales in I-1 Zoning District with two conditions for
                      property commonly known as 31W377 Schoger Drive, Naperville, IL.
ZC-17-004  3-16-2017  Special use permit for religious assembly in an I-1 Zoning District for property
                      commonly known as 1303 Schoolhouse Road, Unit 3, New Lenox, IL.
ZC-17-009  4-20-2017  Special use permit for ancillary liquor sales in C-1 District for 23956 S.
                      Highway 53, Elwood, IL.
ZC-17-012  10-19-2017 Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 on Parcel B commonly known as 22712 S. Pfeiffer
                      Road, Frankfort, IL.
                      Special use permit for the keeping of livestock/farm animals with 4 conditions
ZC-17-027  12-21-2017 for PIN #18-13-25-402-005-0000, in Green Garden Township, commonly known as 26930
                      Harlem Avenue, Monee, IL.
ZC-17-034  10-19-2017 Special use permit for ECHO Housing, for Pin #14-12-23-400- 021-0000, in
                      Manhattan Township, commonly known as 13041 W. Haley Road, Manhattan, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major utility/solar farm facility and variance for
ZC-17-036  1-18-2018  maximum fence height from 5 feet to 6 feet, for PIN #23-15-34-200-012-0000, in
                      Crete Township, commonly known as vacant property on E. Goodenow Rd., Crete, IL.
ZC-17-039  11-16-2017 Special use permit for a truck terminal with 7 conditions for Pin #30-07-26-100-
                      040-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as 1110 Manhattan Road, Joliet, IL.
ZC-17-040  10-19-2017 Map amendment from R-2 to C-6 for Pin #11-04-36-100-013- 0000, in Lockport
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on Briggs Street, Lockport, IL.
                      Special use permit for sports and recreation with 4 conditions for Pin #07-01-21-
ZC-17-045  11-16-2017 200-006-0000, in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 24137 W. 111th Street,
                      Naperville, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from E-2 to A-1, for PIN #18-13-24- 300-008-0000 and #18-13-
ZC-17-051  3-15-2018  24-301-011-0000, in Green Garden Township, commonly known as vacant land on South
                      80th Avenue, Monee, IL.
ZC-17-054  6-21-2018  Zoning map amendment from C-2 to R-5 for PIN #30-07-11-409- 040-0000, in Joliet
                      Township, commonly known as 1427 E. Cass Street, Joliet, IL.
ZC-17-055  2-15-2018  Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #30-07-13-400- 023-0000, in Joliet
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on New Lenox Road, Joliet, IL.
ZC-17-056  6-21-2018  Zoning map amendment from C-2 to R-5 for PIN #30-07-11-409- 041-0000, in Joliet
                      Township, commonly known as 1429 E. Cass Street, Joliet, IL.
ZC-17-057  2-15-2018  Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #11-04-02-205- 020-0000, in
                      Lockport Township, commonly known as 13816 High Road, Lockport, IL.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales/rentals, for PIN #15- 08-26-200-007-
ZC-17-062  2-15-2018  0000, in New Lenox Township, commonly known as 1333 S. Schoolhouse Road, New
                      Lenox, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm facility with 16
ZC-17-071  5-17-2018  conditions, in Washington Township, commonly known as vacant property on East
                      Indiana Avenue, Beecher, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm facility with 17
ZC-17-072  5-17-2018  conditions, in Washington Township, commonly known as vacant property on East
                      Indiana Avenue, Beecher, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility for a solar farm facility with 16
ZC-18-002  5-17-2018  conditions, in Manhattan Township, commonly known as 27555 S. Gougar Road,
                      Manhattan, IL.
ZC-18-005  4-19-2018  Special use permit for a firearms dealer, for PIN #14-12-01-401- 006-0000, in
                      Manhattan Township, commonly known as 23565 S. Highland Drive, Manhattan, IL.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm, for PIN #14-12-35-300-002- 0000, in
ZC-18-009  8-16-2018  Manhattan Township, commonly known as vacant property on S. Kankakee Street,
                      Manhattan, IL.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm, for PIN # (part of) 21-14-32- 400-004-0000
ZC-18-010  8-16-2018  tracts 10, 11, 12, in Monee Township, commonly known as north east corner of IL-
                      50 and West Offner Road.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm, for PIN #22-22-21-400-002- 0000 and 22-22-
ZC-18-011  8-16-2018  22-300-002-0000, in Washington Township, commonly known as 30913 D. Dixie Highway
                      and vacant property on east Corning Road, Beecher, IL.
                      Special use permit for an operation of a trucking terminal with 4 conditions, in
ZC-18-013  5-23-2018  Wilmington Township, commonly known as vacant property on West Lorenzo Road,
                      Wilmington, IL.
                      Special use permit for the keeping of more than 6 companion animals (animal care/
ZC-18-016  6-21-2018  boarding) with 7 conditions, for PIN #10-11-16-300-011-0000, in Jackson Township,
                      commonly known as 19921 Munch Lane, Elwood, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-3 on part of PIN #13-19- 15-100-037-0000, in
ZC-18-019  4-19-2018  Wilton Township, commonly known as 29525 S. Cedar Road and vacant property on S.
                      Cedar road, Manhattan, IL.
ZC-18-021  5-23-2018  Special use permit for an attached accessory dwelling unit, in Manhattan
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on West Creek Drive, Manhattan, IL.
ZC-18-022  5-23-2018  Special use permit for elderly cottage housing authority (ECHO) with 1 condition,
                      in Jackson Township, commonly known as 24300 South Rowell Avenue, Elwood, IL.
ZC-18-025  7-19-2018  Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1, for PIN #16-05-31- 400-006-0000, in Homer
                      Township, commonly known as 16227 W. Oak Avenue, Joliet, IL.
                      Special use permit for the keeping of horses/farm animals/livestock with 1
ZC-18-026  6-21-2018  condition, for PIN #23-16-17-300-007-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as
                      25160 S. Stateline Road, Crete, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm, for PIN #23-15-34-
ZC-18-029  8-16-2018  400-002-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as vacant land on East Goodenow
                      Road, Beecher, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm, for PIN #23-15-35-
ZC-18-030  8-16-2018  300-001-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as vacant land on East Goodenow
                      Road, Beecher, IL.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm, for PIN #13-19-14-100-005- 0000, in Wilton
ZC-18-032  8-16-2018  Township, commonly known as vacant property on South Elevator Road, Manhattan,
                      IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm with 12 conditions
ZC-18-037  10-18-2018 for PIN #03-17-35-300-002-0000, in Wilmington Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on South Route 53, Wilmington, IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from I-1 to I-2 and a special use permit for a truck
ZC-18-040  10-18-2018 terminal with 6 conditions, for PIN #05-06-03-200-017-0000 in Troy Township,
                      commonly known as vacant property on NW Frontage Road, Shorewood, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm, for PIN #23-15-15-
ZC-18-042  9-20-2018  400-010-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as 631 S. Cottage Grove Avenue,
                      Crete, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm with 11 conditions,
ZC-18-043  10-18-2018 for PIN #23-15-34-200-009-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on East Goodenow Road, Beecher, IL.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm, for PIN #21-14-28-
ZC-18-044  9-20-2018  400-021-0000, in Monee Township, commonly known as vacant property on South Will
                      Center Road, Monee, IL.
                      Special use permit for major public utility, a public works facility, for PIN
ZC-18-048  8-16-2018  #17-20-25-300-022-0000, in Peotone Township, commonly known as 31831 S. Rathje
                      Road, Peotone, IL.
ZC-18-050  10-18-2018 Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2, for PIN #14-12-23- 300-002-0000, in
                      Manhattan Township, commonly known as 13217 W. Haley Road, Manhattan, IL.
                      Special use permit for a private recreational club with four conditions for PIN
ZC-18-052  11-15-2018 #18-13-01-100-008-0000, in Green Garden Township, commonly known as 7703 W.
                      Steger Road, Frankfort, IL.
ZC-18-055  10-18-2018 Zoning map amendment from R-1 to C-4, for PIN #16-05-07- 101-008-0000, in Homer
                      Township, commonly known as 14355 Archer Avenue, Lockport, IL.
                      Special use permit for rural events with six conditions and for ancillary liquor
ZC-18-059  1-17-2019; service in conjunction with allowed agritourism uses with three conditions for
           4-18-2019  PIN #11-04-30-400-025-0000, in Lockport Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on South Weber Road, Lockport, IL.
                      Special use permit for landscaping and lawn maintenance business with 12
ZC-18-066  11-15-2018 conditions for PIN #13-19-15-100-033-0000, in Wilton Township, commonly known as
                      vacant property on W. Joliet Road, Manhattan, IL.
ZC-18-071  12-20-2018 Map amendment from R-3 to R-5 for PIN #15-08-10-302-045- 0000, in New Lenox
                      Township, commonly known as 208 Redwood Avenue, New Lenox, IL.
ZC-18-072  12-20-2018 Map amendment from A-1 to R-3 for PIN #11-04-14-408-020- 0000, in Lockport
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on Bluff Street, Lockport, IL.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm with 12 conditions for PIN #10-11-04-101-013-
ZC-18-076  1-17-2019  0000 and 10-11-04-200-004-0000, in Jackson Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on W Sharp Road, Elwood, IL.
ZC-18-080  1-17-2019  Special use permit for a solar farm with 11 conditions for PIN #02-24-17-103-009-
                      0000, commonly known as vacant property on S. Route 53, Braidwood, IL.
ZC-18-086  3-21-2019  Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for Parcel 2, for PIN #18-13- 14-100-022-0000, in
                      Green Garden Township, commonly known as 8686 Dralle Road, Frankfort, IL.
ZC-18-087  3-21-2019  Map amendment from C-2 to R-5, for PIN #11-04-35-322-009- 0000, in Lockport
                      Township, commonly known as vacant parcel on California Avenue, Lockport, IL.
ZC-18-094  3-21-2019  Special use permit for a solar farm with 8 conditions, for PIN #30-07-29-200-010-
                      0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as 1711 S. Brandon Road, Joliet, IL.
                      Special use permit for a landscaping and lawn maintenance business with 14
ZC-19-003  4-18-2019  conditions for PIN #14-12-19-100-022-0000, in Manhattan Township, commonly known
                      as 16540 W. Sweedler Road, Manhattan, IL.
ZC-19-007  5-16-2019  Map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #30-07-13-400- 029-0000, in Joliet
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on New Lenox Road, Joliet, IL.
ZC-19-008  5-16-2019  Map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #30-07-13-400- 032-0000, in Joliet
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on New Lenox Road, Joliet, IL.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales with 3 conditions for PIN #07-01-27-
ZC-19-010  5-16-2019  101-018- 0000, in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 12019 Spaulding School
                      Dr., Unit B, Plainfield, IL.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1, for PIN #14-12-11-300- 021-0000, in Manhattan
ZC-19-011  5-16-2019  Township, commonly known as vacant property on South Kankakee Street, Manhattan,
                      IL.
                      Special use permit for an on premise dynamic display in agricultural and
ZC-19-015  5-16-2019  residential zoning districts with 1 condition for PIN #23-16-18-100-024- 0000, in
                      Crete Township, commonly known as 25048 S. Klemme Road, Crete, IL.
ZC-19-017  7-18-2019  Map amendment from A-1 to R-3 for PIN #01-24-11-400-018-0000, in Custer Township,
                      commonly known as 34256 S. West River Road, Wilmington, IL.
ZC-19-020  6-20-2019  Map amendment from E-2 to R-2, part of PIN #15-08-16-103- 042-0000, in New Lenox
                      Township, commonly known as 415 Old Hickory Road, New Lenox, IL.
                      Special use permit for landscaping and lawn maintenance business with 9
ZC-19-023  6-20-2019  conditions for PIN #16-05-08-300-031-0000, in Homer Township, commonly known as
                      vacant property on S. Gougar Road, Homer Glen, IL.
                      Special use permit for an on premise dynamic display in Agricultural and
ZC-19-034  8-15-2019  Residential Zoning District with 1 condition for PIN #06-03-14-200-003-0000, in
                      Plainfield Township, commonly known as 22525 W. Lockport, Plainfield IL.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal with 3 conditions and map amendment from
ZC-19-036  10-17-2019 A-1 to I-1 for PIN #30-07-25-400-014-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as
                      vacant property on Cherry Hill Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for the keeping of horses, farm animals and livestock with 7
ZC-19-037  8-15-2019  conditions for PIN #21-14-18-202-012-0000, in Monee Township, commonly known as
                      24835 S. Murphy Lane, Monee, IL.
                      Special use permit for heavy equipment sales/rentals, for PIN #18-13-08-100-012-
ZC-19-043  11-21-2019 0000, in Green Garden Township, commonly known as 24149 S. LaGrange Road,
                      Frankfort, IL, County Board District #2.
ZC-19-044  10-17-2019 Special use permit for the keeping of horses, farm animals and livestock with 7
                      conditions.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal with 2 conditions for PIN #30-07-26-201-
ZC-19-047  9-19-2019  015-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as vacant property on Manhattan
                      Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #30-07-13-400- 030-0000, in Joliet
ZC-19-050  11-21-2019 Township, commonly known as vacant property on Burke Drive, Joliet, IL, County
                      Board District #8.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #30-07-13-400- 036-0000, in Joliet
ZC-19-051  11-21-2019 Township, commonly known as vacant property on Cherry Hill Road, Joliet, IL,
                      County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for planned unit development (PUD) with 5 conditions for PIN
                      #03-17-06-301-025-0000, 03-17-06-301-024-0000, 03-17-06-301-023-0000, 03-17- 06-
                      301-022-0000, 03-17-06-301-021-0000, 03-17-06-301-020-0000, 03-17-06-301-019-
ZC-19-052  5-20-2021  0000, 03-17- 06-301-018-0000, 03-17-06-301-017-0000, and 03-17-06-301-016-0000,
                      in Wilmington Township, commonly known as 26300, 26312, 26318, 26324, 26332,
                      26340, 26348, 26356, 26360, and V (vacant) W. Hollyhock Ln., Wilmington, IL,
                      County Board District #6.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-2A for PIN #23-15-12-300-016- 0000, in Crete
ZC-19-053  10-17-2019 Township, commonly known as 24626 S. Stoney Island, Crete, IL, County Board
                      District #1.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-3 to I-1, special use permit for a storage yard,
ZC-19-057  11-21-2019 outdoor and a special use permit for a self-service storage facility for PIN #30-
                      07-25-300- 058-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as 1711 E. Laraway Road,
                      Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-2 to R-3, variance for lot frontage from 90 feet to
                      32.57 feet for Lot 2, and variance for side yard setback (south) from 10 feet to
ZC-19-063  12-19-2019 6.2 feet for Lot 2, for PIN #19-09-24-111-001-1001, 19-09-24-111-001-1002, and
                      19-09-24-111-002- 0000, in Frankfort Township, commonly known as 20929 and 20931
                      S. 80th Avenue, Frankfort, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2, for PIN #16-05-08-300- 031-0000, in Homer
ZC-19-075  12-19-2019 Township, commonly known as vacant property on South Gougar Road, Homer Glen, IL,
                      County Board District #7.
                      Special use permit for ancillary liquor service in conjunction with allowed
                      agritourism uses, special use permit for rural events, special use permit for a
ZC-19-077  1-16-2020  landscaping and lawn maintenance business, for PIN #30-07-01-200-028-0000, in
                      Joliet Township, commonly known as 2225 Maple Road, Joliet, IL, County Board
                      District #8.
                      Special use permit for an on-premise dynamic display in agricultural and
                      residential zoning district and variance for minimum setback of a dynamic display
ZC-19-080  2-20-2020  sign face from a residential structure from 300 feet to 296 feet for PIN #22-22-
                      01-200-008-0000, in Washington Township, commonly known as 28054 S. Yates Avenue,
                      Beecher, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for a mobile home for PIN #01-24-03-30-300- 003-0000, in
ZC-19-081  3-19-2020  Custer Township, commonly known as 33061 S. Route 53, Wilmington, IL, County
                      Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for a firearms dealer, for PIN #14-12-11-200- 022-0000, in
ZC-19-082  3-19-2020  Manhattan Township, commonly known as 12859 W. Baker Road, Manhattan, IL, County
                      Board District #2.
SEXT-20-   5-21-2020  Authorizing extension of special use permit for ZC-17-071.
001
SEXT-20-   5-21-2020  Authorizing extension of special use permit for ZC-17-072.
002
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 and variance for maximum accessory building
ZC-20-003  6-16-2020  area from 3,000 sq. ft. to 4,340 sq. ft., for part of PIN #22-22-32-200- 011-
                      0000, in Washington Township, commonly known as 839 W. Kentucky Road, Beecher,
                      IL, County Board District #1.
SEXT-20-   5-21-2020  Authorizing extension of special use permit for ZC-18-002.
003
                      Map amendment from A-1/C-4 to I-1, and special use permit for a self-service
ZC-20-005  6-24-2020  storage facility, for PIN #23-15-20-202-002-0000, in Crete Township, commonly
                      known as vacant property on Dixie Highway, Crete, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-3, variance for minimum lot frontage from 90 ft. to 0
                      ft.; variance for minimum rear yard setback for accessory structures from 5 ft.
ZC-20-008  6-24-2020  to 1.65 ft.; variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 ft. to 4.20 ft.;
                      variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 ft. to 9.58 ft., for PIN #15-08-
                      14-302-018-0000, in New Lenox Township, commonly known as 745 Bittersweet Lane,
                      New Lenox, IL, County Board District #12.
                      Map amendment from E-1 to I-1 for PIN #19-09-06-226-003- 0000 and #19-09-06-226-
ZC-20-022  7-16-2020  004-0000, in Frankfort Township, commonly known as vacant property on 183rd Place
                      11215 183rd Place, Orland Park, IL, County Board District #12.
SEXT-20-   8-20-2020  Second extension of special use permit for ZC-17-036.
004
                      Special use permit for mining and quarrying with a request to perform blasting
                      and use explosives w/2 conditions; variance for minimum lot area from 10 acres to
                      0.5 acres; variance for minimum lot frontage from 300 feet to 0 feet; variance
                      for the location of open pits and shafts from the side property line from 50 feet
                      to 0 feet (north); variance for the location of open pits and shafts from the
ZC-20-027  9-17-2020  side property line from 50 feet to 0 feet (south); variance for the location of
                      open pits and shafts from the side property line from 50 feet to 0 feet (east);
                      variance for the location of open pits and shafts from the rear/side property
                      line from 50 feet to 0 feet (west) for Pin #11-04-10- 300-024-0000, in Lockport
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on Independence Blvd., Romeoville,
                      IL, County Board District #3.
                      Map amendment from C-3* to I-1, special use permit for self- service storage
ZC-20-030  10-15-2020 facility and special use permit for storage yard, outdoor; for Pins #23-15-21-
                      100-022- 0000, 23-15-20-202-004-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as 25608
                      S. Dixie Highway, Crete IL, County Board District #1.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to I-1 and special use permit for an accessory dwelling
                      unit for security, variance for maximum accessory dwelling unit area from 650
ZC-20-033  8-20-2020  square feet to 3,700 square feet, variance for maximum accessory building height
                      from 25 feet to 26.5 feet, for Pin #30-07-36-200-015-0000, in Joliet Township,
                      commonly known as 2827 W. Manhattan Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales/rentals with 4 conditions for Pin
ZC-20-036  8-20-2020  #07-01-27-102-022-0000, in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 11953 S. Aero
                      Drive, Plainfield, IL, County Board District #13.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-2 and variance for minimum lot area from 105,000
ZC-20-037  8-20-2020  square feet to 87,120 square feet, for Pin #21-14-33-200-013-0000 in Monee
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on Pauling Road, Monee, IL, County
                      Board District #1.
ZC-20-042-            Map amendment from A-1 to I-1, and special use permit for truck terminal, for Pin
M          10-15-2020 #10-11-08-200-005-0000, in Jackson Township, commonly known as 24101 S. Brandon
                      Road, Elwood, IL, County Board District #6.
ZC-20-042-            Map amendment from A-1 to I-1, and special use permit for truck terminal, for Pin
S          10-15-2020 #10-11-08-200-005-0000, in Jackson Township, commonly known as 24101 S. Brandon
                      Road, Elwood, IL, County Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for ancillary liquor service, for Pin #19-09-13- 300-027-0000,
ZC-20-046  10-15-2020 in Frankfort Township, commonly known as 7717 W. St. Francis Road, Frankfort, IL,
                      County Board District #2.
SEXT-20-              Extension of special use permit for ZC-18- 010, for Pin #21-14-32-300-012-0000,
006        12-17-2020 21- 14-32-300-013-0000, and 21-14-32-300- 014-0000, in Monee Township, commonly
                      known as vacant property on Route 50 in Peotone, IL, County Board District #1.
SEXT-20-              Extension of special use permit for ZC-18- 029, for Pin #23-15-34-400-002-0000,
008        11-19-2020 in Crete Township, commonly known as vacant land on East Goodenow Road, Beecher,
                      IL, County Board District #1.
SEXT-20-   10-15-2020 Extension of the special use permit for Pin #23-15-15-400-010- 0000, in Crete
010                   Township, commonly known as 631 S. Cottage Grove Avenue, Crete, IL.
SEXT-20-              Extension of the special use permit for Pin #23-15-34-200-009- 0000, in Crete
011        10-15-2020 Township, commonly known as vacant property on East Goodenow Road (Dutton Road)
                      Crete, IL.
SEXT-20-   10-15-2020 Extension of the special use permit for Pin #05-06-03-200-017- 0000, in Troy
012                   Township, commonly known as 18424 N. Frontage Road, Shorewood, IL.
SEXT-20-              Extension of special use permit for ZC-18-037, for Pin #03-17- 35-300-002-0000,
013        11-19-2020 in Wilmington Township, commonly known as vacant property on South Route 53,
                      Wilmington, IL, County Board District #6.
SEXT-20-              Extension of special use permit for ZC-18-076, for Pin #10-11- 04-101-022-0000,
014        11-19-2020 in Jackson Township, commonly known as vacant land on West Sharp Road, Elwood,
                      IL, County Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm with 10 conditions for Pin #04-10-12-100-004-
ZC-20-043  12-17-2020 0000, in Channahon Township, commonly known as 23960 S. Vetter Road, Elwood, IL,
                      County Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for veterinary clinic, animal hospital with 8 conditions, for
ZC-20-047  11-19-2020 Pin #11-04-36-200-015-0000, in Lockport Township, commonly known as 16935 W.
                      Bruce Road, Lockport, IL, County Board District #9.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales/rentals with 3 conditions for Pin
ZC-20-052  11-19-2020 #07-01-27-101-005-0000, in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 11962 Aero
                      Drive, Plainfield, IL, County Board District #13.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for Pin #21-14-28-300-079- 0000, in Monee Township,
ZC-20-054  12-17-2020 commonly known as vacant property on South Egyptian Trail, Monee, IL, County
                      Board District #1.
           11-19-     Special use permit for an adult-use cannabis processor with 4 conditions for Pin
ZC-20-056  2020    #05-06-15-400-013-0000, in Troy Township, commonly known as 4044 McDonough
                      Street, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-1 for Pin #13-19-28-400-010- 0000, in Wilton
ZC-20-058  1-21-2021  Township, commonly known as 31512 S. Cedar Road, Manhattan, IL, County Board
                      District #6.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for Pin #14-12-12-100-003- 0000, in Manhattan
ZC-20-059  11-19-2020 Township, commonly known as 12717 W. Baker Road, Manhattan, IL, County Board
                      District #2.
                      Map amendment from R-3 to I-1 for Pin #06-03-26-300-056- 0000, in Plainfield
ZC-20-060  12-17-2020 Township, commonly known as 2507 Von Esch Road, Plainfield, IL, County Board
                      District #3.
                      Special use permit for heavy equipment sales/rental with 2 conditions for Pin
ZC-20-066  1-21-2021  #30-07-26-100-040-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as 1110 Manhattan
                      Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for a planned unit development (PUD) with 6 conditions for PIN
ZC-20-069  5-20-2021  #30-07-13-400-020-0000, 30-07-13-400-030-0000 & 30-07-13-400-036-0000, in Joliet
                      Township, commonly known as 20502 S. Cherry Hill Road, Joliet, IL, County Board
                      District #8.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for Pin #19-09-29-100-014- 02000, in Frankfort
ZC-20-078  12-17-2020 Township, commonly known as 21519 S. Wolf Road, Frankfort, IL, County Board
                      District #2.
SEXT-20-              Extension of special use permit for ZC-18-066, Paul Fox, owner of record, for Pin
015        1-21-2021  #13-19-15-100-048-0000, in Wilton Township, commonly known as 14251 W. Joliet
                      Road, Manhattan, IL, County Board District #2.
SEXT-20-              Second extension of special use permit for ZC-17-071, Chanemcoco LLC, for part of
016        1-21-2021  Pin #22-22-14-300-003-0000, in Washington Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on East Indiana Avenue, Beecher, IL, County Board District #1.
SEXT-20-              Second extension of special use permit for ZC-17-072, Chanemcoco LLC, for Pin
017        1-21-2021  #22-22-23-100-001-0000 in Washington Township, commonly known as vacant property
                      on S. Cottage Grove Ave, Beecher IL, County Board District #1.
SEXT-20-              Second extension of special use permit for ZC-18-002, Manhattan Farm, LLC, for
018        1-21-2021  Pin #14-12-32-300-009-0000, in Manhattan Township, commonly known as 27555 South
                      Gougar Road, Manhattan, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Special use permit for an outdoor storage yard with 12 conditions; variance for
                      fence height within street setback from 4 feet to 6 feet; variance for maximum
ZC-20-080  3-18-2021  number of cargo containers permitted from 2 to 5 for Pin #16-05-08-300-031-0000,
                      in Homer Township, commonly known as 14815 S. Gougar Road, Homer Glen, IL, County
                      Board District #7.
                      Special use permit for a landscape and lawn maintenance business with 7
ZC-20-088  8-19-2021  conditions, part of Pin #05-06-07-200-004-0000 (Division Petition #2020-77) in
                      Troy Township, commonly known as 25920 W. Black Road, Shorewood, IL, County Board
                      District #6.
                      Second extension of special use permit for ZC-18-043, Caryn L. Verduin, owner of
SEXT-21-   3-18-2021  record, Jonathan Roberts, agent, for Pin #23-15-34-200-009-0000, in Crete
001                   Township, commonly known as vacant property on East Goodenow Road, Crete, IL,
                      County Board District #1.
SEXT-21-              Second extension of special use permit for ZC-18-042, Beverly J. Wassman Trust
002        3-18-2021  for Pin #23-15-15-400-010-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as 631 S.
                      Cottage Grove Avenue, Crete, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales/rental with 2 conditions for Pin
ZC-21-002  2-18-2021  #07-01-09-200-010-0000, in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 9714 S. Route
                      59, Naperville, IL, County Board District #11.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for (part of) Pin #11-04-36- 400-011-0000, in
ZC-21-003  3-18-2021  Lockport Township, commonly known as 18128 S. Farrell Road, Joliet, IL, County
                      Board District #9.
                      Second extension of special use permit for ZC-18-037, James R. and Laurie S.
SEXT-21-   5-20-2021  Fleishman, owner of record, requesting a second extension of the special use
003                   permit for PIN #03-17-35-300-002-000, in Wilmington Township, commonly known as
                      vacant property on South Route 53, Wilmington, IL, County Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for storage yard, outdoor with 1 condition for PIN #07-01-27-
ZC-21-016  5-20-2021  101-020-0000, in Wheatland Township commonly known as 12045 Spaulding School
                      Drive, Plainfield, IL, County Board District #13.
                      Map amendment from C-2 to R-4 for PIN #23-15-06-300-009- 0000, in Crete Township,
ZC-21-021  7-15-2021  commonly known as 23745 S. Western Ave., Park Forest, IL, County Board District
                      #1.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to R-1 for (part of) PIN #07-01-19- 401-014-0000 located
ZC-21-024  6-17-2021  in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 25728 119th Street, Plainfield, IL,
                      County Board District #5.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for (part of) PIN #07-01-19- 401-014-0000, in
ZC-21-025  6-17-2021  Wheatland Township, commonly known as 25728 119th Street, Plainfield, IL, County
                      Board District #5.
                      Appeal of administrative decision denying special use permit extension after
AAD-21-001 7-6-2021   required expiration date, for PIN #05-06-03-200-017-0000, in Troy Township,
                      commonly known as 18424 NW Frontage Road, Shorewood, IL.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal and special use permit for heavy
ZC-21-030  7-15-2021  equipment sales/rentals with 10 conditions for PIN #15-08-18-300-013-0000, in New
                      Lenox Township, commonly known as 2525 New Lenox Road, Joliet, IL, County Board
                      District #12.
SEXT-21-              Special use permit for ZC-18-076 for PIN #10-11-04-101-022- 0000, in Jackson
004        7-15-2021  Township, commonly known as vacant land on West Sharp Road, Elwood, IL, County
                      Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm facility with 14
ZC-21-035  10-21-2021 conditions, for Pin #22-22-14-300-003-0000, in Washington Township, commonly
                      known as vacant property on E. Indiana Avenue, Beecher, IL, County Board District
                      #1.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm facility with 17
ZC-21-036  11-18-2021 conditions, for Pin #23-15-34-400-002-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as
                      vacant property on Goodenow Road, Beecher, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for a major public utility, a solar farm facility with 15
ZC-21-037  10-21-2021 conditions, for Pin #22-23-100-001-0000, in Washington Township, commonly known
                      as vacant property on E. Indiana Avenue, Beecher, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for a major utility, a solar farm facility with 15 conditions,
ZC-21-038  11-18-2021 for Pin #14-12-32-300-009-0000, in Manhattan Township, commonly known as 27555
                      South Gougar Road, Manhattan, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for Pin #18-13-23-400-012- 0000, in Green Garden
ZC-21-045  8-19-2021  Township, commonly known as vacant property on Bruns Rd., Monee, IL, County Board
                      District #2.
SEXT-21-              Authorizing second extension of special use permit for ZC-18- 040, ABS Building
005        8-19-2021  Management, LLC, for Pin #05-06-03-200-017-0000, in Troy Township, commonly known
                      as 18424 NW Frontage Road, Shorewood, IL, County Board District #10.
Ord. 21-              Overturning the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approving
270        8-19-2021  appeal #APCD-21-003 by Mark Mostert, for ZC-21-007, in Monee Township, commonly
                      known as 5640 Laurel Lane, Monee, IL, District #1.
                      Special use permit for an animal care/boarding facility with 8 conditions;
                      variance for minimum setback for an animal care boarding facility from 500 feet
ZC-21-046  12-16-2021 from the nearest dwelling unit to 394 feet, and variance for minimum setback for
                      an animal care/boarding facility from 250 feet from the nearest R-zoned district
                      to 225 feet, for Pin #14-12-10-400-012-0000, located in Manhattan Township,
                      commonly known as 24520 S. Kankakee St., Manhattan, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Special use permit for light equipment sales/rentals with 4 conditions for Pin
ZC-21-047  9-16-2021  #07-01-27-101-029-0000, in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 23824 W. Andrew
                      Road, Plainfield, IL County Board District #13.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-2 to C-4 for Pin #15-08-03-100-040-0000 and #15-08-
ZC-21-048  9-16-2021  03-100-041-0000, in New Lenox Township, commonly known as 14124 W. Maple Road,
                      Mokena, IL, County Board District #7.
SEXT-21-              Authorizing first extension of special use permit for a truck terminal for ZC-19-
006        10-21-2021 047 for Pin #30-07-26-201-015-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on Manhattan Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 for Pin #18-13-10-100- 002-0000 in Green
ZC-21-053  10-21-2021 Garden Township commonly known as 24129 S. Center Rd., Frankfort, IL, County
                      Board District #2.
                      Special use permit for a major utility, a solar farm facility with 16 conditions
ZC-21-056  12-16-2021 for Pin #21-14-32-300-014-0000, 21-14-32-300-013-0000, 21-14-32-300-012-0000,
                      commonly known as vacant land on the NE corner of IL-50 and W. Offner Rd., Monee,
                      IL, County Board District #1.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-2A for Pin #01-24-10- 300-004-0000, located in
ZC-21-060  11-18-2021 Custer Township, commonly known as 23724 IL Route 113, Custer Park, IL, County
                      Board District #6.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2 and variance for minimum street setback from
ZC-21-067  12-16-2021 100 feet to 41.3 feet, for Pin #14-12-05-300-008-0000, located in Manhattan
                      Township, commonly known as 15620 W. Baker Rd., Manhattan, IL, County Board
                      District #2.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-1 to I-1, and variance for fence height within street
ZC-21-070  12-16-2021 setback from 4 feet to 8 feet for Pin #11-04-14-200-012-0000, in Lockport
                      Township, commonly known as V. (vacant) New Ave., Lockport, IL, County Board
                      District #7.
SEXT-21-              First extension of special use permit for a truck terminal with 3 conditions for
008        2-25-2022  ZC-19-036, for Pin #30-07-25-400-014-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as
                      vacant property on Cherry Hill Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-1, and variance for minimum lot frontage from
                      165 feet to 164.96 feet (on Lot #502 per 50 feet ROW dedication) for Pin #01-24-
ZC-21-074  3-17-2022  13-100-018-0000 and 01-24-13-202-001-0000 in Custer Township, commonly known as
                      vacant land between Zilm Road & Rt. 113, Custer Park, IL, County Board District
                      #6.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-3 to C-4, for PIN #30-07-28-213- 002-0000, in Joliet
ZC-21-092  7-20-2022  Township, commonly known as vacant property on Chicago Street, Joliet, IL, County
                      Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for an outdoor storage yard with 9 conditions and variance for
ZC-21-095  3-17-2022  fence height within street setback from 4 feet to 8 feet, for Pin #15-08-26-402-
                      007- 0000, in New Lenox Township, commonly known as 22043 Howell Dr., New Lenox,
                      IL, County Board District #12.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-1, and special use permit for a truck terminal
ZC-21-100  4-21-2022  for Pin #30-07-26-100-032-0000, Joliet Township, commonly known as vacant
                      property on Manhattan Road, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for a landscaping and lawn maintenance business in the A-
ZC-21-103  4-21-2022  1 Zoning District, for Pin #18-13-08-100-003-000, located in Green Garden
                      Township, commonly known as 10815 Stuenkel Road, Frankfort, IL, County Board
                      District #2.
                      Special use permit for the keeping of swine with 4 conditions for Pin #23-16-30-
ZC-21-107  5-19-2022  401-024-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as 27007 S. Juniper Dr., Crete,
                      IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for construction sales and services with 3 conditions for Pin
ZC-22-003  5-19-2022  #21-14-36-400-013-0000 in Monee Township, commonly known as 2406 Offner Rd.,
                      Beecher, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-1 and R-4 to I-1 and special use permit for light
ZC-22-004  4-21-2022  equipment sales/rentals, for Pin #11-04-34-205-033-0000 in Lockport Township
                      commonly known as 3010 S. State Street, Lockport, IL, County Board District #9.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-1 to I-2 and special use permit for concrete
ZC-22-005  4-21-2022  recycling facility and special use permit for outdoor storage yard, for Pin #19-
                      09-06-200-034-0000, located in Frankfort Township, commonly known as 18424 Wolf
                      Road, Mokena, IL, County Board District #12.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2, and variance for fence height within the
ZC-22-006  4-21-2022  street setback from 4 feet to 6 feet, for Pin #16-05-08-300-033-0000, in Homer
                      Township, commonly known as vacant property on Gougar Road, Homer Glen, IL,
                      County Board District #7.
                      Special use permit for a halfway house for an in-patient rehabilitation facility
ZC-22-007  5-19-2022  with 3 conditions and zoning map amendment from C-4 to R-2 for Pin #30-07- 28-
                      402-003-0000, located in Joliet Township, commonly known as 2019 Chicago Street,
                      Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for accessory dwelling unit for security, variance for maximum
                      accessory dwelling unit area from 650 sq. ft. to 1,891 sq. ft., and variance for
ZC-22-013  7-20-2022  minimum side yard setback (west side) from 10 ft. to 9.67 ft., for PIN #15-08-28-
                      402-006-0000, in New Lenox Township, commonly known as 102 Ford Dr., New Lenox,
                      IL, County Board District #12.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1/C-2 to I-1; special use permit for self-storage
                      facility; special use permit for outdoor storage; variance for maximum self-
ZC-22-015  10-20-2022 service storage building height from 12 ft. to 28 ft.; variance for maximum self-
                      service storage unit floor area from 600 sq. ft. to 700 sq. ft. for PIN #16-05-
                      17-400-023-0000; 16-05-17-400-024-0000; 16-05-17- 400-025-0000 commonly known as
                      vacant property on 159th Street, Homer Glen, IL, County Board District #7.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-2 to R-3 for PIN #23-15-32-205- 005-0000, in Crete
ZC-22-017  6-16-2022  Township, commonly known as 27446 S. Hickory Street, Crete, IL, County Board
                      District #1.
                      Special use permit for sports and recreation participant with 3 conditions, for
ZC-22-022  9-15-2022  PIN #07-01-27-303-012-0000 in Wheatland Township, commonly known as 23852 West
                      Industrial Dr., Unit 3, Plainfield, IL, County Board District #13.
                      Special use permit for on-premise dynamic display in agricultural and residential
                      zoning districts with 3 conditions and variance for minimum setback of a dynamic
ZC-22-026  10-20-2022 display sign face from a residential structure from 300 feet to 112 feet for PIN
                      #06-03-21-100-001- 0000 in Plainfield Township, commonly known as 24741 Renwick
                      Rd., Plainfield, IL, County Board District $5.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal, for PIN #07-01-05-201-019- 0000, in
ZC-22-030  7-20-2022  Wheatland Township, commonly known as 10S257 Schoger Dr., Naperville, IL, County
                      Board District #11.
                      Special use permit for keeping of farm animals (horses) with 7 conditions and
ZC-22-032  6-16-2022  variance for minimum animal confinement setback (west) from 50 feet to 7 feet,
                      for PIN #12-02-24-200-009-0000, in DuPage Township, commonly known as 17152 Bluff
                      Road, Lemont, IL, County Board District #3.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-6 to A-1, special use permit for an outdoor storage
                      yard, special use permit for construction sales and service and variance for
ZC-22-033  8-18-2022  minimum lot area from 10 acres to 9.945 acres for PIN #03-17-06-200-011-0000, in
                      Wilmington Township, commonly known as 27940 Kelly Road, Wilmington, IL, County
                      Board District #6.
                      Zoning map amendment from E-1 to A-1, for PIN #17-20-29-200- 007-0000 and #17-20-
ZC-22-035  7-20-2022  29-200-002-0000 (part of) (consolidated under Petition #2022-12), in Peotone
                      Township, commonly known as 10761 W. Wilmington-Peotone Rd., Peotone, IL, County
                      Board District #1.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-5 to C-2, variance for minimum street setback from 30
                      feet to 19.89 feet, variance for minimum side yard setback from 10 feet to 3.25
ZC-22-036  11-17-2022 feet, variance for minimum lot area from 12,000 square feet to 11,318 square
                      feet, for PIN #30-07-12- 109-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as 607
                      Algonquin Street, Joliet IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit to sell package liquor at premises with 3 conditions for PIN
ZC-22-038  8-18-2022  #30-07-13-308-031-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as 1601 New Lenox
                      Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-1 to C-1 for PIN #16-05-06-201- 006-0000, in Homer
ZC-22-039  9-15-2022  Township, commonly known as 13761 South Archer Avenue, Lemont, IL, County Board
                      District #7.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-2, for PIN #20-21-07- 400-017-0000, in Will
ZC-22-040  8-18-2022  Township, commonly known as V. (vacant) S. Ridgeland Ave., Peotone, IL, County
                      Board District #1.
                      Temporary use permit for annual fall festival with paint ball activities with 11
TUP-22-006 9-6-2022   conditions; September 23, 2022 through November 6, 2022 for PIN #21-14-23-200-
                      009-0000, in Monee Township, commonly known as 3450 Crete-Monee Road, Monee, IL.
                      Temporary use permit for the storage of materials (asphalt grindings from Wilton
TUP-22-010 10-4-2022  Township roadway projects) valid from October 4, 2022 through August 31, 2023 for
                      PIN #13-19-13-200-009-0000, commonly known as 29860 South 120th Ave., Peotone,
                      IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from E-1 to C-1 for PIN #07-01-27-300- 009-0000, in
ZC-22-042  9-15-2022  Wheatland Township, commonly known as 23610 West 127th Street, Plainfield, IL,
                      County Board District #13.
                      Special use permit for rural events (special use applies to 30.42 acres), special
                      use permit for ancillary liquor service in conjunction with allowed agritourism
ZC-22-050  3-16-2023  uses (special use applies to 30.42 acres), (part of) 18-13-07-400-004-0000 in
                      Green Garden Township, commonly known as 11332 West Dralle Road, Monee, IL,
                      County Board District #3.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-2 to E-2 (Lot 1, 2, &4) and A-2 to R-1 (Lot 3) for
ZC-22-056  11-17-2022 PIN #16-05-22-400-017-0000, in Homer Township, commonly known as 13706 W. 167th
                      Street, Homer Glen, IL, County Board District #7.
                      Zoning map amendment from I-2 to I-3 (southern 9.35 acres more or less); special
                      use permit for recyclable material processing facilities, outdoor; and variance
ZC-22-057  10-20-2022 for minimum lot frontage from 80 feet to 0 feet, in Joliet Township for PIN #30-
                      07-03-100-001-0000, commonly known as 2 Genstar Lane, Joliet, IL, County Board
                      District 9.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm with 16 conditions, for PIN #17-20-26-300-
ZC-22-066  3-16-2023  010-0000, in Peotone Township, commonly known as vacant property on West Kennedy
                      Road, Peotone, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-2 (0.58 acres) and A-1 to I-2 (74.00 acres)
                      for PIN #’s part of 30-07-13-224-003-0000 & 30-07-13-400-035-0000 in Joliet
ZC-22-073  11-17-2022 Township, commonly known as vacant property on E. Washington Street, Joliet, IL
                      60433 and vacant property on Cherry Hill Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District
                      #8.
TUP-22-011 11-1-2022  Temporary use permit for the storage of trucks and semitrailers with 5
                      conditions.
SEXT-22-              Extension of special use permit for ZC-20-043, requesting a first extension of
001        1-19-2023  the special use permit for PIN # 04-10-12-100-004-0000, in Channahon Township,
                      commonly known as 23960 S. Vetter Road, Elwood, IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for the keeping of farm animals (horses), for PIN # 23-15-06-
ZC-22-067  1-19-2023  403-040-0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as 23824 Ashland Ave., Crete, IL,
                      County Board District #3.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal (special use applies to the entire site)
ZC-22-071  1-19-2023  with 2 conditions for PIN #30-07-26-201-015-0000 in Joliet Township, commonly
                      known as vacant property on Manhattan Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #6.
                      Zoning map amendment from R-2 to R-3, for PIN #15-08-18- 202-026-0000, in New
ZC-22-072  1-19-2023  Lenox Township, commonly known as V (vacant) Washington Street, Joliet, IL,
                      County Board District #5.
                      Zoning map amendment from C-2 to C-3, variance for minimum street setback
                      (Washington Street) from 100 feet to 38.52 feet, variance for minimum street
ZC-22-075  1-19-2023  setback (Park Road) from 100 feet to 30.57 feet, for PIN #30-07-13-115-001-0000,
                      in Joliet Township, 1900 E. Washington Street, Joliet, IL, County Board District
                      #6.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-2, for PIN #13-19-09- 200-006-0000 and 13-19-
ZC-22-079  3-16-2023  09-200-004-0000, in Wilton Township, commonly known as 14755 Doyle Rd., and V.
                      (vacant) W. Doyle Rd., Manhattan, IL, County Board District #2.
ZC-22-080  4-20-2023  Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-2 for PIN# 16-05-18-200- 032-0000, 16147 W.
                      151st St., Home Glen, IL, County Board District #4.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to C-2 (for 5.37 acres) and variance for minimum
ZC-22-081  3-16-2023  side yard setback from 10 feet to 8 feet, for parts of PIN #21-14-06-200-001-
                      0000 and 21-14-06-200-003-0000, Monee Township, commonly known as 24800 S.
                      Governors Highway, Monee, IL, County Board District #3.
                      Temporary use permit for a seasonal outdoor market (Vintage Faire), for PIN #05-
TUP-23-001 3-21-2023  06-33-300-013-0010, 05-06-33-300-013-0020, 05-06-33-300-006-0000, in Troy
                      Township, commonly known as 24550, 24540, and V (vacant) W. Shepley Rd., Minooka,
                      IL.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for 15.17 acres of the northeast corner, for
ZC-22-084  6-15-2023  PIN #20-21-29-200-016-0000, in Will Township, commonly known as SW corner of S.
                      Egyptian Trail and Corning Road, Peotone, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to E-1 for PIN #18-13-09-100- 002-0000, in Green
ZC-22-090  4-20-2023  Garden Township, commonly known as V (vacant) Stuenkel Road, Frankfort, IL,
                      County Board District #3.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1/C-4 to I-1 and special use permit for a truck
ZC-22-092  5-18-2023  terminal with 11 conditions, for PIN #03-17-08-300-002-0000, in Wilmington
                      Township, commonly known as 25214 W. Lorenzo Road, Wilmington, IL, County Board
                      District #1.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-2 to A-1 and variance for minimum lot frontage from
ZC-22-095  3-16-2023  300 feet to 198.43 feet, for PIN #14-12-11-200-016-0000, in Manhattan Township,
                      commonly known as vacant property on South Schoolhouse Road, Manhattan, IL,
                      County Board District #2.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm with 9 conditions and special use permit for
ZC-22-096  8-17-2023  a battery energy storage system (BESS) with 3 conditions for PIN #23-15-34-200-
                      009- 0000, in Crete Township, commonly known as vacant property on East Goodenow
                      and Dutton Road, Crete, IL, County Board District #3.
                      Special use permit for the construction sales and service (applies to the western
ZC-22-098  6-15-2023  8.56 acres) with 4 conditions, for PIN #13-19-13-200-009-0000, in Wilton
                      Township, commonly known as 29860 S. 120th Avenue, Peotone, IL, County Board
                      District #2.
                      Special use permit for a landscape and lawn maintenance business with 9
ZC-23-002  5-18-2023  conditions, for PIN #19-09-33-100-017-0000, Frankfort Township, V (vacant) South
                      104th Avenue, Frankfort, IL, County Board District #3.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-1 and special use permit for self-service
ZC-23-008  6-15-2023  facility with outdoor storage for recreational vehicles with 5 conditions, for
                      PIN #07- 01-19-100-010-0000, Wheatland Township, commonly known as 26165 W. 111th
                      Street, Plainfield, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for a solar farm with 15 conditions and variance for lot
ZC-23-012  6-15-2023  frontage from 80 feet to 0 feet for PIN #04-10-11-300-002-0010 and 04-10-11-300-
                      002-0020, Channahon Township, commonly known as Utility Amoco Road, Channahon,
                      IL, County Board District #1.
                      Special use permit for a truck terminal (applies to 9.63 acres) with 11
ZC-23-013  6-15-2023  conditions, for PIN #30-07-25-400-014-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as
                      V. (vacant) S. Cherry Hill Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #6.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-2, for PIN #05-06-17- 400-010-0000, in Troy
ZC-23-016  6-15-2023  Township, commonly known as 25104 Seil Road, Shorewood, IL, County Board District
                      #1.
                      Special use permit for landscape and lawn maintenance business with 6 conditions,
ZC-23-017  5-18-2023  for PIN #15-08-35-100-004-0000, #15-08-35-100-007-0000, and #15-08-35-100- 009-
                      0000, in New Lenox Township, commonly known as 2085 S. Spencer Road, New Lenox,
                      IL, County Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for a landscaping and lawn maintenance business with 5
ZC-23-018  5-18-2023  conditions for part of PIN #16-05-33-400-002-0000, in Homer Township, commonly
                      known as 17958 S. Cedar Road, Home Glen, IL, County Board District #4.
Ord. 23-   5-18-2023  Amending ZC-22-057 to add 2 additional conditions.
131
                      Temporary use permit for temporary storage of new Ford automobiles Monday -
TUP-23-004 6-20-2023  Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. with 6 conditions, PIN #23-15-28-100-005-0000, in
                      Crete Township, commonly known as 26435 S. Dixie Highway, Crete, IL.
APCD-23-              Variance for maximum accessory building area 1,800 square feet to 4,815.18 square
003        6-15-2023  feet; and variance for maximum number of vehicles permitted in a residential
                      district from 5 to 15 (ZC-23-005).
                      Special use permit for solar farm (entire site) with 6 conditions and special use
ZC-23-006  8-17-2023  permit for battery energy storage system (5 acres) with 3 conditions for PIN #23-
                      15-15- 400-010-0000 in Crete Township, commonly known as NW corner of W. Munz Rd.
                      & S. Cottage Grove Ave, Crete, IL, County Board District #3.
                      Special use permit for solar farm (entire site) with 6 conditions and special use
ZC-23-006  8-17-2023  permit for battery energy storage system (5 acres) with 3 conditions for PIN #23-
                      15-15- 400-010-0000 in Crete Township, commonly known as NW corner of W. Munz Rd.
                      & S. Cottage Grove Ave, Crete, IL, County Board District #3.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to I-1 for part of Parcel 11-04- 22-400-001-0000
                      (15.05); special use permit for manufacturing and industrial services, general
                      for PIN #11–04-22-200-007-0000 (15.04); special use permit for manufacturing and
                      industrial services, general for PIN #11-04-22-400-001-0000 (15.05); special use
ZC-23-023  7-19-2023  permit for manufacturing and industrial services, general for PIN #11-04-22-200-
                      006-0000 (15.02); with 14 variances for PIN’s 11-04-22-400-001-0000, 11-04-22-
                      200-007-0000, 11-04-22-200-006-0000, 11-04-22-901-000-0000 and 11-04-22-200-015-
                      0000, in Lockport Township, commonly known as 18500 9th Street, Romeoville, IL,
                      County Board District #5 and #9.
                      Special use permit for construction sales and services with 4 conditions for PIN
ZC-23-027  8-17-2023  #17-20-31-200-015-0000 in Peotone Township, commonly known as V (vacant) Kennedy
                      Road, Peotone, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-3 and variance for street setback from 30 feet
ZC-23-032  6-15-2023  to 28.72 feet, for PIN #06-03-16-301-019-0000, Plainfield Township, commonly
                      known as 15639 S. River Road, Plainfield, IL, County Board District #8.
                      Special use permit for heavy equipment sales/rentals for PIN #15- 08-30-102-026-
ZC-23-033  6-15-2023  0000, #15-08-30-102-018-0000, #15-08-30-102-019-1006 and #15-08-30-102-027- 0000,
                      New Lenox Township, commonly known as 16434 Cherry Creek Court, Joliet, IL,
                      County Board District #2.
                      Special use permit for a solar energy facility, commercial with 5 conditions,
                      variance for number of required mowing from 5 times to 1 time and variance for
ZC-23-036  6-15-2023  maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches, for PIN #17-20-19-
                      400-014-0000, Peotone Township, commonly known as vacant property on Route 45,
                      Peotone, IL, County Board District #2.
                      Special use permit for a solar energy facility, commercial with 3 conditions,
                      variance for number of required mowing from 5 to 2 times, and variance for
ZC-23-037  8-17-2023  maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 24 inches, for PIN #30-07-36-
                      400-003-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as vacant property at northwest
                      corner of Cherry Hill Road and W. Schweitzer Road, Joliet, IL, County Board #6,
                      Special use permit for a solar energy facility, commercial with 4 conditions,
                      variance for number of required mowing from 5 to 2 times, and variance for
ZC-23-038  8-17-2023  maximum ground cover plant height from 13 inches to 24 inches, for PIN #30-07-36-
                      200-014-0000, in Joliet Township, commonly known as vacant property at southwest
                      corner of Cherry Hill Road and US 52, Joliet, IL, County Board District #6.
                      Special use permit for a commercial solar energy facility (entire site) with 5
                      conditions, variance for number of required mowing from 5 times to 0 times,
ZC-23-040  8-17-2023  starting the month of May and ending the month of October and variance for
                      maximum plant height from 13 inches to 36 inches, for PIN #17-20-28-400-002-0000
                      in Peotone Township, commonly known as vacant W. Kennedy Road, Peotone, IL (north
                      of W. Kennedy Rd., west of S. Center Rd.), County Board District #2.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-3 and a variance for side yard (south side)
ZC-23-043  9-21-2023  setback from 10 feet to 3.6 feet, for PIN #11-04-26-300-014-0000, located in
                      Lockport Township, commonly known as 2201 Lawrence Avenue, Lockport, IL, County
                      Board District #5.
                      Zoning map amendment from A-1 to R-3, for PIN #11-04-26- 300-005-0000, located in
ZC-23-044  9-21-2023  Lockport Township, commonly known as 2203 Lawrence Avenue, Lockport, IL, County
                      Board District #5.
                      Special use permit for rural events with 6 conditions and special use permit for
ZC-23-046  8-17-2023  ancillary liquor service in conjunction with an approved agritourism use with 3
                      conditions for PIN #05-06-07-300-004-0000 in Troy Township, commonly known as
                      19833 S. County Line Road, Joliet, IL, County Board District #1.
ZC-23-049  11-16-2023 Special use permit for outdoor storage for PIN #19-09-22-400-012-0000.
ZC-23-057  11-16-2023 Special use permit for adult use cannabis infuser for PIN #14-12-14-400-008-0000.
ZC-23-059  11-16-2023 Special use permit applied to 4.89 acres for packaged liquor for PIN #06-03-23-
                      302-001-0000.
ZC-23-062  10-19-2023 MA from R-1 to I-1 and special use permit for a truck terminal for PIN #21-14-09-
                      203-030-0000.
ZC-23-074  10-19-2023 MA from A-1 to R-3 for PIN #07-01-16-100-019-0000.
ZC-23-075  11-16-2023 MA from A-1 to E-1 for PIN #08-25-07-300-025-0000.
ZC-23-086  10-19-2023 Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #21-14-27-100-
                      001-0000.
ZC-23-087  10-19-2023 Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #23-15-01-200-
                      024-0000.
ZC-23-089  11-16-2023 Special use permit for an accessory dwelling unit for PIN #06-03-26-302-005-0000.
ZC-23-093  1-18-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility and BESS for PIN #21-14-
                      27-300-004-0000.
ZC-23-094  1-18-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility and BESS for PIN #21-14-
                      28-400-021-0000.
ZC-23-096  11-16-2023 Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #17-20-35-200-
                      009-0000.
ZC-23-097  12-21-2023 MA from A-1 to R-2 for PIN #03-17-22-300-015-0000.
ZC-23-108  12-21-2023 Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #23-15-18-200-
                      003-0000.
ZC-23-110  3-21-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #21-14-08-300-
                      008-0000.
ZC-23-111  3-21-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #21-14-17-100-
                      003-0000.
ZC-23-117  4-18-2024  MA from A-1 to E-1 for PIN #20-21-11-400-001-0000.
ZC-23-121  3-21-2024  MA from A-1 to E-1 (applies to 5.3 acres) for PIN #18-13-26- 200-018-0000.
ZC-23-125  4-18-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #09-18-30-300-
                      038-0000.
ZC-23-132  3-21-2024  Special use permit for similar or compatible use (farm/agricultural supply and
                      sales) for PIN #17-20-29-100-002-0000.
ZC-23-133  4-18-2024  MA from E-1 to A-1 for PIN #13-19-34-100-008-0000.
ZC-24-003  3-21-2024  Special use permit for similar or compatible use (group care home (maximum 6
                      residents)) for PIN #19-09-13-131-013-0000.
                      Appeal of administrative decision to deny the application for the extension of a
AAD-24-003 11-19-2024 special use permit because the application to extend it was submitted after it
                      expired.
ZC-24-004  3-21-2024  Special use permit for a winery tasting room for PIN #01-25-31- 100-008-0000.
TUP-24-005 1-7-2025   Temporary use permit for a tiny home, PIN #23-15-26-104-008-0000, in Crete
                      Township, commonly known as 2428 S. Greenwood Avenue, Crete IL.
ZC-24-010  5-16-2024  Special use permit for self-storage facility for PIN #19-09-12-422-042-0000 and
                      PIN #19-09-12-422-043-0000.
ZC-24-015  5-16-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #08-25-06-300-
                      006-0000.
ZC-24-020  5-16-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #22-22-19-100-
                      004-0000.
                      MA from A-1 to I-2; special use permit for outdoor storage; special use permit
ZC-24-027  8-15-2024  for an accessory dwelling unit for security; special use permit for truck
                      terminal for PIN #18-13-19-200-017-0000.
ZC-24-031  7-18-2024  Special use permit for the keeping of a farm animal (one horse) for PIN #23-15-
                      08-104-006-0000.
ZC-24-032  7-18-2024  MA from R-3 to A-1 for PIN #05-06-28-101-054-0000.
ZC-24-036  8-15-2024  Special use permit for a detached accessory dwelling unit for PIN #15-08-06-300-
                      011-0000.
ZC-24-040  8-15-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #10-11-15-300-
                      032-0000.
ZC-24-044  8-15-2024  Special use permit for rural events for PIN #07-01-19-401-015-0000, PIN #07-01-
                      19-401-016-0000, and PIN #07-01-19-401-005-0000.
ZC-24-047  9-19-2024  Special use permit for truck terminal for PIN #07-01-05-203-007-0000 and PIN #07-
                      01-05-202-058-0000.
ZC-24-049  10-17-2024 MA from C-6 to A-1 for PIN #23-15-24-300-036-0000, PIN #23-15-24-300-037-0000,
                      PIN #23-15-24-300-038-0000, and PIN #23-15-24-300-039-0000.
ZC-24-058  9-19-2024  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #20-21-13-400-
                      001-0000.
                      MA from R-2 to C-4 (part of property) and special use permit for similar or
ZC-24-060  10-17-2024 compatible use to a permitted use in the district (vehicle storage and towing and
                      light equipment sales/rentals) for PIN #21-14-29-402-005-0000 and PIN #21-14-29-
                      402-006-0000.
ZC-24-064  9-19-2024  Special use permit for a nonconforming use (concrete plant) for PIN #30-07-22-
                      101-001-0000.
                      Special use permit for mining/quarrying with blasting and use of other explosives
ZC-24-066  3-20-2025  (120 acres on east side of Lily Cache Creek) for PIN #07-01-36-100-001-0000, PIN
                      #07-01-36-100-002-0000, and PIN #07-01-36-300-001-0000.
ZC-24-067  12-19-2024 Special use permit for dynamic digital display for PIN #18-13-21- 200-010-0000.
ZC-24-070  10-17-2024 Special use permit for wine bar/tavern for PIN #19-09-12-409- 003-0000.
ZC-24-074  12-19-2024 MA from R-4 to C-3 for PIN #11-04-34-403-003-0000.
ZC-24-076  12-19-2024 Special use permit for ancillary liquor service for PIN #10-11-09-200-024-0000
                      and PIN #10-11-09-200-017-0000.
ZC-24-077  1-16-2025  Special use permit for rural events for PIN #16-05-34-100-015- 0000.
ZC-24-078  11-21-2024 Special use permit for construction sales and services for PIN #21-14-16-200-011-
                      0000.
ZC-24-080  2-20-2025  Special use permit for an accessory dwelling unit for security for PIN #06-03-26-
                      300-049-0000.
ZC-24-081  4-17-2025  Special use permit for a truck terminal for PIN #15-08-31-100- 018-0000.
ZC-24-082  1-16-2025  MA from A-1 to I-2 and special use permit for truck terminal for PIN #03-17-17-
                      100-009-0000 and PIN #03-17-17-100-015-0000.
ZC-24-090  1-16-2025  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #21-14-19-300-
                      002-0000.
ZC-24-092  1-16-2025  MA from A-1 to I-2 for PIN #03-17-17-200-011-0000.
ZC-24-093  2-20-2025  Special use permit for construction sales and services for PIN #30-07-23-202-012-
                      0000.
ZC-24-094  1-16-2025  Special use permit for a similar or compatible use to a permitted use (group care
                      home (max 6 residents)) for PIN #19-09-24-207-002-0000.
ZC-24-101  1-16-2025  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #14-12-15-100-
                      003-0000.
ZC-24-102  4-17-2025  Special use permit for a commercial solar energy facility for PIN #20-21-08-200-
                      001-0000.
ZC-24-103  3-20-2025  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #14-12-18-300-
                      013-0000.
ZC-24-104  2-20-2025  MA from R-4 to C-3 for PIN #11-04-34-404-022-0000.
ZC-24-105  3-20-2025  Special use permit for landscape and lawn maintenance business for PIN #19-09-04-
                      100-011-0000.
ZC-24-109  3-20-2025  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #15-08-27-200-
                      020-0000 and PIN #15-08-26-100-010-0000.
ZC-24-110  1-16-2025  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #30-07-24-106-
                      002-0000.
ZC-24-116  2-20-2025  Special use permit for landscape and lawn maintenance business for PIN #06-03-18-
                      100-004-0000 and PIN #06-03-18-100-003-0000.
ZC-24-120  4-17-2025  Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #18-13-17-100-
                      007-0000 and PIN #18-13-17-300-010-0000.
ZC-24-123  5-15-2025  Special use permit for a dynamic digital display for PIN #01-24- 13-401-012-0000.
ZC-24-124  3-20-2025  Special use permit for an attached accessory dwelling unit for PIN #07-01-02-203-
                      010-0000.
ZC-24-125  5-15-2025  Special use permit for packaged liquor sales for PIN #16-05-21- 201-001-0000.
                      Temporary use permit for a travel trailer to live in until completion of home
TUP-25-001 2-4-2025   remodel, PIN #19-09-24-302-029-0000 in Frankfort Township, commonly known as
                      21443 S. 80th Avenue, Frankfort, IL.
TUP-25-002 2-18-2025  Temporary use permit for a mobile office trailer, PIN #16-05-08-300-031-0000,
                      commonly known as 14915 S. Gougar Road, Lockport, IL.
                      The administrative decision being appealed is in error and the Zoning
                      Administrator is hereby required to accept the zoning application submitted
                      February 7, 2025, requesting a special use permit for a landscape and lawn
AAD-25-001 4-3-2025   maintenance business, variance for maximum of 8 commercial motor vehicles to be
                      parked on a constructed driveway within a residential zoning district, and
                      variance for maximum vehicle weight limit from 8,000 pounds to 25,000 pounds for
                      the property commonly known as 17438 W Bluff Road, Lemont, IL 60439.
                      The administrative decision being appealed is in error and the Zoning
                      Administrator is hereby required to accept the zoning application submitted
                      January 13, 2025, requesting a special use permit for a landscape and lawn
                      maintenance business, variance for maximum of 6 commercial motor vehicles to be
AAD-25-002 4-3-2025   parked on a constructed driveway within a residential zoning district, and
                      variance for maximum vehicle weight limit from 8,000 pounds to 25,000 pounds for
                      the property commonly known as 17438 W. Bluff Road, Lemont, IL 60439 and
                      identified by permanent index number 12-02-24-100-013-0000 provided all other
                      application requirements are satisfied.
                      Temporary use permit for an annual fall festival with paintball activities with
TUP-25-007 9-2-2025   11 conditions for property located in Monee Township identified by permanent
                      index 21-14-23-200-009-0000.
ZC-25-012  6-18-2025  Special use permit for a bar for PIN #19-09-12-410-034-0000.
ZC-25-019  6-18-2025  MA from E-1 to A-1 for PIN #20-21-23-200-016-0000 and PIN #20-21-23-200-017-0000.
                      Special use permit for rural events; special use permit for ancillary liquor
ZC-25-021  6-18-2025  service in conjunction with allowed agritourism uses; special use permit for
                      similar or compatible use for rural retreat for PIN #30-07-01-200-029-0000.
ZC-25-025  6-18-2025  Special use permit for truck terminal for PIN #15-08-18-300-017-0000.
ZC-25-026  6-18-2025  MA from A-1/R-2 to I-2 for PIN #21-14-18-400-007-0000 and PIN #21-14-18-202-022-
                      0000.
ZC-25-032  6-18-2025  Special use permit for a bar for PIN #19-09-24-300-007-0000.
ZC-25-045  10-17-2025 Special use permit for commercial solar energy facility for PIN #30-07-24-300-
                      003-0000 & #30-07-34-300-002-0000.
                      Map amendment from A-2 to A-1, special use permit for commercial solar energy
ZC-25-046  10-17-2025 facility for PINs #30-07-34-101-003-0000, #30-07-34-101-014-0000, & #30- 07-34-
                      101-004-0000.
TUP-25-011 1-20-2026  Temporary use permit for weddings and events with 9 conditions.
                     
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Illinois Administrative Code
References to 1980 Code
References to Supplementary Record Books
References to Record Books
References to County Board Record Books
References to Zoning Case Numbers
References to Resolutions
References to Highway Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                                    Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01                          10.06
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02                          10.06
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03                          10.06
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04                          10.06
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09                          10.06
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11                          10.06
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.27                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29                          10.05
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.31                          10.09
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2                             10.07
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3                             10.08
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4                             10.08
Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.                  34.002
Ch. 5, Act 140                                  38.01
Ch. 5, Act 220, §§ 1 et seq.                  33.150
Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3                            32.065
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3                           32.065
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.                34.015,
                                                34.023
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 7                          34.020
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 8                          34.018
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 9                          34.022
                                                34.016,
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 10                         34.017,
                                                34.026
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 11 et seq.               34.026
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 13                         34.017,
                                                34.019
Ch. 20, Act 3305, § 20                         34.024
Ch. 30, Act 525, §§ 0.01 et seq.              41.004
Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 3-5 through 3-65          32.006
Ch. 35, Act 200, § 15-170                      39.05
Ch. 35, Act 200 §§ 18-165 et seq.             157.15
Ch. 35, Act 200, § 21-440                      40.07
                                                55.105,
Ch. 35, Act 200, §§ 27-5 et seq.              154.031,
                                                164.105,
                                                Ch. 164, App. A
Ch. 35, Act 200, § 31-25                       38.03
Ch. 35, Act 715, §§ 1 et seq.                 40.11
Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 7-101 et seq.               36.022,
                                                36.034
Ch. 40, Act 5, § 7-139                         36.042
Ch. 50, Act 125, § 2                           36.026
Ch. 50, Act 345, § 25                          110.019,
                                                110.024
Ch. 50, Act 345, § 25(c)                       40.17,
                                                40.24
Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.                 33.001
                                                34.105,
Ch. 50, Act 750                                 34.106,
                                                34.110,
                                                94.01
Ch. 55                                          70.01,
                                                154.003
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 2-5001 et seq.              30.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5001                        30.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(c)                     30.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(d)                     30.01,
                                                31.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(e)                     30.01,
                                                31.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(f)                     31.05
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(g)                     30.01,
                                                31.03
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(h)                     31.04
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(j)                     31.06
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(p)                     31.07
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5009(q)                     31.07
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 2-5010                        30.03
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 3-1001 et seq.              32.002
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-1004                        41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 3-2001 et seq.              32.003
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-2003.2                      41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-2005                        32.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-3003                        41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-5005.2                      41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-5018                        38.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-6018                        41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005                        110.142
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9006                        41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 3-10001 et seq.             32.005
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-10003                       32.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-10005.1                     41.016
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-12003                       33.002
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1003                        32.014
                                                90.27,
                                                90.99,
                                                110.002,
                                                110.018,
                                                110.020,
                                                110.021,
                                                110.023,
                                                110.024,
                                                110.025,
                                                110.040 -
                                                110.044,
                                                110.056,
                                                110.057,
                                                110.072,
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1004                        110.075,
                                                110.090,
                                                110.091,
                                                110.092,
                                                110.094 -
                                                110.101,
                                                110.115 -
                                                110.124,
                                                110.138,
                                                110.139,
                                                110.140,
                                                110.155,
                                                110.156,
                                                110.157,
                                                110.999
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1006                        111.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1007                        111.03
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1014                        90.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1031                        38.03
                                                33.030,
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1041                        55.001,
                                                164.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1049                        55.001,
                                                164.001
                                                51.01,
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1052                        93.020,
                                                120.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062 et seq.                56.006
                                                33.122,
                                                55.001,
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062                        55.180,
                                                55.230,
                                                164.195
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1062(b)                     55.125
                                                55.001,
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1063                        150.009,
                                                164.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1067                        162.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1078-5                      130.16
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1092                        93.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1097                        Ch. 118
                                                55.001,
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1104                        55.230,
                                                164.001,
                                                164.195
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1117                        95.01,
                                                95.03
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1123                        154.063
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-6002                        110.003,
                                                110.026
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-9001                        112.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-9002                        112.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-12001 et seq.               155-1.30,
                                                155-1.50
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-12001                       55.001,
                                                164.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-12009                       164.141
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-12020                       155-9.245,
                                                155-9.260
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-15001 et seq.               55.001,
                                                164.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-15010                       51.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-22001 et seq.             35.01
Ch. 55, Act 5, §§ 5-25001 et seq.             33.061
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-25013(B)                    33.062
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-39001                       37.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-40001                       164.001
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-43005 et seq.               43.01,
                                                43.03
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 15-1061                       33.123
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1                         55.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-5                         10.17,
                                                10.18
Ch. 65, Act 5, § l-2-6                         10.19
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq.            33.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-29                     33.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12                      55.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2                       55.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8                       55.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2                       55.001
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-141-1                      10.05
Ch. 70, Act 3105, §§ 1 et seq.                50.20
Ch. 105, Act 5, § 3-2                          32.001
Ch. 210, Act 12                                 97.03
Ch. 210, Act 125                                97.03,
                                                97.01
Ch. 210, Act 125, § 4                          97.04
Ch. 210, Act 125, § 15.1                       97.05
Ch. 210, Act 125, § 1-32                       97.02,
                                                97.05
Ch. 210, Act 145 §§ 1 et seq.                 93.004
Ch. 225, Act 225                                51.01,
                                                51.10
                                                55.005,
Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.                155-18.20,
                                                164.004
                                                55.005,
Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et seq.                155-18.20,
                                                164.004
Ch. 225, Act 345                                53.02,
                                                53.11
Ch. 225, Act 440                                155-13.60,
                                                155-13.90
Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq.                155-13.10
Ch. 225, Act 470                                50.42
Ch. 225, Act 605, §§ 1 et seq.                90.18
Ch. 225, Act 605, § 3.3                        90.29
Ch. 225, Act 725, §§ 1a et seq.               93.006
Ch. 230, Act 15                                 116.02
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 1-8                         116.01
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 3.1(a), (b)                 116.31
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 6                           116.32
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.                 121.01
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 27                          121.02
Ch. 235                                         155-8.50
                                                Ch. 110,
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.                110.003,
                                                110.017,
                                                110.141
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-2                          110.001
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.04                       Ch. 110
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.05                       110.003
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.18                       Ch. 110
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.22                       110.003
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.23                       110.003
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.25                       Ch. 110
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 2-1                          110.003
                                                Ch. 110,
                                                110.003,
                                                110.015,
                                                110.016,
                                                110.118 -
                                                110.021,
                                                110.023 -
                                                110.026,
                                                110.040 -
                                                110.044,
                                                110.055,
                                                110.056,
                                                110.057,
                                                110.072,
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 4-1 et seq.                110.075,
                                                110.090,
                                                110.091,
                                                110.092,
                                                110.094 -
                                                110.101,
                                                110.115 -
                                                110.124,
                                                110.138,
                                                110.139,
                                                110.140,
                                                110.155,
                                                110.156,
                                                110.157,
                                                110.999
                                                110.017,
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-1                          110.022,
                                                110.026,
                                                110.055
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-2                          110.135,
                                                110.137
Ch. 234, Act 5, § 4-3                          110.136
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2                          110.017
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-3                          110.017
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-11                         110.017,
                                                110.026
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-12                         110.017
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16                         110.070,
                                                110.074
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16.2                       110.071,
                                                110.073
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-17                         110.093
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20                         110.073,
                                                110.074
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-21(a)                      110.019
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-25                         110.017
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-5                          110.141
Ch. 410, Act 315, § 1                          33.061
Ch. 410, Act 315, § 2                          33.061
Ch. 415, Act 5                                  50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.                  50.20
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.84                         93.061
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.105                        50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160                        50.43
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160(b)                     50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160(c)                     50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51                        50.43
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(e)(1)                  50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(e)(2)                  50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(e)(3)                  50.40
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51b(f)                    50.42,
                                                50.43
Ch. 415, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.                 54.02,
                                                54.03
Ch. 415, Act 30                                 53.11
Ch. 415, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.                 93.006
Ch. 415, Act 35, §§ 1 et seq.                 93.006
Ch. 415, Act 55                                 53.02
Ch. 415, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq.                93.060
Ch. 425, Act 35                                 133.05
Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2.1                         92.01
Ch. 430, Act 85                                 150.116
Ch. 505, Act 5, § 3.01                         155-10.10
Ch. 505, Act 5, § 3.06                         155-10.10
Ch. 510, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.                  90.01,
                                                90.03
Ch. 510, Act 5, §§ 2.01 - 2.04a               90.01
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 2.05a                        90.01
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 2.07                         90.01
Ch. 510, Act 5, §§ 2.11 - 2.17c               90.01
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 2.18                         90.28
Ch. 510, Act 5, §§ 2.18a -2.19b               90.01
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 3                            90.02
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 3.5                          90.01
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 5                            90.03,
                                                90.12
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 8                            90.08
                                                90.01,
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 9                            90.14,
                                                90.29
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 10                           90.15
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 11                           90.15
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 13                           90.04,
                                                90.05
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 15                           90.06
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 15.1                         90.01, 90.06
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 15.2                         90.06
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 15.3                         90.06
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 15.4                         90.06
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 16                           90.07
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 17                           90.22
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 19                           90.03
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 24                           90.18,
                                                90.21
Ch. 510, Act 5, § 26                           90.06
Ch. 510, Act 68, §§ 1 et seq.                 155-9.25
Ch. 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq.                 90.23,
                                                90.25
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 2.01                        90.01
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 2.01c                       90.01
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 2.09                        90.01
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 2.10                        90.01
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 3.01                        90.01
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 3.02                        90.01,
                                                90.23
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 3.03                        90.01,
                                                90.23
Ch. 510, Act 70. § 3.03-1                      90.23
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 3.09                        90.23
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 4.01                        90.01
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 4.03                        90.25
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 4.04                        90.25
Ch. 510, Act 70, § 20.1a                       90.01
Ch. 520, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.                  155-9.25
Ch. 605                                         70.01
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-101.7 et seq.              56.068
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-201                        56.006
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-301 et seq.                56.028
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-413 et seq.                56.021
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-414 et seq.                56.054,
                                                56.120
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 5-414                        56.021
Ch. 605, Act 5 §§ 5-901 et seq.               33.123
Ch. 605, Act 5 § 5-907                         33.123
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 6-201                        71.01
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8                            56.006
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8-101 et seq.                56.021,
                                                56.051
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 8-102 et seq.                56.021,
                                                56.051
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-101.1                      56.021
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-105                        56.082
                                                56.006,
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-113                        56.021,
                                                56.022,
                                                56.028
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-115.1                      56.021,
                                                56.081
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-117                        56.033
Ch. 605, Act 5, § 9-118                        56.021
Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 4.9 et seq., including § 155.001
Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18g                          55.003,
                                                164.002
Ch. 625                                         70.01,
                                                114.003
Ch. 625, Act 5                                  70.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-76.01                      76.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146                        93.061
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188                        10.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-401(d)                     70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609                        74.11,
                                                74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616                        74.11,
                                                74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-100                        93.061
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-201 et seq.              78.60
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-202 et seq.              70.26
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 5                            155-18.20
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5                      77.02,
                                                77.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208(a)(7)                 70.12
                                                77.02,
Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-208.3                      77.04,
                                                77.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3(f)                  77.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.7                     78.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.7(b)                  78.30
                                                56.006,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301                       74.11 -
                                                74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601                       Ch. 72, Sch. II
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604                       Ch. 72, Sch. II
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2                    74.11,
                                                74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306                      77.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1307.2                    74.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1393                      74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1501 et seq.            75.18
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-205.1                  70.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, Chapter 15                      70.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.             70.09,
                                                Ch. 72, Sch. I
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102                       70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103                       70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107                       70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111                       70.12,
                                                70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-301 through 15-319      70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-301                    70.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-301(j)                    70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-316                       70.09
Ch. 705, Act 105, § 27.1b                      37.04,
                                                37.05
Ch. 705, Act 105, § 135 et seq.                37.04
Ch. 705, Act 135, §§ 1-5 et seq.              37.06
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30                        110.095
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12C-30                       119.003
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1                         93.047
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-4                         119.003
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 47 et seq.                 93.001
                                                93.040,
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 47-5                         93.080,
                                                93.100
Ch. 720, Act 5, Art. 33E                        41.092
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 33E-11                       41.092
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 48-10(c)                     155-9.25
Ch. 720, Act 135, §§ 0.01 et seq.             119.003
Ch. 720, Act 150, §§ 0.01 et seq.             119.003
Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.                119.003,
                                                132.01
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.              119.003,
                                                132.01
Ch. 720, Act 570, § 102                        132.01
Ch. 720, Act 640, §§ 001 et seq.              119.003
Ch. 720, Act 646, §§ 5 et seq.                132.01
Ch. 720, Act 670, §§ 0.01 et seq.             119.003
Ch. 735, Act 5, § 2-203                        77.13
                                                77.10,
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.              77.11,
                                                78.55
Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101                        78.45
Ch. 740, Act 147, §§ 1 et seq.                130.99
Ch. 745, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.              90.19
Ch. 745, Act 10, § 2-301                       32.014
Ch. 765                                         150.003,
                                                154.003
Ch. 765, Act 205                                154.061,
                                                155-2.40
Ch. 765, Act 205, §§ 2 et seq.                56.021
Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2                          56.024
Ch. 775, Act 5, § 2-105                        40.04
Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 1 through 12             36.032
Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 1 et seq.                36.022,
                                                36.030
Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 13 et seq.               36.030
                                                
 
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Ill. Adm. Section Code Section
Ill. Adm. Section                    Code Section
Ill. Adm. Code Part 3700 Rules       55.060,
                                     164.060
17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708          55.066,
                                     164.064
35 Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle G         51.05
35 Ill. Adm. Code, subtitle H, Ch. 1 93.083,
                                     93.084
35 Ill. Adm. Code 611                53.06
35 III. Adm. Code 1100               50.42
77 Ill. Adm. Code 870                55.062,
                                     164.062
77 Ill. Adm. Code 890                53.02
77 Ill. Adm. Code 895                53.02
77 Ill. Adm. Code 900                53.02
                                     Ch. 51, App. B,
77 Ill. Adm. Code 920                53.02,
                                     53.05
77 Ill. Adm. Code 925                53.02,
                                     53.05
77 Ill. Adm. Code 930                53.02,
                                     53.05
                                     
 
REFERENCES TO 1980 CODE
1980 Code Section 2011 Code Section
1980 Code Section 2011 Code Section
10.01             10.01
10.02             10.02
10.03             10.03
10.04             10.04
10.05             10.05
10.06             10.06
10.07             10.07
10.08             10.08
10.09             10.09
10.10             10.10
10.11             10.11
10.12             10.12
10.13             10.13
10.14             10.14
10.15             10.15
10.16             10.16
10.17             10.17
10.18             10.18
10.19             10.19
10.20             10.20
10.21             10.20
10.99             10.99
30.01             30.01
30.02             30.02
30.03             30.03
30.04             30.04
30.05             30.05
30.06             30.06
30.07             30.07
30.08             30.08
31.01             31.01
31.02             31.02
31.03             31.03
31.04             31.04
31.05             31.05
31.06             31.06
31.07             31.07
32.01             32.001
32.02             32.002
32.03             32.003
32.04             32.004
32.05             32.005
32.06             32.006
32.07             32.007
32.08             32.008
32.09             32.009
32.10             32.010
32.12             32.011
32.13             32.012
32.14             32.013
32.15             32.014
32.20             32.030
32.21             32.031
32.30             32.045
32.31             32.046
32.32             32.047
32.33             32.048
32.34             32.049
32.35             32.050
32.36             32.051
32.37             32.052
32.50             32.052
32.51             32.066
32.52             32.067
32.53             32.068
32.54             32.069
32.99             32.999
33.01             33.001
33.02             33.002
33.03             33.003
33.04             33.004
33.05             33.005
33.06             33.006
33.07             33.007
33.08             33.008
33.09             33.009
33.10             33.010
33.11             33.011
33.12             33.012
33.13             33.013
33.14             33.014
33.15             33.015
33.16             33.016
33.17             33.017
33.18             33.018
33.20             33.030
33.25             33.045
33.30             33.060
33.31             33.061
33.32             33.062
33.33             33.063
33.40             33.075
33.41             33.076
33.50             33.090
33.60             33.105
33.70             33.120
33.71             33.121
33.72             33.122
33.73             33.123
33.80             33.123
34.01             34.001
34.02             34.002
34.03             34.003
34.05             34.015
34.06             34.016
34.07             34.017
34.08             34.018
34.09             34.019
34.10             34.020
34.11             34.021
34.12             34.022
34.13             34.023
34.14             34.024
34.15             34.025
34.16             34.026
34.20             34.040
34.21             34.041
34.22             34.042
34.25             34.055
34.30             34.070
34.40             34.085
34.41             34.086
34.42             34.087
34.43             34.088
34.44             34.089
34.45             34.090
34.46             34.091
34.47             34.092
34.55             34.092
34.56             34.106
34.57             34.107
34.58             34.108
34.59             34.109
34.60             34.110
34.61             34.111
34.62             34.112
34.63             34.113
34.70             34.113
34.80             34.140
35.01             35.01
35.02             35.02
35.03             35.03
35.04             35.04
35.05             35.05
35.06             35.06
35.07             35.07
36.04             36.009
36.10             36.015
36.11             36.016
36.12             36.017
36.13             36.018
36.14             36.019
36.15             36.020
36.16             36.021
36.17             36.022
36.18             36.023
36.19             36.023
36.20             36.025
36.21             36.026
36.22             36.027
36.23             36.028
36.24             36.029
36.25             36.030
36.26             36.031
36.27             36.032
36.28             36.033
36.29             36.034
36.30             36.035
36.31             36.036
36.32             36.037
36.33             36.038
36.34             36.039
36.35             36.040
36.36             36.041
36.37             36.042
36.38             36.043
36.50             36.055
36.51             36.056
36.52             36.057
36.53             36.058
36.54             36.059
36.55             36.060
36.70             36.075
36.71             36.076
36.72             36.077
36.73             36.078
36.74             36.079
36.75             36.080
36.76             36.081
36.77             36.082
36.78             36.083
36.79             36.084
36.80             36.085
36.81             36.086
36.82             36.087
36.83             36.088
36.84             36.089
36.85             36.090
37.01             37.01
37.02             37.02
38.01             38.01
38.02             38.02
38.03             38.03
38.04             38.04
38.05             38.05
38.06             38.06
39.01             39.01
39.02             39.02
39.03             39.03
39.04             39.04,
                  39.99
40.01             40.01
40.02             40.02
40.03             40.03
40.04             40.04
40.05             40.05
40.06             40.06
40.07             40.07
40.08             40.08
40.09             40.09
40.10             40.10
40.11             40.11
40.12             40.12
40.13             40.13
40.14             40.14
40.15             40.15
40.16             40.16
40.17             40.17
40.18             40.18
40.19             40.19
40.20             40.20
40.21             40.21
41.001            41.001
41.002            41.002
41.003            41.003
41.004            41.004
41.005            41.005
41.010            41.015
41.011            41.016
41.020            41.030
41.021            41.031
41.022            41.032
41.023            41.033
41.024            41.034
41.025            41.035
41.040            41.050
41.050            41.065
41.051            41.066
41.052            41.067
41.053            41.068
41.054            41.069
41.055            41.070
41.056            41.071
41.070            41.085
41.071            41.086
41.072            41.087
41.073            41.088
41.074            41.089
41.075            41.090
41.076            41.091
41.077            41.092
41.090            41.105
41.091            41.106
41.100            41.120
41.101            41.121
41.110            41.135
41.111            41.136
41.112            41.137
41.113            41.138
41.120            41.150
41.121            41.151
41.122            41.152
41.123            41.153
41.130            41.165
41.131            41.166
41.132            41.167
41.133            41.168
41.134            41.169
41.135            41.170
41.136            41.171
41.137            41.172
41.138            41.173
41.139            41.174
41.140            41.175
42.01             42.01
42.02             42.02
42.03             42.03
42.04             42.04
42.05             42.05
42.06             42.06
42.07             42.07
42.09             42.09
42.11             42.10
42.12             42.11
42.13             42.12
50.01             50.01
50.02             50.02
50.03             50.03
50.20             50.20
50.21             50.21
50.22             50.22
50.23             50.23
50.24             50.24
50.25             50.25
50.26             50.26
50.27             50.27
50.99             50.99
51.01             51.01
51.02             51.02
51.03             51.03
51.04             51.04
51.05             51.05
51.06             51.06
51.07             51.07
51.08             51.08
51.09             51.11
51.10             51.09
51.11             51.10
51.12             51.12
51.13             51.13
51.14             Ch. 51, App. A
51.15             Ch. 51, App. B
51.99             51.99
52.01             52.01
52.02             52.02
52.03             52.03
52.04             52.04
52.05             52.05
52.06             52.06
52.07             52.07,
                  52.99
53.01             53.01
53.02             53.02
53.03             53.03
53.04             53.04
53.05             53.05
53.06             53.06
53.07             53.07
53.08             53.08
53.09             53.09
53.10             53.10
53.11             53.11
53.12             53.12
53.13             53.13
53.14             53.14
53.99             53.99
54.01             54.01
54.02             54.02
54.03             54.03
54.04             54.04
54.05             54.05
54.99             54.99
70.01             70.01
70.02             70.02
70.03             70.03
70.04             70.04
70.05             70.05
70.06             70.06
70.07             70.07
70.08             70.08
70.09             70.09
70.10             70.10
70.11             70.10
70.12             70.12,
                  70.99
70.15             70.25
70.16             70.26
70.99             70.99
71.01             71.01
71.02             71.02
Ch. 72, Sch. I    Ch. 72, Sch. I
Ch. 72, Sch. II   Ch. 72, Sch. II
Ch. 73, Sch. I    Ch. 73, Sch. I
74.01             74.01
74.02             74.02
74.03             74.03
74.04             74.04
74.05             74.05
74.06             74.06
74.07             74.07
74.08             74.08
74.09             74.09
74.10             74.09
74.11             74.11
74.12             74.13
74.13             74.14
74.14             74.15
74.15             74.16
74.16             74.17
74.17             74.18
74.18             74.19
74.99             74.99
75.01             75.01
75.02             75.02
75.03             75.03
75.15             75.15
75.16             75.16
75.17             75.17
75.18             75.18
75.19             75.19
75.20             75.20
75.21             75.21
75.22             75.22
75.23             75.23
75.24             75.24
75.99             75.99
90.01             90.01
90.02             90.02
90.03             90.03
90.04             90.04
90.06             90.06
90.07             90.07
90.08             90.08
90.09             90.08
90.11             90.08
90.12             90.12
90.14             90.14
90.15             90.15
90.17             90.17
90.18             90.18
90.19             90.19
90.20             90.20
90.21             90.21
90.22             90.22
90.23             90.23
90.25             90.25
90.27             90.27
90.99             90.99
91.01             91.01
91.02             91.02
91.03             91.03
91.04             91.04
91.05             91.05
91.06             91.06
91.07             91.07
91.08             91.08
91.09             91.09
91.10             91.10
92.01             92.01
92.02             92.02
92.99             92.99
93.001            93.001
93.002            93.002
93.003            93.003
93.004            93.004
93.005            93.005
93.006            93.006
93.007            93.999
93.008            93.007
93.009            93.008
93.010            93.009
93.015            93.020
93.016            93.021
93.017            93.022
93.018            93.023
93.0185           93.023
93.019            93.025
93.020            93.026
93.021            93.027
93.022            93.028
93.023            93.029
93.035            93.040
93.036            93.041
93.037            93.042
93.038            93.043
93.039            93.044
93.040            93.045
93.041            93.046
93.042            93.047
93.043            93.048
93.044            93.999
93.045            93.049
93.054            93.060
93.055            93.061
93.056            93.062
93.057            93.063
93.058            93.064
93.059            93.065
93.060            93.999
93.070            93.080
93.071            93.081
93.072            93.082
93.073            93.083
93.074            93.084
93.075            93.085
93.076            93.086
93.077            93.087
93.090            93.100
93.091            93.101
93.092            93.102
93.093            93.103
93.094            93.104
93.095            93.105
93.096            93.106
93.097            93.107
93.098            93.108
93.999            93.999
94.01             94.01
94.02             94.02
95.01             95.01
95.02             95.02
95.03             95.03
95.04             95.04
95.05             95.05
95.06             95.06
95.99             95.99
96.01             96.01,
                  96.99
97.01             97.01
97.02             97.02
97.03             97.04
97.04             97.05
97.05             97.06
97.06             97.07
97.07             97.08
97.08             97.09
97.99             97.99
Ch. 97, App.      Ch. 97, App. A
110.001           110.001
110.002           110.002
110.003           110.002
110.015           110.015
110.016           110.016
110.017           110.017
110.018           110.018
110.021           110.019
110.022           110.020
110.023           110.021
110.024           110.022
110.025           110.023
110.026           110.024
110.027           110.025
110.028           110.026
110.029           110.026
110.040           110.040
110.041           110.041
110.042           110.042
110.043           110.043
110.044           110.044
110.055           110.055
110.056           110.056
110.057           110.057
110.070           110.070
110.071           110.071
110.072           110.072
110.073           110.073
110.074           110.074
110.075           110.075
110.085           110.090
110.086           110.090
110.087           110.092
110.088           110.093
110.089           110.094
110.090           110.095
110.091           110.096
110.092           110.096
110.093           110.098
110.094           110.099
110.095           110.100
110.098           110.101
110.110           110.115
110.111           110.116
110.112           110.117
110.113           110.118
110.114           110.119
110.115           110.120
110.116           110.121
110.117           110.122
110.118           110.123
110.119           110.124
110.130           110.135
110.131           110.136
110.132           110.137
110.133           110.138
110.134           110.139
110.135           110.140
110.136           110.141
110.137           110.142
110.150           110.155
110.151           110.156
110.152           110.157
110.999           110.999
111.01            111.01
111.02            111.02
111.02            111.02
111.03            111.03
111.04            111.04
111.05            111.05
112.01            112.01
112.02            112.02
112.03            112.03
112.04            112.04
112.05            112.05
112.06            112.06
112.99            112.99
113.01            113.01
113.02            113.02
113.03            113.03
113.04            113.03
113.05            113.05
113.06            113.06
113.99            113.99
114.01            114.001
114.02            114.002
115.01            115.01
115.02            115.02
116.01            116.01
116.02            116.02
116.10            116.15
116.11            116.16
116.12            116.17
116.13            116.18
116.20            116.30
116.21            116.31
116.22            116.32
116.99            116.99
117.20            117.01
117.21            117.02
117.22            117.03
117.23            117.04
117.24            117.04
117.25            117.06
117.26            117.07
117.27            117.08
117.28            117.09
118.01            118.01
118.02            118.02
118.03            118.03
118.04            118.04
118.05            118.05
118.06            118.06
118.07            118.07
118.98            118.08
118.99            118.99
119.001           119.001
119.002           119.002
119.003           119.003
119.004           119.004
119.005           119.005
119.020           119.020
119.021           119.021
119.030           119.035
119.031           119.036
119.032           119.037
119.033           119.038
119.034           119.039
119.050           119.050
119.051           119.051
119.052           119.052
119.053           119.053
119.054           119.054
119.055           119.055
119.056           119.056
119.065           119.070
119.066           119.071
119.067           119.072
119.068           119.073
119.075           119.085
119.076           119.086
119.077           119.087
119.078           119.088
119.090           119.100
119.091           119.101
119.092           119.102
119.093           119.103
119.094           119.104
119.095           119.105
119.096           119.106
119.097           119.107
119.098           119.108
119.099           119.109
119.100           119.110
119.101           119.111
119.102           119.112
119.110           119.125
119.111           119.111
119.112           119.112
119.113           119.128
119.125           119.140
119.135           119.155
119.136           119.156
120.01            120.01
120.10            120.15
120.11            120.19
120.12            120.20
120.13            120.21
120.14            120.22
120.15            120.23
120.16            120.24
120.17            120.99
120.18            120.25
120.19            120.26
130.01            130.01
130.10            130.15
130.11            130.16
130.12            130.17
130.13            130.18
130.14            130.19
130.15            130.20
130.17            130.21
130.99            130.99
156.01            156.01
157.01            157.01
157.02            157.02
157.10            157.15
157.11            157.16
157.12            157.17
157.13            157.18
158.01            158.01
158.02            158.02
159.01            159.01
161.01            161.01
162.01            162.01
162.02            162.01
162.10            162.15
162.11            162.16
162.12            162.17
162.13            162.18,
                  162.99
162.14            162.19
162.20            162.30
162.30            162.45
162.31            162.46
162.40            162.60
162.41            162.61
 
REFERENCES TO SUPPLEMENTARY RECORD BOOKS
Book Page Date Code Section
Book Page          Date       Code Section
-    p. 47         - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 48         - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 165        - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 167        - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 168        - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 169        - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 210        - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 272        - -        TSO Table XV
-    p. 448        - -        TSO Table XV
G    p. 102        - -        TSO Table VIII
G    p. 445        - -        TSO Table VIII
G    p. 462        - -        TSO Table VIII
H    p. 239        - -        TSO Table VIII
H    p. 266        - -        TSO Table VIII
H    p. 273        - -        TSO Table VIII
H    p. 348        - -        TSO Table V
H    p. 516        - -        TSO Table VIII
I    p. 336        - -        TSO Table VIII
I    p. 417        - -        TSO Table VIII
I    p. 552        - -        TSO Table VIII
J    p. 263        - -        TSO Table VIII
J    p. 274        - -        TSO Table VIII
K    p. 77         - -        TSO Table VIII
K    p. 107        - -        TSO Table VIII
K    p. 222        - -        TSO Table VIII
K    p. 323        - -        TSO Table VIII
K    p. 377        - -        TSO Table VIII
L    p. 161        - -        TSO Table VIII
L    p. 369        - -        TSO Table VIII
125  p. 44         - -        TSO Table VIII
125  p. 553        - -        TSO Table VIII
142  p. 88         - -        TSO Table V
173  p. 135        - -        TSO Table V
173  p. 266        - -        TSO Table V
173  p. 270        - -        TSO Table V
173  p. 594        - -        TSO Table V
173  p. 605        - -        TSO Table V
186  p. 131        - -        TSO Table VIII
186  p. 460        - -        TSO Table XIII
202  p. 316        - -        TSO Table XII
204  p. 214        - -        TSO Table VIII
206  p. 458        - -        TSO Table VIII
206  p. 483        - -        TSO Table XIII
206  p. 486        - -        TSO Table VIII
206  pp. 571—573 - -        TSO Table VIII 
206  p. 651        - -        TSO Table VIII
207  p. 85         - -        TSO Table VIII
207  p. 499        - -        TSO Table VIII
207  p. 540        - -        TSO Table V
207  p. 622        - -        TSO Table V
208  p. 297        - -        TSO Table VIII
208  p. 39l        - -        TSO Table V
208  p. 461        - -        TSO Table VIII
208  p. 488        - -        TSO Table VIII
209  p. 312        - -        TSO Table V
210  p. 35         - -        TSO Table V
210  p. 277        - -        TSO Table V
211  p. 220        - -        TSO Table VIII
211  p. 456        - -        TSO Table XIII
212  p. 169        - -        TSO Table V
212  p. 478        - -        TSO Table V
212  p. 516        - -        TSO Table V
212  p. 621        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 15         - -        TSO Table XV
213  p. 46         - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 47         - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 77         - -        TSO Table VIII
213  p. 104        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 118        - -        TSO Table VIII
213  p. 240        - -        TSO Table VIII
213  p. 333        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 401        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 448        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 49l        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 492        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 499        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 500        - -        TSO Table V
213  p. 511        - -        TSO Table V
214  p. 63         - -        TSO Table VIII
214  p. 73         - -        TSO Table V
214  p. 127        - -        TSO Table V
214  p. 213        - -        TSO Table V
215  p. 18         - -        TSO Table V
215  p. 19         - -        TSO Table V
215  p. 63         - -        TSO Table V
215  p. 92         - -        TSO Table V
215  p. 226        - -        TSO Table V
215  p. 490        - -        TSO Table VIII
215  p. 507        - -        TSO Table V
216  pp. 175—176 - -        40.01
216  pp. 285—286 - -        TSO Table XV
216  p. 561        - -        TSO Table XV
217  p. 192        - -        TSO Table VIII
217  p. 256        - -        TSO Table VIII
217  p. 344        - -        TSO Table XV
218  p. 63         - -        TSO Table VIII
218  p. 108        - -        TSO Table V
218  p. 466        - -        TSO Table V
219  pp. 53—54   - -        TSO Table XV
219  p. 167        - -        TSO Table VIII
220  pp. 301—302 - -        40.03
220  pp. 401—402 - -        40.04
220  p. 404        - -        TSO Table XV
221  p. 96         - -        TSO Table V
221  p. 566                  TSO Table XV
222  p. 178        - -        TSO Table XI
222  pp. 277—278           TSO Table XV
223  pp. 41—42   - -        33.061
223  p. 89         - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 187        - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 203        - -        TSO Table VIII
223  p. 239        - -        TSO Table V
223  p. 242        - -        TSO Table V
223  p. 244        - -        TSO Table V
223  pp. 293—294 - -        35.01—
                              35.05
223  p. 389        - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 393        - -        TSO Table V
223  pp. 439—440 - -        40.01
223  p. 458        - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 459        - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 460        - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 464        - -        TSO Table XV
223  p. 492        - -        TSO Table XIII
223  pp. 505—506 - -        40.01
224  p. 384        - -        TSO Table XIII
224  p. 385        - -        TSO Table IV
224  p. 480        - -        TSO Table V
225  p. 126        - -        TSO Table V
225  p. 132        - -        TSO Table V
225  p. 143        - -        TSO Table VIII
225  p. 206        - -        TSO Table V
225  p. 266        - -        TSO Table XV
225  p. 495        - -        TSO Table V
225  p. 496        - -        TSO Table XIII
225  p. 549        - -        TSO Table XV
225  p. 552        - -        TSO Table XV
225  p. 592        - -        TSO Table V
225  p. 594        - -        TSO Table XIII
226  p. 45         - -        TSO Table XIII
226  p. 75         - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 199        - -        TSO Table III
226  p. 254        - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 288        - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 289        - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 306        - -        TSO Table XV
226  p. 309        - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 329        - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 348        - -        TSO Table V
226  p. 377        - -        TSO Table XV
226  p. 444        - -        TSO Table XV
227  p. 3          - -        TSO Table V
227  p. 108        - -        TSO Table V
227  p. 136        - -        TSO Table V
227  p. 323        - -        TSO Table V
227  p. 352        - -        TSO Table II
227  p. 353        - -        TSO Table XV
227  p. 390        - -        TSO Table XV
227  p. 392        - -        TSO Table XV
227  p. 393A       - -        TSO Table XI
227  p. 393B       - -        TSO Table XI
227  p. 487        - -        TSO Table XI
228  p. 240        - -        TSO Table V
228  p. 257        - -        TSO Table XV
228  p. 306        - -        TSO Table XV
228  p. 328        - -        TSO Table XV
228  p. 348        - -        TSO Table V
228  p. 350        - -        TSO Table V
228  p. 556        - -        TSO Table V
229  p. 17         - -        TSO Table XV
229  p. 102        - -        TSO Table XIII
229  p. 156        - -        TSO Table V
229  p. 158        - -        TSO Table XIII
229  p. 184        - -        TSO Table XV
229  p. 191        - -        TSO Table XIII
229  p. 409        - -        TSO Table XV
229  p. 410        - -        TSO Table XV
230  p. 75         - -        TSO Table XI
230  p. 113        - -        TSO Table V
230  p. 199        - -        TSO Table XIII
230  p. 202        - -        TSO Table XIII
230  p. 298        - -        TSO Table V
230  p. 299        - -        TSO Table XIII
230  p. 301        - -        TSO Table XIII
230  p. 305        - -        TSO Table XIII
230  p. 346        - -        TSO Table XV
230  p. 347        - -        TSO Table XI
230  p. 376        - -        TSO Table XIII
231  p. 5          - -        TSO Table II
231  p. 57         - -        TSO Table XV
231  p. 283        - -        TSO Table XV
231  p. 284        - -        TSO Table XV
231  p. 286        - -        TSO Table XV
231  p. 316        - -        TSO Table XIII
231  p. 441        - -        TSO Table XIII
231  p. 470        - -        TSO Table XV
231  p. 473        - -        TSO Table XV
231  p. 506        - -        TSO Table V
232  p. 18         - -        TSO Table V
232  p. 105        - -        TSO Table VIII
232  p. 159        - -        TSO Table XV
232  p. 228        - -        TSO Table V
232  p. 272        - -        TSO Table V
232  p. 273        - -        TSO Table V
232  p. 275        - -        TSO Table V
232  p. 320        - -        111.02
233  p. 18         - -        TSO Table XV
233  p. 27         - -        TSO Table VIII
233  p. 52         - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 54         - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 57         - -        TSO Table XIII
233  p. 101        - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 114        - -        TSO Table XV
233  p. 136        - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 139        - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 170        - -        TSO Table XV
233  p. 277        - -        TSO Table XV
233  p. 318        - -        TSO Table XIII
233  p. 377        - -        TSO Table XV
233  p. 415        - -        TSO Table VIII
233  p. 449        - -        TSO Table XV
233  p. 478        - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 506        - -        TSO Table V
233  p. 539        - -        TSO Table IV
233  p. 558        - -        TSO Table V
234  p. 57         - -        111.03
234  p. 193        - -        TSO Table XIII
234  p. 196        - -        TSO Table XIII
234  p. 198        - -        TSO Table V
234  p. 210        - -        TSO Table VIII
234  p. 244        - -        TSO Table XV
234  p. 268        - -        TSO Table VIII
234  pp. 290—291 - -        37.02
234  p. 307        - -        TSO Table XV
234  p. 311        - -        TSO Table VIII
234  p. 414        - -        TSO Table XV
234  p. 438        - -        TSO Table VIII
234  p. 455        - -        TSO Table V
235  p. 18         - -        33.045
235  p. 35         - -        TSO Table V
235  p. 84         - -        TSO Table XV
235  p. 154        - -        TSO Table XV
235  p. 215        - -        TSO Table XV
235  p. 240        - -        TSO Table XIII
235  p. 242        - -        TSO Table V
235  pp. 257—258 - -        51.02
235  pp. 258—259 - -        51.03
235  p. 259        - -        51.04
235  pp. 259—261 - -        51.05
235  p. 262        - -        51.06,
                              51.07
235  p. 269        - -        TSO Table VIII
235  p. 310        - -        TSO Table XV
235  p. 315        - -        33.030
235  p. 341        - -        TSO Table V
235  p. 385        - -        TSO Table VIII
235  p. 435        - -        TSO Table V
235  p. 457        - -        TSO Table VIII
235  p. 460        - -        TSO Table XIII
235  p. 460        - -        TSO Table VIII
235  p. 483        - -        TSO Table V
236  p. 4          - -        TSO Table VIII
236  p. 64         - -        TSO Table VIII
236  p. 71         - -        TSO Table VIII
236  p. 78         - -        112.01
236  pp. 78—79   - -        112.02,
                              112.03
                              112.04—
236  p. 79         - -        112.06,
                              112.99
236  p. 94         - -        TSO Table V
236  p. 112        - -        TSO Table IX
236  p. 222        - -        TSO Table V
236  p. 237        - -        TSO Table I
236  p. 270        - -        TSO Table V
236  p. 280        - -        TSO Table XV
236  p. 332        - -        TSO Table XIII
236  p. 383        - -        TSO Table V
236  p. 388        - -        TSO Table XIII
236  p. 430        - -        TSO Table XV
236  p. 442        - -        TSO Table XV
236  p. 445        - -        40.05
236  p. 521        - -        TSO Table X
237  p. 19         - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
237  p. 33         - -        111.01
237  pp. 45, 87—9- -        33.003
237  p. 58         - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
237  p. 59         - -        TSO Table V,
                              TSO Table XIII
237  p. 62         - -        TSO Table VIII
237  p. 68         - -        TSO Table XV
237  p. 81         - -        TSO Table XIII
237  pp. 87—88   - -        33.004
237  pp. 88—89   - -        33.005
237  p. 89         - -        33.007
237  pp. 89—90   - -        33.008
237  pp. 90—91   - -        33.009
237  pp. 91—92   - -        33.010
237  p. 92         - -        33.011
237  pp. 92—93   - -        33.006
237  pp. 93—94   - -        33.012
237  p. 106        - -        TSO Table V
237  p. 107        - -        TSO Table V
237  p. 116        - -        40.02
237  p. 121        - -        TSO Table X
237  p. 125        - -        36.027
237  p. 163        - -        33.001
237  p. 167        - -        TSO Table V
237  p. 168        - -        TSO Table V
237  p. 169        - -        33.060,
                              33.062
237  p. 219        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II,
                              TSO Table V
237  p. 241        - -        TSO Table V
237  p. 263        - -        TSO Table IX
237  p. 292        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
237  p. 318        - -        111.03
237  p. 326        - -        36.028
237  p. 342        - -        TSO Table VIII
237  p. 418        - -        TSO Table XIII
237  p. 425        - -        36.025
237  p. 454        - -        TSO Table V
237  p. 465        - -        TSO Table VIII
237  p. 494        - -        40.01
237  p. 498        - -        TSO Table IX
238  p. 52         - -        36.017
238  p. 54         - -        TSO Table VIII
238  p. 59         - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 119        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II,
                              TSO Table XV
238  p. 121        - -        TSO Table V
238  p. 161        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 203        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 257        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 271        - -        36.018
238  p. 285        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 333        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  pp. 345—346 - -        34.040—
                              34.042
238  p. 359        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 434        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 455        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
238  p. 510        - -        36.026
239  p. 142        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
239  p. 288        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
239  p. 289        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
239  p. 405        - -        TSO Table V
239  p. 459        - -        TSO Table V
239  p. 460        - -        TSO Table V
239  p. 461        - -        TSO Table V
239  p. 502        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 94         - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 134        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 171        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 194        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 197        - -        TSO Table V
240  pp. 253—257 - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 259        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 262        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 304        - -        TSO Table III
240  p. 306        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 345        - -        TSO Table III
240  p. 351        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 353        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 426        - -        TSO Table V
240  pp. 466—469 - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 471        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 473        - -        TSO Table V
240  p. 495        - -        TSO Table V
241  -             - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
241  pp. 18—19   - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
241  p. 51         - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 87         - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 90         - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 9l         - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 115        - -        TSO Table III
241  p. 123        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 135        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 138        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 164        - -        TSO Table III
241  p. 199        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 201        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 206        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 208        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 210        - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
241  p. 252                  TSO Table V
241  p. 255        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 297        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 325        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 328        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 338        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 394        - -        TSO Table III
241  p. 540        - -        TSO Table V
241  p. 543        - -        TSO Table V
236  pp. 216—220 9- -1964   TSO Table II
236  pp. 259—261 9- -1964   TSO Table II
239  p. 142        - -1971    Ch. 72, Sch. II
239  p. 288        - -1971    Ch. 72, Sch. II
239  p. 289        - -1971    Ch. 72, Sch. II
239  p. 62         1-13-1971  36.029
                              52.01—
240  pp. 457—458 11-15-1972 52.07,
                              70.09
241  pp. 18—19   - -1973    Ch. 72, Sch. II
241  p. 210        - -1973    Ch. 72, Sch. II
241  p. 420        - -1973    Ch. 72, Sch. II
-    p. 134        3-13-1974  Ch. 72, Sch. II
-    p. 179        4-24-1974  36.016,
                              36.017
-    p. 180        4-24-1974  36.018,
                              36.019
-    p. 181        4-24-1974  36.021,
                              36.022
-    pp. 181—182 4-24-1974  36.020
-    p. 182        4-24-1974  36.023
-    p. 183        4-24-1974  36.015
-    p. 459        10-30-1974 40.06
-    p. 247        6-9-1975   32.002
-    p. 317        7-16-1975  Ch. 72, Sch. II
-    p. 392        9-9-1975   70.09
-    p. 437        10-15-1975 36.017
-    p. 451        10-15-1975 33.003
-    pp. 463—464 10-15-1975 34.055
-    p. 494        11-19-1975 33.015
-    p. 21         1-21-1976  Ch. 72, Sch. II
-    p. 22         1-21-1976  Ch. 72, Sch. II
                              113.01—
-    pp. 120—121 3-24-1976  113.04,
                              113.99
                              51.02,
                              51.04,
-    pp. 261—267 6-14-1976  51.05,
                              51.08,
                              51.09,
                              51.99
-    p. 303        6-14-1976  Ch. 72, Sch. II
-    pp. 532—534 11-10-1976 34.015—
                              34.026
-    p. 30         1-26-1977  Ch. 72, Sch. II
-    p. 11         1-26-1977  36.026
-    p. 51         2-23-1977  36.027
-    p. 224        6-13-1977  33.007
-    pp. 636—637 11-30-1977 33.063
 
REFERENCES TO RECORD BOOKS
Book Page Date Code Section
Book Page             Date       Code Section
1861 p. 30            - -        TSO Table VIII
1868 p. 6             - -        TSO Table VIII
1868 p. 16            - -        TSO Table VIII
1874 p. 3             - -        TSO Table VIII
1874 p. 21            - -        TSO Table VIII
1875 p. 17            - -        TSO Table V
1876 p. 25            - -        TSO Table VIII
1877 p. 20            - -        TSO Table VIII
1880 p. 19            - -        TSO Table VIII
1880 p. 38            - -        TSO Table VIII
1880 p. 73            - -        TSO Table VIII
1881 p. 18            - -        TSO Table VIII
1882 p. 21            - -        TSO Table VIII
1884 p. 19            - -        TSO Table VIII
1884 p. 28            - -        TSO Table VIII
1885 p. 22            - -        TSO Table VIII
1885 p. 70            - -        TSO Table VIII
1886 p. 25            - -        TSO Table VIII
1888 p. 23            - -        TSO Table VIII
1889 p. 18            - -        TSO Table VIII
1892 p. 560           - -        TSO Table VIII
1894 p. 90            - -        TSO Table VIII
1894 p. 216           - -        TSO Table V
1899 p. 48            - -        TSO Table V
1899 p. 210           - -        TSO Table V
1899 p. 216           - -        TSO Table V
1901 p. 67            - -        TSO Table V
1901 p. 81            - -        TSO Table V
1901 p. 285           - -        TSO Table VIII
1903 p. 81            - -        TSO Table XIII
1905 p. 16            - -        TSO Table XII
1909 p. 284           - -        TSO Table VIII
1913 p. 148           - -        TSO Table VIII
1913 p. 188           - -        TSO Table XIII
1913 pp. 192, 332—33- -        TSO Table VIII
1914 p. 103           - -        TSO Table VIII
1914 p. 337           - -        TSO Table VIII
1916 p. 254           - -        TSO Table VIII
1916 p. 310           - -        TSO Table V
1916 p. 416           - -        TSO Table V
1918 p. 101           - -        TSO Table VIII
1918 p. 252           - -        TSO Table V
1918 p. 355           - -        TSO Table VIII
1918 p. 393           - -        TSO Table VIII
1920 p. 326           - -        TSO Table V
1921 p. 359           - -        TSO Table V
1922 p. 353           - -        TSO Table V
1924 p. 278           - -        TSO Table VIII
1925 p. 170           - -        TSO Table XIII
1926 p. 183           - -        TSO Table V
1927 p. 169           - -        TSO Table V
1927 p. 223           - -        TSO Table V
1927 p. 382           - -        TSO Table V
1928 p. 28            - -        TSO Table XV
1928 p. 74            - -        TSO Table V
1928 p. 75            - -        TSO Table V
1928 p. 129           - -        TSO Table VIII
1928 p. 158           - -        TSO Table V
1928 p. 180           - -        TSO Table VIII
1928 p. 388           - -        TSO Table VIII
1928 p. 532           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 64            - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 141           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 207           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 209           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 220           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 221           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 237           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 350           - -        TSO Table VIII
1929 p. 368           - -        TSO Table V
1929 p. 450           - -        TSO Table V
1930 p. 95            - -        TSO Table V
1931 p. 150           - -        TSO Table V
1931 p. 151           - -        TSO Table V
1931 p. 225           - -        TSO Table V
1931 p. 270           - -        TSO Table V
1932 p. 42            - -        TSO Table V
1933 p. 15            - -        TSO Table VIII
1933 p. 47            - -        TSO Table V
1934 p. 125           - -        TSO Table XV
1935 p. 59            - -        TSO Table XV
1935 p. 352           - -        TSO Table VIII
1936 p. 26            - -        TSO Table VIII
1936 p. 301           - -        TSO Table XV
1936 p. 395           - -        TSO Table VIII
1936 p. 460           - -        TSO Table V
1937 p. 250           - -        TSO Table V
1938 p. 54            - -        TSO Table XV
1938 p. 287           - -        TSO Table VIII
1941 p. 111           - -        TSO Table XV
1942 p. 70            - -        TSO Table V
1943 p. 263           - -        TSO Table XV
1944 p. 169           - -        TSO Table XI
1944 p. 284           - -        TSO Table XV
1946 p. 62            - -        TSO Table XV
1946 p. 173           - -        TSO Table XV
1946 p. 194           - -        TSO Table VIII
1946 p. 249           - -        TSO Table V
1946 p. 252           - -        TSO Table V
1946 p. 255           - -        TSO Table V
1947 p. 59            - -        TSO Table XV
1947 p. 65            - -        TSO Table V
1947 p. 148           - -        TSO Table XV
1947 p. 149           - -        TSO Table XV
1947 p. 150           - -        TSO Table XV
1947 p. 154           - -        TSO Table XV
1947 p. 175           - -        TSO Table XIII
1948 p. 170           - -        TSO Table XIII
1948 p. 172           - -        TSO Table IV
1948 p. 309           - -        TSO Table V
1949 p. 71            - -        TSO Table V
1949 p. 77            - -        TSO Table V
1949 p. 90            - -        TSO Table VIII
1949 p. 143           - -        TSO Table V
1949 p. 199           - -        TSO Table XV
1949 p. 371           - -        TSO Table V
1949 p. 373           - -        TSO Table XIII
1950 p. 64            - -        TSO Table XV
1950 p. 68            - -        TSO Table XV
1950 p. 120           - -        TSO Table V
1950 p. 123           - -        TSO Table XIII
1950 p. 201           - -        TSO Table XIII
1950 p. 221           - -        TSO Table V
1950 p. 403           - -        TSO Table III
1951 p. 37            - -        TSO Table V
1951 p. 96            - -        TSO Table V
1951 p. 98            - -        TSO Table V
1951 p. 125           - -        TSO Table XV
1951 p. 131           - -        TSO Table V
1951 p. 168           - -        TSO Table V
1951 p. 199           - -        TSO Table V
1951 p. 237           - -        TSO Table XV
1951 p. 342           - -        TSO Table XV
1951 p. 463           - -        TSO Table V
1952 p. 63            - -        TSO Table V
1952 p. 115           - -        TSO Table V
1952 p. 391           - -        TSO Table V
1952 p. 450           - -        TSO Table II,
                                 TSO Table XV
1953 p. 47            - -        TSO Table XV
1953 p. 50            - -        TSO Table XV
1953 p. 55            - -        TSO Table XI
1953 p. 56            - -        TSO Table XI
1953 p. 200           - -        TSO Table XI
1954 p. 14            - -        TSO Table V
1954 p. 54            - -        TSO Table XV
1954 p. 143           - -        TSO Table XV
1954 p. 182           - -        TSO Table XV
1954 p. 220           - -        TSO Table V
1954 p. 225           - -        TSO Table V
1955 p. 13            - -        TSO Table V
1955 p. 52            - -        TSO Table XV
1955 p. 211           - -        TSO Table XIII
1955 p. 316           - -        TSO Table V
1955 p. 319           - -        TSO Table XIII
1955 p. 365           - -        TSO Table XV
1955 p. 376           - -        TSO Table XIII
1955 p. 518           - -        TSO Table XV
1955 p. 520           - -        TSO Table XV
1956 p. 133           - -        TSO Table XI
1956 p. 200           - -        TSO Table V
1956 p. 360           - -        TSO Table XIII
1956 p. 366           - -        TSO Table XIII
1956 p. 508           - -        TSO Table V
1956 p. 511           - -        TSO Table XIII
1956 p. 517           - -        TSO Table XIII
1956 p. 524           - -        TSO Table XIII
1957 p. 32            - -        TSO Table XV
1957 p. 33            - -        TSO Table XI
1957 p. 82            - -        TSO Table XIII
1957 p. 243           - -        TSO Table II
1957 p. 332           - -        TSO Table XV
1957 p. 474           - -        TSO Table XV
1957 p. 479           - -        TSO Table XV
1957 p. 483           - -        TSO Table XV
1957 p. 533           - -        TSO Table XIII
1958 p. 190           - -        TSO Table XIII
1958 p. 248           - -        TSO Table XV
1958 p. 252           - -        TSO Table XV
1958 p. 312           - -        TSO Table V
1958 p. 357           - -        TSO Table V
1958 p. 481           - -        TSO Table VIII
1959 p. 16            - -        TSO Table XV
1959 p. 142           - -        TSO Table V
1959 p. 231           - -        TSO Table V
1959 p. 234           - -        TSO Table V
1959 p. 238           - -        TSO Table V
1959 p. 503           - -        TSO Table XV
1959 p. 523           - -        TSO Table VIII
1959 p. 577           - -        TSO Table V
1959 p. 580           - -        TSO Table V
1959 p. 588           - -        TSO Table XIII
1960 p. 79            - -        TSO Table V
1960 p. 103           - -        TSO Table XV
1960 p. 144           - -        TSO Table V
1960 p. 149           - -        TSO Table V
1960 p. 208           - -        TSO Table XV
1960 p. 414           - -        TSO Table XV
1960 p. 514           - -        TSO Table XIII
1960 p. 578           - -        TSO Table XV
1960 p. 654           - -        TSO Table VIII
1961 p. 50            - -        TSO Table XV
1961 p. 101           - -        TSO Table V
1961 p. 150           - -        TSO Table V
1961 p. 210           - -        TSO Table IV
1961 p. 249           - -        TSO Table V
1961 pp. 367—368    - -        111.03
1961 p. 610           - -        TSO Table XIII
1961 p. 616           - -        TSO Table XIII
1961 p. 621           - -        TSO Table V
1961 p. 643           - -        TSO Table VIII
1961 p. 715           - -        TSO Table XV
1962 p. 12            - -        TSO Table VIII
1962 p. 81            - -        TSO Table XV
1962 p. 87            - -        TSO Table VIII
1962 p. 285           - -        TSO Table XV
1962 p. 334           - -        TSO Table VIII
1962 p. 366           - -        TSO Table V
1962 p. 642           - -        TSO Table V
1963 p. 35            - -        TSO Table XV
1963 p. 171           - -        TSO Table XV
1963 p. 281           - -        TSO Table XV
1963 p. 329           - -        TSO Table XIII
1963 p. 334           - -        TSO Table V
1963 p. 374           - -        TSO Table VIII
1963 p. 457           - -        TSO Table XV
1963 p. 509           - -        TSO Table V
1963 p. 691           - -        TSO Table V
1964 p. 12            - -        TSO Table VIII
1964 p. 16            - -        TSO Table VIII,
                                 TSO Table XIII
1964 p. 60            - -        TSO Table V
1964 p. 147           - -        TSO Table VIII
1964 p. 246           - -        TSO Table VIII
1964 p. 262           - -        TSO Table VIII
1964 p. 300           - -        TSO Table V
1964 p. 334           - -        TSO Table IX
1964 p. 554           - -        TSO Table V
1964 p. 582           - -        TSO Table I
1964 p. 641           - -        TSO Table V
1964 p. 659           - -        TSO Table XV
1965 p. 72            - -        TSO Table XIII
1965 p. 166           - -        TSO Table V
1965 p. 175           - -        TSO Table XIII
1965 p. 244           - -        TSO Table XV
1965 p. 266           - -        TSO Table XV
1965 p. 404           - -        TSO Table X
1965 p. 717           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1965 p. 718           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1965 pp. 783—784    - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1965 p. 784           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1965 p. 785           - -        TSO Table XIII
1965 p. 789           - -        TSO Table XIII
1965 p. 792           - -        TSO Table V
1965 p. 806           - -        TSO Table VIII
1965 p. 831           - -        TSO Table XV
1965 p. 906           - -        TSO Table XIII
1966 p. 65            - -        TSO Table V
1966 p. 68            - -        TSO Table V
1966 p. 113           - -        TSO Table X
1966 p. 377           - -        TSO Table V
1966 p. 381           - -        TSO Table V
1966 p. 386           - -        TSO Table V
1966 pp. 670—671    - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1966 p. 674           - -        TSO Table V
1966 p. 676           - -        TSO Table V
1966 p. 780           - -        TSO Table V
1967 p. 99            - -        TSO Table IX
1967 p. 215           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1967 pp. 351—352    - -        111.03
1967 p. 447           - -        TSO Table VIII
1968 p. 67            - -        TSO Table XIII
1968 p. 186           - -        TSO Table V
1968 p. 191           - -        TSO Table V
1968 p. 227           - -        TSO Table VIII
1968 p. 390           - -        TSO Table IX
1968 p. 715           - -        TSO Table VIII
1968 pp. 745—746    - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 227           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 229           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II,
                                 TSO Table XV
1969 p. 241           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 294           - -        TSO Table XV
1969 p. 363           - -        TSO Table IX
1969 p. 422           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 425           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 426           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 497           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 542           - -        TSO Table XII
1969 p. 561           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 563           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 567           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 569           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 583           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 681           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 727           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 797           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 802           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 806           - -        TSO Table V
1969 p. 912           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1969 p. 943           - -        TSO Table XII
1970 p. 1210          - -        TSO Table IX
1970 p. 1273          - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1970 p. 1274          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 1277          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 1309          - -        TSO Table XIII
1970 p. 1356          - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1970 p. 1521          - -        TSO Table XIII
1970 p. 1625          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 1629          - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1970 p. 1703          - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1970 p. 1832          - -        TSO Table VIII
1970 p. 1860          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 1864          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 1891          - -        TSO Table X
1970 p. 1891          - -        TSO Table IX
1970 p. 1927          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 1931          - -        TSO Table V
1970 p. 2218          - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 40            - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 143           - -        TSO Table XV
1971 p. 197           - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 258           - -        TSO Table XII
1971 p. 290           - -        TSO Table V,
                                 Table X
1971 p. 323           - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 325           - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 327           - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 366           - -        TSO Table V
1971 p. 369           - -        TSO Table V
1973 p.         - -        TSO Table XV
1973 p. 210           - -        Ch. 72, Sch. II
1974 p.               - -        TSO Table XV
1974 p. 411           - -        TSO Table X
1974 p. 575           - -        TSO Table XIII
1974 p. 577           - -        TSO Table XIII
1974 p. 592           - -        TSO Table III
1975 p.               - -        TSO Table XV
1975 p. 19            - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 21            - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 76            - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 78            - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 92            - -        TSO Table III,
                                 Table X
1975 p. 109           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 182           - -        TSO Table IX
1975 p. 214           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 256           - -        TSO Table VI
1975 p. 259           - -        TSO Table VI
1975 p. 260           - -        TSO Table VI
1975 p. 261           - -        TSO Table VI
1975 p. 262           - -        TSO Table VI
1975 p. 263           - -        TSO Table VI
1975 p. 266           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 267           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 320           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 322           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 333           - -        TSO Table IX
1975 p. 378           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 395           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 397           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 399           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 401           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 413           - -        TSO Table IX
1975 p. 416           - -        TSO Table III
1975 p. 444           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 445           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 446           - -        TSO Table XIII
1975 p. 456           - -        TSO Table V
1975 p. 474           - -        TSO Table IX
1975 p. 550           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p.               - -        TSO Table XV
1976 p. 18            - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 52            - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 118           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 137           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 171           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 173           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 293           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 346           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 347           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 353           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 356           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 357           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 359           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 403           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 409           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 441           - -        TSO Table XII
1976 p. 443           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 445           - -        TSO Table XII
1976 p. 452           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 489           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 490           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 492           - -        TSO Table III
1976 p. 530           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 536           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 539           - -        TSO Table V
1976 p. 578           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 579           - -        TSO Table XIII
1976 p. 581           - -        TSO Table XII
1976 p. 583           - -        TSO Table V
1977 p.               - -        TSO Table XV
1933 p. 30            - -1933    40.01
1940 p. 400           12- -1940  40.03
1941 pp. 106—107    6- -1941   40.04
1945 p. 299           11- -1945  33.061
1946 pp. 282—283    11- -1946  35.01—
                                 35.05
1947 pp. 125—126    6- -1947   40.01
1947 p. 193           8- -1947   40.01
1962 pp. 48—49      3- -1962   37.02
1962 pp. 610—611    11- -1962  33.045
1963 pp. 360—361    8- -1963   51.02
1963 pp. 361—363    8- -1963   51.03
1963 pp. 363—364    8- -1963   51.04
1963 pp. 365—370    8- -1963   51.05
1963 p. 370           8- -1963   51.06
1963 pp. 370—372    8- -1963   51.07
1963 pp. 465—466    8- -1963   33.030
1964 p. 274           6- -1964   112.01
1964 pp. 274—275    6- -1964   112.02,
                                 112.03
                                 112.04—
1964 p. 275           6- -1964   112.06,
                                 112.99
1964 pp. 542—547    9- -1964   TSO Table II
1964 pp. 620—626    9- -1964   TSO Table II
1965 pp. 270—271    5-18-1965  40.05
1965 pp. 642—643    9-14-1965  111.01
1965 pp. 723—724    9- -1965   33.003
1966 pp. 12—26      1- -1966   33.003
1966 pp. 13—14      1- -1966   33.004
1966 pp. 14—15      1- -1966   33.005
1966 p. 15            1- -1966   33.007
1966 pp. 15—17      1- -1966   33.008
1966 pp. 17—20      1- -1966   33.009
1966 pp. 20—21      1- -1966   33.010
1966 p. 21            1- -1966   33.011
1966 pp. 21—24      1- -1966   33.006
1966 pp. 24—25      1- -1966   33.012
1966 pp. 96—97      3-9-1966   40.02
1966 pp. 123—124    5- -1966   36.027
1966 pp. 338—339    6- -1966   33.001
1966 pp. 393—394    6- -1966   33.060,
                                 33.062
1967 pp. 378—379    8- -1967   36.028
1967 p. 380           8-9-1967   111.03
1968 p. 91            2- -1968   36.025
1968 p. 709           11- -1968  36.017
1969 p. 533           8- -1969   111.03
1969 p. 867           11-5-1969  36.018
1985 p. 201           7-18-1985  TSO Table VIII
1985 p. 269           9-19-1985  TSO Table VIII
1985 p. 282           9-19-1985  TSO Table VIII
1985 p. 307           10-17-1985 TSO Table VIII
1985 p. 308           10-17-1985 TSO Table VIII
1987 p. 89            3-19-1987  TSO Table VIII
1970 pp. 1313—1314  2-25-1970  34.040—
                                 34.042
1970 p. 1907          11-18-1970 36.026
1996 p. 323           6-20-1996  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 2             1-16-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 3             1-16-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 46            2-20-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 47            2-20-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 98            3-20-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 99            3-20-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 101           3-20-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 100           3-20-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 150           4-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 151           4-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 152           4-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 189           5-15-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 190           5-15-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 257           6-19-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 258           6-19-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 259           6-19-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 260           6-19-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 261           6-19-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 334           7-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 335           7-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 336           7-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 337           7-17-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 390           8-21-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 391           8-21-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 452           9-18-1997  TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 493           10-16-1997 TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 535           11-20-1997 TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 536           11-20-1997 TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 595           12-18-1997 TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 596           12-18-1997 TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 597           12-18-1997 TSO Table VIII
1997 p. 598           12-18-1997 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 1             1-15-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 2             1-15-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 3             1-15-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 48            2-19-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 49            2-19-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 50            2-19-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 223           4-16-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 222           5-21-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 223           5-21-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 224           5-21-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 281           6-18-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 282           6-18-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 283           6-18-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 284           6-18-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 285           6-18-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 323           7-16-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 324           7-16-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 325           7-16-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 376           8-20-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 421           9-17-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 422           9-17-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 423           9-17-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 424           9-17-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 425           9-17-1998  TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 466           10-15-1998 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 467           10-15-1998 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 468           10-15-1998 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 469           10-15-1998 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 470           10-15-1998 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 471           10-15-1998 TSO Table VIII
1998 p. 527           11-19-1998 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 154           3-18-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 155           3-18-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 229           4-15-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 260           5-20-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 261           5-20-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 259           5-20-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 262           5-20-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 321           6-17-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 322           6-17-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 323           6-17-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 379           7-15-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 380           7-15-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 381           7-15-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 416           8-19-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 482           9-16-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 483           9-16-1999  TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 535           10-21-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 536           10-21-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 604           11-18-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 606           11-18-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 607           11-18-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 670           11-18-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 671           11-18-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 695           12-16-1999 TSO Table VIII
1999 p. 696           12-16-1999 TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 1             1-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 3             1-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 115           3-16-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 168           4-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 169           4-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 310           6-15-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 353           7-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 357           7-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 358           7-20-2000  TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 523           10-19-2000 TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 577           11-16-2000 TSO Table VIII
2000 p. 578           11-16-2000 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 55            2-15-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 56            2-15-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 102           3-15-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 177           4-19-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 290           5-17-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 291           5-17-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 292           5-17-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 293           5-17-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 294           5-17-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 295           5-17-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 351           6-21-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 437           7-19-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 560           9-20-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 561           9-20-2001  TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 635           10-18-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 636           10-18-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 637           10-18-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 701           10-18-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 718           11-15-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 808           12-20-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 809           12-20-2001 TSO Table VIII
2001 p. 882           12-20-2001 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 2             1-17-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 10            1-17-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 11            1-17-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p.44             2-21-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 117           3-21-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 118           3-21-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p.178            4-18-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 250           5-16-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 298           6-20-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 386           7-18-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 387           7-18-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 449           8-15-2002  TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 595           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 596           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 597           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 669           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 670           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 671           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 672           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 675           10-17-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 774           11-21-2002 TSO Table VIII
2002 p. 775           11-21-2002 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 154           2-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 155           2-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 156           2-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 256           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 300           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 302           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 303           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 304           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 306           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 307           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 308           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 310           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 311           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 313           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 314           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 315           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 317           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 318           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 319           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 321           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 322           3-20-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 332           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 395           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 399           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 400           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 401           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 403           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 404           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 405           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 406           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 408           4-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 436           5-15-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 498           5-15-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 515           6-19-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 611           7-17-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 688           8-21-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 760           9-18-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 762           9-18-2003  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 851           10-16-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 861           10-16-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 919           10-16-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 924           11-20-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 1043          12-18-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 1044          12-18-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 1045          12-18-2003 TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 1046          12-18-2003 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 2             1-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 68            2-19-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 69            2-19-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 144           3-18-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 222           4-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 239           4-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 304           5-20-2004  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 329           5-20-2004  TSO Table VIII
2003 p. 331           5-20-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 419           6-17-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 420           6-17-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 421           6-17-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 506           7-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 507           7-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 560           7-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 561           7-15-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 589           8-19-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 594           8-19-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 729           9-16-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 773           9-16-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 779           10-21-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 780           10-21-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 781           10-21-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 782           10-21-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 796           10-21-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 800           10-21-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 883           11-18-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 884           11-18-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 993           12-6-2004  TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 993           12-16-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 994           12-16-2004 TSO Table VIII
2004 p. 995           12-16-2004 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 2             1-20-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 80            1-20-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 89            1-20-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 95            1-20-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 108           2-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 109           2-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 182           2-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 198           2-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 204           3-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 205           3-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 278           3-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 296           3-17-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 303           4-21-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 394           5-19-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 395           5-19-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 488           6-16-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 506           6-16-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 665           7-21-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 757           8-18-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 758           8-18-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 853           9-15-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 855           9-15-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 856           9-15-2005  TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 944           10-20-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 946           10-20-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 1051          11-17-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 1194          12-15-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 1196          12-15-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 1197          12-15-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 1223          12-15-2005 TSO Table VIII
2005 p. 1225          12-15-2005 TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 3             1-19-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 109           2-16-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 222           3-16-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 224           3-16-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 306           3-16-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 322           4-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 323           4-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 352           4-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 437           5-18-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 439           5-18-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 556           6-15-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 558           6-15-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 559           6-15-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 628           6-15-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 659           7-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 660           7-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 662           7-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 682           7-20-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 769           8-17-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 770           8-17-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 771           8-17-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 873           9-21-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 874           9-21-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 892           9-21-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 937           9-21-2006  TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 963           10-19-2006 TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 965           10-19-2006 TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 1082          11-16-2006 TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 1083          11-16-2006 TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 1272          12-21-2006 TSO Table VIII
2006 p. 1273          12-21-2006 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 2             1-18-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 121           2-15-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 474           5-17-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 475           5-17-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 477           5-17-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 579           6-21-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 580           6-21-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 582           6-21-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 583           6-21-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 708           7-19-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 710           7-19-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 815           8-16-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 13            9-20-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 912           9-20-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 915           9-20-2007  TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1025          10-18-2007 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1026          10-18-2007 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1028          10-18-2007 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1064          10-18-2007 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1135          11-15-2007 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1309          12-20-2007 TSO Table VIII
2007 p. 1364          12-20-2007 TSO Table VIII
2008 p. 2             1-17-2008  TSO Table VIII
2008 p. 114           2-21-2008  TSO Table VIII
2008 p. 116           2-21-2008  TSO Table VIII
2008 p. 1203          12-18-2008 TSO Table VIII
2008 p. 1205          12-18-2008 TSO Table VIII
2008 p. 1206          12-18-2008 TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 3             1-15-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 4             1-15-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 81            2-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 82            2-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 148           3-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 149           3-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 151           3-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
2009 p. 152           3-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
2010 p. 205           3-18-2010  TSO Table VIII
2010 p. 206           3-18-2010  TSO Table VIII
2010 pp. 207—208    3-18-2010  TSO Table VIII
 
REFERENCES TO COUNTY BOARD RECORD BOOKS
Book Page Date Code Section
Book Page        Date       Code Section
239  p. 417      - -        TSO Table VIII
239  p. 439      - -        TSO Table XIII
239  p. 440      - -        TSO Table XIII
239  p. 496      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 87       - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 97       - -        TSO Table II
240  p. 165      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 179      - -        TSO Table VIII
240  p. 191      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 206      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 213      - -        TSO Table VIII
240  p. 215      - -        TSO Table VIII
240  p. 296      - -        TSO Table IX
240  p. 298      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 299      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 300      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 301      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 334      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 335      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 346      - -        TSO Table VIII
240  p. 347      - -        TSO Table VIII
240  p. 357      - -        TSO Table XV
240  p. 369      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 409      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 418      - -        TSO Table XII
240  p. 429      - -        TSO Table XV
240  p. 454      - -        TSO Table XIII
240  p. 475      - -        TSO Table II
240  p. 495      - -        TSO Table XV
241  p. 26       - -        TSO Table IX
241  p. 40       - -        TSO Table XII
241  p. 50       - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 55       - -        TSO Table XV
241  p. 82       - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 83       - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 98       - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 113      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 114      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 150      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 151      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 179      - -        TSO Table VI
241  p. 191      - -        TSO Table VI
241  p. 193      - -        TSO Table VI
241  p. 224      - -        TSO Table X
241  p. 247      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 248      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 292      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 293      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 319      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 361      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 365      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 366      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 403      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 404      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 440      - -        TSO Table XIII
241  p. 442      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 19       - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 20       - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 75       - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 119      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 120      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 150      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 193      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 194      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 265      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 299      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 332      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 333      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 394      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 461      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 462      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 463      - -        TSO Table XIII
242  p. 534      - -        TSO Table XIII
239  p. 501      - -1971    Ch. 72, Sch. II
240  p. 133      - -1972    Ch. 72, Sch. II
240  p. 354      - -1972    Ch. 72, Sch. II
240  p. 51       1-19-1972  50.99
-    p. 642      12-22-1976 TSO Table XIII
-    p. 3        1-26-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 4        1-26-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 5        1-26-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 25       1-26-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 47       2-23-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 49       2-23-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 64       2-23-1977  TSO Table V
-    p. 67       2-23-1977  TSO Table XII
-    pp. 106—103-30-1977  TSO Table XII
-    pp. 109—113-30-1977  TSO Table X
-    pp. 112—113-30-1977  TSO Table V
-    p. 122      3-30-1977  TSO Table IX
-    p. 128      3-30-1977  TSO Table X
-    pp. 145—144-20-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 163      5-18-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 180      5-18-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 181      5-18-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 182      5-18-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    pp. 191—195-18-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 194—195-18-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 197—195-18-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 200—205-18-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 232—256-13-1977  TSO Table V
-    p. 244      6-13-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 245      6-13-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    pp. 255—256-13-1977  TSO Table V
-    p. 227      7-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 228—227-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 230—237-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    p. 232      7-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 233—237-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 234—237-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 236—237-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 238—237-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 239—247-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 241—247-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 282—287-13-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 283      7-13-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 284      7-13-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 285      7-13-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    pp. 311—317-13-1977  TSO Table VI
-    p. 318      7-13-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 319      7-13-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 321      7-13-1977  TSO Table III
-    pp. 327—327-13-1977  TSO Table V
-    p.          7-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    p. 347      7-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 348—347-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 350—357-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    p. 352      7-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    p. 353      7-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 354—357-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 355—357-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 357—357-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 358—357-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    pp. 359—367-29-1977  TSO Table VI
-    p. 367      8-17-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 368      8-17-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    pp. 369—378-17-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 370      8-17-1977  TSO Table XVII
-    p. 387      8-17-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 388      8-17-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    pp. 388—388-17-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 389      8-17-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 390      8-17-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    p. 39l      8-17-1977  TSO Table XIII
-    pp. 397—398-17-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 399—408-17-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 406—408-17-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 409—418-17-1977  TSO Table V
-    pp. 412—418-17-1977  TSO Table V
-    p. 471      9-13-1977  TSO Table XII
-    p. 472      9-13-1977  TSO Table XII
-    p. 498      10-19-1977 TSO Table XVII
-    p. 499      10-19-1977 TSO Table XVII
-    p. 500      10-19-1977 TSO Table XVII
-    p. 501      10-19-1977 TSO Table XVII
-    p. 502      10-19-1977 TSO Table XVII
-    pp. 517—5110-19-1977 TSO Table X
-    pp. 524—5210-19-1977 TSO Table XII
-    p. 526      10-19-1977 TSO Table XIII
-    pp. 526—5210-19-1977 TSO Table XIII
-    p. 527      10-19-1977 TSO Table XIII
-    p. 528      10-19-1977 TSO Table XIII
-    pp. 537—5310-19-1977 TSO Table V
-    pp. 549—5510-19-1977 TSO Table XII
-    pp. 552—5510-19-1977 TSO Table X
-    p. 571      11-16-1977 TSO Table XIII
-    p. 572      11-16-1977 TSO Table V
-    pp. 586—5811-16-1977 TSO Table V
-    pp. 589—5911-16-1977 TSO Table V
-    pp. 592—5911-16-1977 TSO Table V
-    pp. 604—6011-16-1977 TSO Table X
-    p. 635      11-30-1977 TSO Table XIII
 
REFERENCES TO ZONING CASE NUMBERS
Case No. Date Passed Code Section
Case No.           Date Passed            Code Section
-                  1-18-1978              TSO Table XVII
-                  3-23-1978              TSO Table XVII
-                  5-18-1978              TSO Table XVII
-                  6-12-1978              TSO Table XVII
-                  8-24-1978              TSO Table XVII
-                  9-14-1978              TSO Table XVII
-                  10-26-1978             TSO Table XVII
-                  12-21-1978             TSO Table XVII
-                  1-18-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  2-22-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  3-21-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  4-18-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  4-25-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  5-16-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  6-14-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  7-25-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  8-29-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  9-26-1979              TSO Table XVII
-                  10-24-1979             TSO Table XVII
-                  12-19-1979             TSO Table XVII
-                  1-23-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  2-20-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  3-26-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  4-23-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  5-21-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  6-25-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  7-23-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  8-27-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  9-24-1980              TSO Table XVII
-                  10-29-1980             TSO Table XVII
-                  11-28-1980             TSO Table XVII
-                  1-22-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  2-26-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  3-26-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  4-23-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  5-28-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  6-25-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  7-23-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  8-27-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  9-24-1981              TSO Table XVII
-                  10-22-1981             TSO Table XVII
-                  11-19-1981             TSO Table XVII
-                  12-17-1981             TSO Table XVII
-                  1-28-1982              TSO Table XVII
-                  2-25-1982              TSO Table XVII
2520-C             3-17-1982              TSO Table XVII
2521-C             3-17-1982              TSO Table XVII
2359-C             3-25-1982              TSO Table XVII
2414-C             3-25-1982              TSO Table XVII
2448-C             3-25-1982              TSO Table XVII
2452-C             3-25-1982              TSO Table XVII
2453-C             3-25-1982              TSO Table XVII
2444-C             4-22-1982              TSO Table XVII
2449-C             4-22-1982              TSO Table XVII
2457-C             4-22-1982              TSO Table XVII
2459-C             4-22-1982              TSO Table XVII
1868-S             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2082-V             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2084-V             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2089-V             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2092-V             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2093-V             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2460-C             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2465-C             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2467-C             5-27-1982              TSO Table XVII
2425-C             6-24-1982              TSO Table XVII
2472-C             7-22-1982              TSO Table XVII
2446-C             8-26-1982              TSO Table XVII
2462-C             8-26-1982              TSO Table XVII
2466-C             8-26-1982              TSO Table XVII
2476-C             8-26-1982              TSO Table XVII
2477-C             8-26-1982              TSO Table XVII
2480-C             9-23-1982              TSO Table XVII
2481-C             9-23-1982              TSO Table XVII
2486-C             9-23-1982              TSO Table XVII
2416-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2483-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2487-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2488-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2490-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2491-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2494-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2498-C             10-28-1982             TSO Table XVII
2500-C             11-23-1982             TSO Table XVII
2493-C             12-16-1982             TSO Table XVII
2497-C             12-16-1982             TSO Table XVII
2501-C             12-16-1982             TSO Table XVII
2495-C             1-20-1983              TSO Table XVII
2506-C             1-20-1983              TSO Table XVII
2508-C             1-20-1983              TSO Table XVII
2510-C             1-20-1983              TSO Table XVII
2469-C             2-17-1983              TSO Table XVII
2512-C             2-17-1983              TSO Table XVII
2516-C             2-17-1983              TSO Table XVII
2517-C             3-17-1983              TSO Table XVII
2518-C             3-17-1983              TSO Table XVII
2522-C             3-17-1983              TSO Table XVII
2454-C             3-25-1983              TSO Table XVII
2447-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2504-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2523-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2524-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2526-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2527-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2528-C             4-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2362-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2498-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2525-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2529-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2530-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2531-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2532-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2534-C             5-19-1983              TSO Table XVII
2540-C             6-16-1983              TSO Table XVII
2541-C             6-16-1983              TSO Table XVII
2542-C             6-16-1983              TSO Table XVII
2543-C             6-16-1983              TSO Table XVII
2544-C             6-16-1983              TSO Table XVII
2545-C             6-16-1983              TSO Table XVII
2547-C             7-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2549-C             7-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2550-C             7-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2554-C             7-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2555-C             7-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2556-C             7-21-1983              TSO Table XVII
2552-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2558-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2559-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2562-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2563-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2564-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2569-C             8-18-1983              TSO Table XVII
2512-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2548-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2562-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2565-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2566-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2570-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2573-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2575-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2576-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2582-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2583-C             9-15-1983              TSO Table XVII
2522-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2567-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2568-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2571-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2572-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2578-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2580-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2581-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2587-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2590-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2591-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2596-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2604-C             10-20-1983             TSO Table XVII
2531-C             11-17-1983             TSO Table XVII
2602-C             11-17-1983             TSO Table XVII
2609-C             11-17-1983             TSO Table XVII
2603-C             12-15-1983             TSO Table XVII
2606-C             12-15-1983             TSO Table XVII
2610-C             12-15-1983             TSO Table XVII
2612-C             12-15-1983             TSO Table XVII
2599-C             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2600-C             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2614-C             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2615-C             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2616-R             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2617-R             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2618-R             1-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2613-C             2-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2624-R             2-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2625-C             2-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2626-R             2-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2628-R             2-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2549-C             3-15-1984              TSO Table XVII
2579-C             3-15-1984              TSO Table XVII
2629-R             3-15-1984              TSO Table XVII
2630-R             3-15-1984              TSO Table XVII
2627-R             4-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2631-R             4-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2632-R             5-17-1984              TSO Table XVII
2635-R             5-17-1984              TSO Table XVII
2603-C             6-21-1984              TSO Table XVII
2636-R             6-21-1984              TSO Table XVII
2637-R             6-21-1984              TSO Table XVII
2639-R             6-21-1984              TSO Table XVII
2640-R             6-21-1984              TSO Table XVII
2641-R             6-21-1984              TSO Table XVII
2642-R             7-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2644-R             7-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2645-R             7-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2648-R             7-19-1984              TSO Table XVII
2618-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2634-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2647-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2649-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2651-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2652-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2653-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2655-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2656-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
3657-R             8-16-1984              TSO Table XVII
2654-R             9-20-1984              TSO Table XVII
2659-R             9-20-1984              TSO Table XVII
2661-R             9-20-1984              TSO Table XVII
2662-R             9-20-1984              TSO Table XVII
2663-R             9-20-1984              TSO Table XVII
2658-R             10-18-1984             TSO Table XVII
2668-R             10-18-1984             TSO Table XVII
2673-R             10-18-1984             TSO Table XVII
2674-R             11-15-1984             TSO Table XVII
2676-R             11-15-1984             TSO Table XVII
2677-R             12-20-1984             TSO Table XVII
2678-R             12-20-1984             TSO Table XVII
2679-R             12-20-1984             TSO Table XVII
2680-R             1-17-1985              TSO Table XVII
2681-R             1-17-1985              TSO Table XVII
2684-R             1-17-1985              TSO Table XVII
2675-R             2-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2683-R             2-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2685-R             2-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2686-R             2-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2688-R             2-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2690-R             2-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2691-R             3-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2692-R             3-21-1985              TSO Table XVII
2693-R             4-18-1985              TSO Table XVII
2697-R             5-16-1985              TSO Table XVII
2698-R             5-16-1985              TSO Table XVII
2700-R             5-16-1985              TSO Table XVII
2704-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2708-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2709-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2711-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2712-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2713-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2714-R             6-20-1985              TSO Table XVII
2703-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2715-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2719-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2722-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2723-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2724-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2725-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2727-R             8-15-1985              TSO Table XVII
2726-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2728-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2729-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2731-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2732-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2735-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2740-R             9-19-1985              TSO Table XVII
2733-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2734-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2738-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2741-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2742-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2744-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2745-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2746-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2747-R             10-17-1985             TSO Table XVII
2749-R             11-21-1985             TSO Table XVII
2752-R             11-21-1985             TSO Table XVII
2748-R             12-19-1985             TSO Table XVII
2760-R             12-19-1985             TSO Table XVII
2682-R             1-16-1986              TSO Table XVII
2737-R             1-16-1986              TSO Table XVII
2751-R             1-16-1986              TSO Table XVII
2761-R             1-16-1986              TSO Table XVII
2763-R             1-16-1986              TSO Table XVII
2764-R             1-16-1986              TSO Table XVII
2758-R             2-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2769-R             2-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2770-R             2-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2768-R             3-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2773-R             3-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2775-R             3-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2778-R             3-20-1986              TSO Table XVII
2776-R             4-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2777-R             4-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2779-R             4-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2782-R             4-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2783-R             4-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2786-R             4-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2772-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2780-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2784-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2785-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2787-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2788-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2789-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2790-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2791-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2793-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2794-R             5-15-1986              TSO Table XVII
2795-RMS-3V2       6-19-1986              TSO Table XVII
2796-R             6-19-1986              TSO Table XVII
2797-R             6-19-1986              TSO Table XVII
2799-RM            6-19-1986              TSO Table XVII
2802-RMS2          6-19-1986              TSO Table XVII
2792-R             7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2800-RM            7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2807-RMS           7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2808-RM            7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2809-RM            7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2810-RMS           7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2812-RM            7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2813-RMSV          7-17-1986              TSO Table XVII
2804-RMV2          8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2807-RMS           8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2810-RMS           8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2814-RM            8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2815-RMS           8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2818-RM            8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2825-RMSV          8-21-1986              TSO Table XVII
2817-RM            9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2819-RM            9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2828-RMV           9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2829-RS            9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2832-RM            9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2833-RM            9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2834-RM            9-18-1986              TSO Table XVII
2779-R             11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2816-RM            11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2836-RM            11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2837-RM            11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2839-RM            11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2840-RMV           11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2841-RMV           11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2842-RMV2          11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2843-RM            11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2844-RS            11-20-1986             TSO Table XVII
2795-RMS3V2        12-18-1986             TSO Table XVII
2847-RMV           12-18-1986             TSO Table XVII
2848-RM            12-18-1986             TSO Table XVII
2849-RMS           12-18-1986             TSO Table XVII
2855-RM            12-18-1986             TSO Table XVII
2762-R             12-19-1986             TSO Table XVII
2850-RMV           1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2851-RM            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2852-RS            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2853-RS            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2854-RM            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2856-RM            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2857-RM            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2858-RMS           1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2860-RM            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2862-RM            1-15-1987              TSO Table XVII
2861-RMV           2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2863-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2866-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2867-RS            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2868-RMV           2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2870-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2872-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2873-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2874-RMV           2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2875-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2876-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2877-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2878-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2879-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2881-RMV           2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2882-RM            2-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2859-RMS           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2865-RM            3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2884-RMV           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2885-RM            3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2886-RMS           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2887-RMS           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2888-RMS           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2889-RMS           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2890-RM            3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2891-RM            3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2894-RMS           3-19-1987              TSO Table XVII
2895-RMS           4-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2896-RS            4-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2816               5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2899-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2849-RMS (amended) 5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2901-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2902-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2903-RMS           5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2904-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2906-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2907-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2912-RS            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2913-RS            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2915-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2920-RM            5-21-1987              TSO Table XVII
2908-RMS           6-18-1987              TSO Table XVII
2914-RM            6-18-1987              TSO Table XVII
2921-RM            6-18-1987              TSO Table XVII
2925-RM            6-18-1987              TSO Table XVII
2922-RS            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2923-RM            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2927-RMS4          7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2929-RS            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2930-RM            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2931-RM            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2935-RM            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2936-RM            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2937-RS            7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2938-RMS           7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2939-RMS           7-16-1987              TSO Table XVII
2916-RM            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2934-RMS           8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2941-RMS           8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2944-RS            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2945-RM            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2946-RS            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2948-RM            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2953-RM            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2954-RMS           8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2956-RS            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2959-RS            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2960-RMSV          8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2961-RMS           8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2962-RM            8-20-1987              TSO Table XVII
2965-RM            8-20-1997              TSO Table XVII
2968-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2971-RM            8-20-1997              TSO Table XVII
2934-RMS           9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2955-RMSV          9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2957-RM2S2         9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2964-RS            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2970-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2972-RMSV2         9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2973-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2974-RMV           9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2975-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2976-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2977-RS            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2978-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2979-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2980-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2983-RMS           9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2984-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2986-RM            9-17-1987              TSO Table XVII
2987-RM            10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2988-RMS           10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2989-RM            10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2990-RS            10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2991-RM            10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2992-RMV           10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2998-RS            10-13-1987             TSO Table XVII
2981-RM            11-19-1987             TSO Table XVII
2985-RMS           11-19-1987             TSO Table XVII
2993-RMV           11-19-1987             TSO Table XVII
2997-RM            11-19-1987             TSO Table XVII
2903-RM (amended)  12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3001-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3004-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3005-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3006-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3007-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3008-RS2           12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3009-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
3011-RM            12-17-1987             TSO Table XVII
2996-RMS           1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3013A-RM2          1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3014-RMV2          1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3018-RM            1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3019-RM            1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3022-RM            1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3023-RM            1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3024-RMV           1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3026-RM            1-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
2934-RMS           2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
2982-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3012-RMSV2         2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3020-RMV           2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3029-RS            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3030-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3031-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3032-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3033-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3034-RS            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3035-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3036-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3037-RM            2-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3040-RM            3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3041-RMV2          3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3042-RM            3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3044-RM            3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3046-RMV           3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3048-RM            3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3050-RMV           3-17-1988              TSO Table XVII
3010-RM            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3013-RM2(A)        4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3039-RM            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3053-RS            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3054-RMS           4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3057-RM            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3058-RMV           4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3059-RMS           4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3060-RM            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3064-RS            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
3073-RM            4-21-1988              TSO Table XVII
2968-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3065-RMV           5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3069-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3070-RSV           5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3071-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3072-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3076-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3077-RS            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3087-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3088-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3097-RM            5-19-1988              TSO Table XVII
3048-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3051-RMS           6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3052-RMS           6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3062-RMV           6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3079-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3080-RMV2          6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3085-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3086-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3089-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3091-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3092-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3095-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3096-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3098-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3102-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3104-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3107-RM            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3110-RS            6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3111-RMS3          6-16-1988              TSO Table XVII
3056-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3105-RS            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3106-RS            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3109-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3112-RMV           7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3113-RMV2          7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3115-RMS           7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3117-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3118-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3119-RMS           7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3123-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3125-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3128-RM            7-22-1988              TSO Table XVII
3052-RMS           8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3114-RMV2          8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3126-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3129-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3133-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3134-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3136-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3137-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3138-RM            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3145-RS            8-18-1988              TSO Table XVII
3090-RMVSV         9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3108-RS            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3130-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3132-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3135-RS            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3139-RMS           9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3140-RMS2          9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3142-RMV           9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3143-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3144-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3146-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3148-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3149-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3150-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3151-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3152-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3153-RS            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3154-RM            9-15-1988              TSO Table XVII
3155-RS            10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3156-RM            10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3158-RS            10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3159-RMSV          10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3160-RM            10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3161-RMS           10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3162-RSV           10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3163-RMS           10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3164-RM            10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3165-RM            10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3167-RMV           10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
3170-RMV           10-20-1988             TSO Table XVII
2996-RMS           11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3166-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3173-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3174-RMS           11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3175-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3176-RSV2          11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3178-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3180-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3181-RS            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3182-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3183-RS            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3184-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3185-RM            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3186-RS            11-17-1988             TSO Table XVII
3185-RM            12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3187-RMS2          12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3188-RM            12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3189-RS            12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3190-RMS           12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3194-RM            12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3195-RS            12-15-1988             TSO Table XVII
3191-RS            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3193-RS            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3196-RM            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3197-RM            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3201-RM            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3202-RM            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3203-RMS           1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3204-RMS2          1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3205-RMS           1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3206-RS            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3208-RS            1-19-1989              TSO Table XVII
3118-RS            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3210-RS            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3211-RMS           2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3213-RM            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3214-RM            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3220-RM            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3221-RM            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3223-RM            2-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3207-RM            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3216-RMS           3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3217-RS            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3224-RM            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3226-RMS           3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3227-RM            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3229-RM            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3231-RM            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3235-RM            3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3236-RMV           3-16-1989              TSO Table XVII
3090-RMV           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3198-RMV           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3234-RSV2          4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3237-RMV           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3238-RMV           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3240-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3241-RMS           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3243-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3244-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3245-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3246-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3248-RS            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3250-RMS           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3251-RMS           4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3252-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3253-RS            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3254-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3256-RS            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3257-RS            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3258-RM            4-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3242-RS2           5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3247-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3260-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3262-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3265-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3266-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3267-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3269-RM            5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3275-RMS           5-18-1989              TSO Table XVII
3270-RM            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3273-RMS           6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3274-RMS           6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3276-RMS           6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3277-RMS           6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3278-RM            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3280-RM            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3281-RS            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3285-RM            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3286-RM            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3293-RMV2          6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3294-RM            6-15-1989              TSO Table XVII
3239-RMS           7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3261-RMS           7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3268-RS2V4         7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3272-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3295-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3297-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3298-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3299-RSV           7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3301-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3302-RMS           7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3303-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3304-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3305-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3306-RMS2          7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3307-RS            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3308-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3310-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3312-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3313-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3315-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3317-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3320-RM            7-20-1989              TSO Table XVII
3300-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3309-RMS           8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3316-RS            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3318-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3321-RMS           8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3323-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3325-RS            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3327-RM (amended)  8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3328-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3329-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3331-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3335-RM            8-17-1989              TSO Table XVII
3287-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3289-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3290-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3291-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3314-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3322-RM (amended)  9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3326-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3333-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3336-RS            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3338-RS            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3340-RMS           9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3345-RS            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3346-RM            9-21-1989              TSO Table XVII
3330-RMS           10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3342-RM            10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3343-RM            10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3347-RMV           10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3351-RMSV2         10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3353-RM            10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3356-RS            10-19-1989             TSO Table XVII
3362-RS            11-6-1989              TSO Table XVII
3357-RM            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3359-RS            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3360-RMV           11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3361-RM            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3366-RS            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3367-RM            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3368-RMS           11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3369-RS            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3373-RM            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3374-RS            11-16-1989             TSO Table XVII
3370-RM            12-21-1989             TSO Table XVII
3375-RM            12-21-1989             TSO Table XVII
3387-RM            12-21-1989             TSO Table XVII
3394-RM            12-21-1989             TSO Table XVII
3334-RMS           1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3358-RM            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3372               1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3388-RS            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3389-RM            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3395               1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3396               1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3400               1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3401-RS            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3403-RM            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3406-RMS           1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3407-RS            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3408-RM            1-18-1990              TSO Table XVII
3378-RM            2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3379-RM            2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3380-RM            2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3391-RS2V          2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3404-RM            2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3409-RMV           2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3411-RM            2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3413               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3414               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3415               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3417               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3418               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3420               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3422               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3424               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3425               2-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3399-RS            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3405-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3412-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3421-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3430-RMV           3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3431-RMV           3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3432-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3434-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3435-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3439-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3441-RM            3-15-1990              TSO Table XVII
3328A-RM           4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3365-RM            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3433-RMS           4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3438-RMS           4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3440-RMS           4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3442-RM            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3444-RS            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3445-RM            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3447-RS            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3448-RM            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3453-RM            4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3455-RMS2          4-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3451-RM            5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3459-RM            5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3460               5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3461               5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3462-RS            5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3463-RMSV          5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3465-RM            5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3480-RSV           5-17-1990              TSO Table XVII
3446-RS            6-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3466-RMV           6-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3341-RMV           6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3385-RS2           6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3467-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3468-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3470-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3471-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3472-RS            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3475-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3477-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3481-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3482-RM            6-21-1990              TSO Table XVII
3456               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3476-RS            7-19-1990, 8-16-1990   TSO Table XVII
3479               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3484               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3487               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3488               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3490               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3491               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3504               7-19-1990              TSO Table XVII
3426               7-29-1990              TSO Table XVII
3457-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3458-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3496-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3497-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3498-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3499-RM3           8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3503-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3505-RS            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3506-RS            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3507-RS            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3508-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3509-RM            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3511-RMS           8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3514-RSV           8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3515-RMS           8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3519-RS            8-16-1990              TSO Table XVII
3452               9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3493-RM            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3494-RM            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3500-RM            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3520-RM            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3528-RS            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3530-RS            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3531-RM            9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3533-RS2           9-20-1990              TSO Table XVII
3526-RMV           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3535-RMS           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3537-RS            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3538-RMV           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3541-RS            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3550-RM            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3552-RS            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3553-RMV           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3554-RMSV          11-15-1990, 12-20-1990 TSO Table XVII
3555-RM            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3557-RMV           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3559-RS            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3560-RS2           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3561-RMS           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3564-RMS           11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3566-RS            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3567-RM            11-15-1990             TSO Table XVII
3517-RMS           12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3542-RM            12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3562               12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3563-RMS           12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3568-RM            12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3569-RM            12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3572-RM            12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3573-RMV           12-20-1990             TSO Table XVII
3495-RMS           1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3575-RMS           1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3576-RM            1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3577-RM            1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3581-RS            1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3582-RM            1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3583-RS            1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3586-RMV           1-17-1991              TSO Table XVII
3591-RMV           2-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3593-RMS           2-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3594-RM            2-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3597-RM            2-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3598-RM            2-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3565-RM            3-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3599-RMS8          3-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3604-RM            3-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3605-RM            3-21-1991              TSO Table XVII
3587-RM            4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3603-RMS           4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3606-RM            4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3612-RMS           4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3613-RMV           4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3618-RM            4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3622-RM            4-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3614-RM            5-16-1991              TSO Table XVII
3626-RMV           5-16-1991              TSO Table XVII
3628-RM            5-16-1991              TSO Table XVII
3634-RM            6-20-1991              TSO Table XVII
3636-RM            6-20-1991              TSO Table XVII
3640-RM            6-20-1991              TSO Table XVII
3642-RM            6-20-1991              TSO Table XVII
3645-RM            6-20-1991              TSO Table XVII
3624-RMV           7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3625-RMV           7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3629-RMS2V         7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3633-RMS3V         7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3646-RMS           7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3647-RM            7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3648-RM            7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3654-RM            7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3655-RMV           7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3656-RM            7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3660-RS            7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3663-RM            7-18-1991              TSO Table XVII
3666-RMS           8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3667-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3670-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3674-RMV           8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3677-RMV           8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3679-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3681-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3683-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3684-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3692-RM            8-15-1991              TSO Table XVII
3650-RM            9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3651-RM            9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3685-RMV           9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3687-RMS2          9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3690-RMV           9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3696-RMV3          9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3697-RMSV          9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3699               9-19-1991              TSO Table XVII
3713-RMV           11-21-1991             TSO Table XVII
3714-RM            11-21-1991             TSO Table XVII
3689-RMSV          1-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3736-RS2           1-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3744-RM            1-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3678-RM(A)         2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3678-RM(B)         2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3738-RS            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3739-RMS           2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3743-RM            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3745-RM            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3748-RS            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3749-RM            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3752-RM            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3753-RS            2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3757-RMV           2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3758-RMV           2-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3754-RMSV          3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3756-RMS           3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3759-RS            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3760-RS            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3761-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3762-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3764-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3765-RS            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3766-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3767-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3768-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3770-RM            3-19-1992              TSO Table XVII
3771               4-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3773-RMV           4-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3775-RS2           4-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3811-RM            6-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3824-RM            6-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3825-RM            6-16-1992              TSO Table XVII
3774-RMV           6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3778-RMS2          6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3802-RMV           6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3804-RMSV          6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3805-RMV2          6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3806-RM            6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3809-RM            6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3810-RM            6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3814-RMV           6-18-1992              TSO Table XVII
3792-RMV           8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3818-RMS           8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3819-RM            8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3820-RMV           8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3827-RMS           8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3828-RMV           8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3829-RMV2          8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3832-RMV           8-20-1992              TSO Table XVII
3835-RMS           9-17-1992              TSO Table XVII
3844-RMV2          9-17-1992              TSO Table XVII
3849-RM            9-17-1992              TSO Table XVII
3850-RMS           9-17-1992              TSO Table XVII
3857-RMV           9-17-1992              TSO Table XVII
3850-RMS           11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3859-RMV2          11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3870-RM            11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3872-RM            11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3873-RM            11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3878-RMV           11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3880-RMS           11-19-1992             TSO Table XVII
3826-RMV           12-17-1992             TSO Table XVII
3885-M             12-17-1992             TSO Table XVII
3889-RMV           1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3890-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3894-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3895-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3896-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3901-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3902-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3903-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3904-RM            1-21-1993              TSO Table XVII
3886-RM            2-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3893-RM            2-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3900-RMS2          2-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3914-RM            2-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3854-RMS           3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3905-RM            3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3906-RM            3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3909-RM            3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3911-RM            3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3920-RMS           3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3921-RMV2          3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3922-RMS           3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3924-RMS           3-18-1993              TSO Table XVII
3923-RMS           4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3925-RMV           4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3928-R             4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3929-RMV2          4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3930-RM            4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3931-RM            4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3932-RMV           4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3933-RMV           4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3936-RMV2          4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3939-RMV2          4-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3888-RMS           5-20-1993              TSO Table XVII
3939-RM            5-20-1993              TSO Table XVII
3940-RM            5-20-1993              TSO Table XVII
3941-RM            5-20-1993              TSO Table XVII
3910-RM            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3942-RM            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3943-RS            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3944-RM            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3945-RM            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3946-RMV           6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3950-RM            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3954-RM            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3955-RS            6-17-1993              TSO Table XVII
3888-RMS           7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3917-RMV4          7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3918-RM            7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3951-RSV           7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3956-RM            7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3959-RS2           7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3961-RM            7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3962-RMS2          7-15-1993              TSO Table XVII
3953-RS            8-19-1993              TSO Table XVII
3959-RS2           8-19-1993              TSO Table XVII
3965-RMS           8-19-1993              TSO Table XVII
3966-RMS           8-19-1993              TSO Table XVII
3967-RMV           8-19-1993              TSO Table XVII
3969-RM            8-19-1993              TSO Table XVII
3953-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3970-MS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3972-MS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3973-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3974-RM            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3975-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3976-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3979-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3980-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3981-RM            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3982-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3984-RMSV          9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3985-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3986-RS            9-16-1993              TSO Table XVII
3988-RM            10-21-1993             TSO Table XVII
3990-RM            10-21-1993             TSO Table XVII
3968-RM            11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3983-RMV2          11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3991-RSV           11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3992-RS            11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3993-RM            11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3994-RM            11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3999-RS            11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
4000-RS            11-18-1993             TSO Table XVII
3992-RS            12-16-1993             TSO Table XVII
4003-RMV           12-16-1993             TSO Table XVII
4005-RS            12-16-1993             TSO Table XVII
4009-RMS           12-16-1993             TSO Table XVII
4011-RS            12-16-1993             TSO Table XVII
4006-RS            1-20-1994              TSO Table XVII
4007-RMV2          1-20-1994              TSO Table XVII
4014-RM            1-20-1994              TSO Table XVII
4015-RM            1-20-1994              TSO Table XVII
4020-RM            1-20-1994              TSO Table XVII
4021-RM            1-20-1994              TSO Table XVII
4013-RS            2-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4019-RMS           2-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4022-RS            2-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4024-RM            2-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4027-RS            2-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
3964-RMS           3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4017-RM            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4018               3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4025-RM            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4026-RM            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4030-RM            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4037-RS            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4038-RS            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4040-RS            3-17-1994              TSO Table XVII
4034-RMS           4-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4035-RMV5          4-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4039-RM            4-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4043-RMV           4-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4045-RM            4-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4048-RM            4-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4012-RMV           5-19-1994              TSO Table XVII
4029-RMS           5-19-1994              TSO Table XVII
4032-RMS           5-19-1994              TSO Table XVII
4041-RM            5-19-1994              TSO Table XVII
4053               5-19-1994              TSO Table XVII
4047-RSV2          6-16-1994              TSO Table XVII
4058-RS            6-16-1994              TSO Table XVII
4059-RM            6-16-1994              TSO Table XVII
4060-RM            6-16-1994              TSO Table XVII
4061-RM            6-16-1994              TSO Table XVII
4065-RS            6-16-1994              TSO Table XVII
4062-RS            7-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4068-RMS           7-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4072-RM            7-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4074-RM            7-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4075-RMV           7-21-1994              TSO Table XVII
4073-RS            8-18-1994              TSO Table XVII
4085-RMS           8-18-1994              TSO Table XVII
4087-RS            8-18-1994              TSO Table XVII
4089-RS            8-18-1994              TSO Table XVII
4096-RS            8-18-1994              TSO Table XVII
4082-RM            9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4083-RM            9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4084-RMS           9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4088-RS            9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4090-RM            9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4092-RM            9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4093-RM            9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4098-RSV2          9-15-1994              TSO Table XVII
4054-RM            10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4070-RMS3          10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4081-RS1           10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4091-RMS           10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4099-RM            10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4100-RS            10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4102-RM            10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4104-RM            10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4112-RMS           10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4115-RM            10-20-1994             TSO Table XVII
4066-RM            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4069-RM            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4109-RS            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4110-RM            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4116-RM            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4117-RM            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4120-RM            11-17-1994             TSO Table XVII
4111-RM            12-15-1994             TSO Table XVII
4121-RM            12-15-1994             TSO Table XVII
4124-RS            12-15-1994             TSO Table XVII
4107-RS2           1-19-1995              TSO Table XVII
4127-RS            1-19-1995              TSO Table XVII
4128-RM            1-19-1995              TSO Table XVII
4129-RM            1-19-1995              TSO Table XVII
4131-RS            1-19-1995              TSO Table XVII
4113-RS3           2-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4130-RS            2-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4132-RM            2-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4133-RM            2-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4136-RMV           2-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4137-RM            2-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4139-RM            3-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4144-RM            3-16-1995              TSO Table XVII
4049-RE            4-20-1995              TSO Table XVI
4081-RSV           4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4135-RSV           4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4138-RS            4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4141-RM            4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4145-RM            4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4147-RMSV          4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4150-RM            4-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4153-RM            6-15-1995              TSO Table XVII
4171-RMS           6-15-1995              TSO Table XVII
4154-RM            7-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4155-RM            7-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4164-RM            7-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4168-RM            7-20-1995              TSO Table XVII
4151-RMS           8-17-1995              TSO Table XVII
4152-RMS           8-17-1995              TSO Table XVII
4156-RM            8-17-1995              TSO Table XVII
4157-RM            8-17-1995              TSO Table XVII
4159-RM            8-17-1995              TSO Table XVII
4175-RM            8-17-1995              TSO Table XVII
4160-RMS           9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4176-RMS           9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4181-RM            9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4184-RM            9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4188-RM            9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4189-RM            9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4196-RMS           9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4197-RM            9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4198-RM            9-21-1995              TSO Table XVII
4178-RM            10-19-1995             TSO Table XVII
4179-RM            10-19-1995             TSO Table XVII
4186-RMS           10-19-1995             TSO Table XVII
4205-RM            10-19-1995             TSO Table XVII
4167-RMS           11-16-1995             TSO Table XVII
4219-RM            11-16-1995             TSO Table XVII
4177-RMV           12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4193-RMV2          12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4212-RM            12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4218-RMS           12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4226-RM            12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4230-RM            12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4232-RMS           12-21-1995             TSO Table XVII
4210-RM            1-18-1996              TSO Table XVII
4235-RMS4          1-18-1996              TSO Table XVII
4236-RM            1-18-1996              TSO Table XVII
4238-RM            1-18-1996              TSO Table XVII
4134-RMS           2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4194-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4203-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4211-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4246-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4250-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
4253-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4266-RM            2-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4227-RM            3-21-1996              TSO Table XVII
4241-RM            3-21-1996              TSO Table XVII
4247-RM            3-21-1996              TSO Table XVII
4254-RMV           3-21-1996              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
4260-RM            3-21-1996              TSO Table XVII
4264-RM            3-21-1996              TSO Table XVII
4267-RMV           4-18-1996              TSO Table XVII
4268-RM            4-18-1996              TSO Table XVII
4119-RM            5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4271-RMS2          5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4272-RM            5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4273-RMS           5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4280-RM            5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4284-RM            5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4286-RM            5-16-1996              TSO Table XVII
4285-RS            6-20-1996              TSO Table XVII
4288-RMS2          6-20-1996              TSO Table XVII
4289-RMV2          6-20-1996              TSO Table XVII
4290-RM            6-20-1996              TSO Table XVII
4291-RM            6-20-1996              TSO Table XVII
4298-RMV           6-20-1996              TSO Table XVII
4078-RMS           7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4257-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4258-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4276-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4295-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4297-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4300-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4302-RM            7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4306-RMV           7-24-1996              TSO Table XVII
4307-RM            8-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4308-RM            8-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4309-RM            8-15-1996              TSO Table XVII
4173-RM            9-19-1996              TSO Table XVII
4174-RM            9-19-1996              TSO Table XVII
4281-RM            9-19-1996              TSO Table XVII
4293-RM            9-19-1996              TSO Table XVII
4325-RM            9-19-1996              TSO Table XVII
4261-RM            10-17-1996             TSO Table XVII
4331-RM2           10-17-1996             TSO Table XVII
4333-RM            10-17-1996             TSO Table XVII
4336-RM            10-17-1996             TSO Table XVII
4385-RMSV3         10-17-1996             TSO Table XVII
4313-RMS           11-21-1996             TSO Table XVII
4316-RM            11-21-1996             TSO Table XVII
4356-RM            1-16-1997              TSO Table XVII
4359-RM            1-16-1997              TSO Table XVII
4125-RMS2          2-20-1997              TSO Table XVII
4365-RMV           2-20-1997              TSO Table XVII
4374-RMV           2-20-1997              TSO Table XVII
4326-RM            3-20-1997              TSO Table XVII
4369-RM            4-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4379-RS            4-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4382-RM            4-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4384-RM            5-15-1997              TSO Table XVII
4389-RM            5-15-1997              TSO Table XVII
4221-RS2           6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4366-RSV           6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4383-RS            6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4388-RM            6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4395-RS            6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4402-RMV           6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4415-SV4           6-19-1997              TSO Table XVII
4311-S2            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4391-RSV           7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4392-RS            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4393-RS            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4394-RS            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4398-RM            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4399-RM            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4400-RM            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4403-RS            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4404-S             7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4406-S             7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4407-S             7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4408-S             7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4411-S2            7-17-1997              TSO Table XVII
4368-RMV           8-21-1997              TSO Table XVII
4410-S             8-21-1997              TSO Table XVII
4412-S             8-21-1997              TSO Table XVII
4414-S             8-21-1997              TSO Table XVII
4420-S             8-21-1997              TSO Table XVII
4435-MV            8-21-1997              TSO Table XVII
4359-RM            9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4416-S             9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4419-S             9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4421-S             9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4423-S             9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4424-S             9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4426-S             9-18-1997              TSO Table XVII
4425-M             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4427-SV            10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4428-S             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4429-S             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4432-S             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4433-M             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4436-S             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4443-S             10-16-1997             TSO Table XVII
4430-MS2V          11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4437-MV            11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4439-S             11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4441-S2            11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4442-S2            11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4444-S             11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4446-S             11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4447-M             11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4450-S2            11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4467-M             11-20-1997             TSO Table XVII
4413-S             12-18-1997             TSO Table XVII
4449-M             12-18-1997             TSO Table XVII
4453-S             12-18-1997             TSO Table XVII
4459-M             12-18-1997             TSO Table XVII
4463-MS            12-18-1997             TSO Table XVII
4466-M             12-18-1997             TSO Table XVII
4406-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4454-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4457-M             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4458-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4460-M             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4464-M             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4465-M             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4469-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4470-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4471-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4487-S             1-15-1998              TSO Table XVII
4472-S             2-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4473-M             2-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4477-MV            2-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4480-M             2-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4452-S2            3-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4482-S             3-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4485-S             3-19-1998              TSO Table XVII
4418-S2            4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4432-S             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4475-S3V           4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4481-M             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4483-M             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4484-S             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4486-S             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4488-S             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4489-S             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4496-M             4-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4494-M             5-21-1998              TSO Table XVII
4497-MSV           5-21-1998              TSO Table XVII
4499-M             5-21-1998              TSO Table XVII
4500-M             5-21-1998              TSO Table XVII
4501-M             5-21-1998              TSO Table XVII
4503-M             6-18-1998              TSO Table XVII
4504-MS2           6-18-1998              TSO Table XVII
4505-2             6-18-1998              TSO Table XVII
4506-M             6-18-1998              TSO Table XVII
4507-M             6-18-1998              TSO Table XVII
4510-MS            6-18-1998              TSO Table XVII
4468-MS            7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4518-M             7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4519-M             7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4520-M             7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4527-MV            7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4528-MS            7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4532-MV2           7-16-1998              TSO Table XVII
4539-M             8-20-1998              TSO Table XVII
4552-M             9-17-1998              TSO Table XVII
4553-M             9-17-1998              TSO Table XVII
4557-M             9-17-1998              TSO Table XVII
4569-M             9-17-1998              TSO Table XVII
4476-MS            10-15-1998             TSO Table XVII
4493-M             10-15-1998             TSO Table XVII
4545-M             10-15-1998             TSO Table XVII
4551-M             10-15-1998             TSO Table XVII
4555-MS            10-15-1998             TSO Table XVII
4775-MS2           10-15-1998             TSO Table XVII
4563-M             11-19-1998             TSO Table XVII
4568-MS            11-19-1998             TSO Table XVII
4517-MS            12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4582-M             12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4583-M             12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4584-M             12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4585-M             12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4589-MV            12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4594-MS2           12-17-1998             TSO Table XVII
4577-M             1-21-1999              TSO Table XVII
4591-M             1-21-1999              TSO Table XVII
4594-MS2           1-21-1999              TSO Table XVII
4597-MV            1-21-1999              TSO Table XVII
4603-MS            2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4604-M             2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4605-M             2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4613-M             2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4614-M             2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4617-M             2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4622-MSV           2-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4595-M             3-18-1999              TSO Table XVII
4606-S             4-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4621-M             4-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4625-M             4-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4631-MS            4-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4634-MV            5-20-1999              TSO Table XVII
4636-M             5-20-1999              TSO Table XVII
4637-M             5-20-1999              TSO Table XVII
4640-M             6-17-1999              TSO Table XVII
4641-M             6-17-1999              TSO Table XVII
4651-M             6-17-1999              TSO Table XVII
4629-MS            7-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4654-M             7-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4663-SV2           7-15-1999              TSO Table XVI
4664-SV2           7-15-1999              TSO Table XVI
4665-M             7-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4666-M             7-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4667-M             7-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4682-M             7-15-1999              TSO Table XVII
4633-MV            8-19-1999              TSO Table XVII
4668-V2            8-19-1999              TSO Table XVI
4679-MS            8-19-1999              TSO Table XVII
4681-MS            8-19-1999              TSO Table XVII
4686-MV            8-19-1999              TSO Table XVII
CT-99-12           9-16-1999              TSO Table XVI
4687-M             9-16-1999              TSO Table XVII
4694-M             9-16-1999              TSO Table XVII
CT-99-13V          10-21-1999             TSO Table XVI
CT-99-14V          10-21-1999             TSO Table XVI
4612-MS            10-21-1999             TSO Table XVII
4635-MS            10-21-1999             TSO Table XVII
4662-MV            10-21-1999             TSO Table XVII
4693-MV            10-21-1999             TSO Table XVII
4698-M             10-21-1999             TSO Table XVII
4706-M             10-21-1999             TSO Table XVII
4699-MV            11-18-1999             TSO Table XVII
4700-M             11-18-1999             TSO Table XVII
4701-M             11-18-1999             TSO Table XVII
4702-M             11-18-1999             TSO Table XVII
4704-MV            11-18-1999             TSO Table XVII
CT-99-15V          12-16-1999             TSO Table XVI
4709-MS            12-16-1999             TSO Table XVII
4710-M             12-16-1999             TSO Table XVII
4712-M             12-16-1999             TSO Table XVII
4716-M             12-16-1999             TSO Table XVII
4738-M             12-16-1999             TSO Table XVII
CT-99-17V          1-20-2000              TSO Table XVI
4714-MS2V          1-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4715-MV            1-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4719-M             2-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4723-M             2-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4726-M             2-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4729-M             2-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4731-M             2-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4689-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4713-MS            3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4737-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4742-MS            3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4746-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4749-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4750-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4752-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4753-M             3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4756-MSV           3-16-2000              TSO Table XVII
4736-MV            4-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4757-MV            4-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4759-MV            5-18-2000              TSO Table XVII
4760-M             5-18-2000              TSO Table XVII
4763-MS            5-18-2000              TSO Table XVII
4766-M             5-18-2000              TSO Table XVII
4768-MS            5-18-2000              TSO Table XVII
4761-M             6-15-2000              TSO Table XVII
4775-MV            6-15-2000              TSO Table XVII
CT-00-13V          7-20-2000              TSO Table XVI
CT-00-14V          7-20-2000              TSO Table XVI
4778-M             7-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4785-M             7-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4789-M             7-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4791-M             7-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4792-M             7-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4793-M             7-20-2000              TSO Table XVII
4780-MS            8-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4799-M             8-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4803-M             8-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4804-M             8-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4806-M             8-17-2000              TSO Table XVII
4832-V             8-17-2000              TSO Table XVI
4810-M             9-21-2000              TSO Table XVII
4812-MV            9-21-2000              TSO Table XVII
4813-MS            9-21-2000              TSO Table XVII
CT-00-33V2         10-19-2000             TSO Table XVI
4824-M             10-19-2000             TSO Table XVII
4829-M             11-16-2000             TSO Table XVII
4830-M             11-16-2000             TSO Table XVII
4835-M             11-16-2000             TSO Table XVII
4838-MS            11-16-2000             TSO Table XVII
4854-M             11-16-2000             TSO Table XVII
4781-V             12-21-2000             TSO Table XVI
4817-MS            12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
4840-MV            12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
4846-M3S3          12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
4848-MV            12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
4849-MS            12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
4858-M             12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
4859-M             12-21-2000             TSO Table XVII
CT-00-39-V         1-18-2001              TSO Table XVI
4860-M             1-18-2001              TSO Table XVII
4862-M             1-18-2001              TSO Table XVII
4867-MV3           1-18-2001              TSO Table XVII
4882-MV            1-18-2001              TSO Table XVII
4873-M             2-15-2001              TSO Table XVII
4890-M             3-15-2001              TSO Table XVII
4893-M             3-15-2001              TSO Table XVII
4903-MV            4-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4904-M             4-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4905-M             4-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4907-MV            4-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4909-M             4-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4920-M             4-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4891-S             5-17-2001              TSO Table XVII
4916-SV            5-17-2001              TSO Table XVII
4918-S             5-17-2001              TSO Table XVII
4949-S             5-17-2001              TSO Table XVII
4895-S2            6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4917-S             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4921-MV            6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4923-S             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4925-S             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4928-S             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4931-MV            6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4932-M             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4933-S             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4937-S             6-21-2001              TSO Table XVII
4935-S             7-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4936-SV            7-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4938-S2            7-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4939-S             7-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4944-M             7-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4945-S             7-19-2001              TSO Table XVII
4913-M             8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4914-MS            8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4924-S             8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4929-S             8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4947-MS            8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4953-S             8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4962-MV3           8-16-2001              TSO Table XVII
4940-MV            9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4941-S             9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4948-MV            9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4957-S             9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4958-M             9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4959-S             9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4960-M             9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4961-M             9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4963-MS2           9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4964-MS            9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4970-MS            9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4973-MS            9-20-2001              TSO Table XVII
4966-S             10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4967-S3            10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4968-S             10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4969-S             10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4972-MS            10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4975-M             10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4977-SV2           10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4983-MV            10-18-2001             TSO Table XVII
4978-S             11-15-2001             TSO Table XVII
4979-S             11-15-2001             TSO Table XVII
4980-S             11-15-2001             TSO Table XVII
4981-S             11-15-2001             TSO Table XVII
4985-M             11-15-2001             TSO Table XVII
4988-S             11-15-2001             TSO Table XVII
4899-S             12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4986-M             12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4987-MS            12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4990-S2V           12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4991-M             12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4993-SV            12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4995-SV            12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4996-MS            12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4997-M             12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
4998-S             12-20-2001             TSO Table XVII
5001-S             1-17-2002              TSO Table XVII
5003-S             1-17-2002              TSO Table XVII
5004-M             1-17-2002              TSO Table XVII
5007-M             1-17-2002              TSO Table XVII
5008-M             1-17-2002              TSO Table XVII
5006-S             2-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5010-M             2-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5012-M             2-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5013-S2            2-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5015-S             2-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5017-S             2-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5022-V2            3-21-2002              TSO Table XVI
5023-S             3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5024-M             3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5025-M             3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5027-S2            3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5029-S             3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5030-S             3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
5032-S             3-21-2002              TSO Table XVII
4942-S             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
4982-S2            4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5021-M             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5031-S             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5033-S             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5034-S             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5036-S             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5038-M             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5039-M             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5041-S             4-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5040-M             5-16-2002              TSO Table XVII
5045-M             5-16-2002              TSO Table XVII
5011-MS            6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5037-S2            6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5044-M             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5048-S             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5049-S             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5050-M             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5052-M             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5053-S             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5057-S             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5079-S             6-20-2002              TSO Table XVII
5059-M2            7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5060-MV3           7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5063-M             7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5064-MS            7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5065-MV3           7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5067-M             7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5069-M             7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5072-S             7-18-2002              TSO Table XVII
5068-MS2           8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5070-S             8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5073-M             8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5074-M             8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5080-MS            8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5090-S             8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5092-M             8-15-2002              TSO Table XVII
5081-S             9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5085-M             9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5086-SV            9-19-2002              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5087-S             9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5089-S             9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5095-SV            9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5096-M             9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5097-S2            9-19-2002              TSO Table XVII
5047-S2            10-17-2002             TSO Table XVII
5062-SV            10-17-2002             TSO Table XVII
5083-M             10-17-2002             TSO Table XVII
5091-S             11-21-2002             TSO Table XVII
5103-S             11-21-2002             TSO Table XVII
5107-S             11-21-2002             TSO Table XVII
5093-MS            1-16-2003              TSO Table XVII
5121-M             1-16-2003              TSO Table XVII
5124-MS            1-16-2003              TSO Table XVII
5120-MS2           2-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5125-S             2-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5129-M             2-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5105-S             3-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5122-SV            3-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5123-S2            3-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5128-S             3-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5134-S             3-20-2003              TSO Table XVII
5102-MS            4-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5142-M             4-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5143-M             4-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5144-S2            4-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5147-S             4-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5167-S             4-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5133-MS            5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5136-SV            5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5148-S             5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5152-M             5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5153-M             5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5154-S             5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5155-S             5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5161-S             5-15-2003              TSO Table XVII
5157-M             6-19-2003              TSO Table XVII
5160-S             6-19-2003              TSO Table XVII
5164-S             6-19-2003              TSO Table XVII
5166-S             6-19-2003              TSO Table XVII
5195-SV            6-19-2003              TSO Table XVII
5170-S             7-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5172-S             7-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5173-MS            7-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5175-S             7-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5178-M             7-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5184-MS            7-17-2003              TSO Table XVII
5159-MS            8-21-2003              TSO Table XVII
5181-MS2           8-21-2003              TSO Table XVII
5183-S             8-21-2003              TSO Table XVII
5186-M             8-21-2003              TSO Table XVII
5187-M             8-21-2003              TSO Table XVII
5199-V             8-21-2003              TSO Table XVI
5145-MS            9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5165-M             9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5177-M             9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5190-S             9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5192-M             9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5194-M             9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5196-MS            9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
5197-M             9-18-2003              TSO Table XVII
CT-03-05-V         10-16-2003             TSO Table XVI
5189-M             10-16-2003             TSO Table XVII
5198-S             10-16-2003             TSO Table XVII
5200-S             10-16-2003             TSO Table XVII
5204-S             10-16-2003             TSO Table XVII
5169-S             11-20-2003             TSO Table XVII
5207-M             11-20-2003             TSO Table XVII
5210-MV2           11-20-2003             TSO Table XVII
5211-S2            11-20-2003             TSO Table XVII
5213-S2            11-20-2003             TSO Table XVII
5215-S             11-20-2003             TSO Table XVII
5130-S             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5206-M             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5216-S             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5217-S             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5218-S             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5219-M             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5220-M             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5222-M             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5223-S             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5224-MSV2          12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5226-MV            12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5232-S             12-18-2003             TSO Table XVII
5209-S             1-5-2004               TSO Table XVII
5212-S             1-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5225-M             1-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5230-S             1-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5231-M             1-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5235-S             1-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5241-S             1-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5227-S             2-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5237-MS            2-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5239-S2            2-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5162-MS            3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5208-MV4           3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5245-S             3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5246-M2SV2         3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5248-M             3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5250-M             3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5252-SV3           3-18-2004              TSO Table XVII
5233-MS2V          4-15-2004              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5242-S             4-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5251-M             4-15-2004; 5-20-2004   TSO Table XVII
5260-MV            4-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5234-MS            5-20-2004              TSO Table XVII
5253-SV2           5-20-2004              TSO Table XVII
5262-M             5-20-2004              TSO Table XVII
5264-M             5-20-2004              TSO Table XVII
5272-S             5-20-2004              TSO Table XVII
5283-S             5-20-2004              TSO Table XVII
5255-M             6-17-2004              TSO Table XVII
5273-MV            6-17-2004              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5274-MV            6-17-2004              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5275-MV            6-17-2004              TSO Table XVII
5276-M             6-17-2004              TSO Table XVII
5277-M             6-17-2004              TSO Table XVII
5281-S             6-17-2004              TSO Table XVII
5290-M2S2          6-17-2004              TSO Table XVII
5267-M             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5278-S             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5280-S             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5284-S2V           7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5285-S             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5286-M             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5287-S             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5288-S             7-15-2004              TSO Table XVII
5267-MS            8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5295-S             8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5296-M             8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5297-S             8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5298-M             8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5300-M             8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5301-MV            8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5302--M            8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5303-S             8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5305-MV3           8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5310-SV2           8-19-2004              TSO Table XVII
5307-MV2           9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5308-S             9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5312-MV            9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5312-M             9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5314-M             9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5316-S             9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5317-MS            9-16-2004              TSO Table XVII
5306-S             10-21-2004             TSO Table XVII
5319-S             10-21-2004             TSO Table XVII
5324-SV2           10-21-2004             TSO Table XVII
5326-M             10-21-2004             TSO Table XVII
5327-S             10-21-2004             TSO Table XVII
5263-S             11-18-2004             TSO Table XVII
5330-M             11-18-2004             TSO Table XVII
5331-S             11-18-2004             TSO Table XVII
5335-M             11-18-2004             TSO Table XVII
5342-S             11-18-2004             TSO Table XVII
5339-MV3           12-16-2004             TSO Table XVII
5337-S             1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5341-M             1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5349-S             1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5353-MS2           1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5354-S             1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5356-SV            1-20-2005              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5357-MV            1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5358-S             1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5359-S             1-20-2005              TSO Table XVII
5362-MV            2-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5363-S             2-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5364-M             3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5365-M             3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5366-M             3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5368-MV            3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5369-MV            3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5370-MV            3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5372-MS            3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5373-S             3-17-2005              TSO Table XVII
5385-V             3-17-2005              TSO Table XVI
5360-M             4-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5375-M             4-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5376-S             4-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5378-SV            4-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5380-S             5-19-2005              TSO Table XVII
5382-M             5-19-2005              TSO Table XVII
5384-V2            5-19-2005              TSO Table XVI
5387-S             5-19-2005              TSO Table XVII
5388-S2            5-19-2005              TSO Table XVII
5391-MV            5-19-2005              TSO Table XVII
5398-S             5-19-2005              TSO Table XVII
5395-M             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5397-S             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5399-S             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5401-S             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5402-M             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5406-S             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5408-S             6-16-2005              TSO Table XVII
5322-S             7-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5371-MS            7-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5407-MV            7-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5409-S             7-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5412-S             7-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5417-M             7-21-2005              TSO Table XVII
5418-SV            7-21-2005              TSO Table XVI
5400-MV            8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5419-M             8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5420-S             8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5422-M             8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5427-S             8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5428-S             8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5429-M             8-18-2005              TSO Table XVII
5421-MS            9-15-2005              TSO Table XVII
5423-S             9-15-2005              TSO Table XVII
5431-S2            9-15-2005              TSO Table XVII
5432-M             9-15-2005              TSO Table XVII
5435-S             9-15-2005              TSO Table XVII
5438-S             9-15-2005              TSO Table XVII
5439-S             10-20-2005             TSO Table XVII
5440-SV5           10-20-2005             TSO Table XVII
5443-M             10-20-2005             TSO Table XVII
5446-SV2           10-20-2005             TSO Table XVII
5447-MV            10-20-2005             TSO Table XVII
5451-M             11-17-2005             TSO Table XVII
5452-M             11-17-2005             TSO Table XVII
5455-MS            11-17-2005             TSO Table XVII
5404-M             12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5454-MS            12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5461-V             12-15-2005             TSO Table XVI
5462-S2            12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5463-S             12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5464-MS            12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5465-M             12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5466-MS            12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5470-MS            12-15-2005             TSO Table XVII
5437-S             1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5448-MSV2          1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5466-MS            1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5472-M             1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5473-SV            1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5474-M             1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5477-S             1-19-2006              TSO Table XVII
5430-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5460-S2            2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5469-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5480-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5481-MV            2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5483-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5484-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5486-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5487-M             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5488-S             2-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5489-V3            2-16-2006              TSO Table XVI
5348-MS            3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5430-S             3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5441-S             3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5442-S             3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5471-S             3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5491-SV            3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5492-S             3-16-2006              TSO Table XVII
5475-MV2           4-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5499-S             4-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5500-M             4-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5511-S             4-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5436-M             5-18-2006              TSO Table XVII
5501-S             5-18-2006              TSO Table XVII
5505-S             5-18-2006              TSO Table XVII
5506-M             5-18-2006              TSO Table XVII
5509-S             5-18-2006              TSO Table XVII
5521-V             5-18-2006              TSO Table XVI
5512-M2            6-15-2006              TSO Table XVII
5513-MS            6-15-2006              TSO Table XVII
5515-S             6-15-2006              TSO Table XVII
5456-S             7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5510-SV            7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5516-S             7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5522-M             7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5524-SV            7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5528-M             7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5529-M             7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5531-S             7-20-2006              TSO Table XVII
5361-S             8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5478-MS2           8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5494-SV            8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5519-SM            8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5532-S             8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5534-M             8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5535-S2V2          8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5538-MS            8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5539-S             8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5543-M             8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5557-S2V           8-17-2006              TSO Table XVII
5546-S             9-21-2006              TSO Table XVII
5547-MS            9-21-2006              TSO Table XVII
5549-M             9-21-2006              TSO Table XVII
5550-M             9-21-2006              TSO Table XVII
5523-S2            10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5540-MS            10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5552-S             10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5555-SV2           10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5558-MV            10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5561-MV2           10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5562-M             10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5563-M             10-19-2006             TSO Table XVII
5565-V             10-19-2006             TSO Table XVI
5545-MS            11-16-2006             TSO Table XVII
5554-M             11-16-2006             TSO Table XVII
5560-S             11-16-2006             TSO Table XVII
5568-S             11-16-2006             TSO Table XVII
5569-M             11-16-2006             TSO Table XVII
5497-MS            12-21-2006             TSO Table XVII
5577-MV3           12-21-2006             TSO Table XVII
5578-M             12-21-2006             TSO Table XVII
5579-S             12-21-2006             TSO Table XVII
5582-S             12-21-2006             TSO Table XVII
5574-S             1-18-2007              TSO Table XVII
5583-M             1-18-2007              TSO Table XVII
5586-S             1-18-2007              TSO Table XVII
5594-S             1-18-2007              TSO Table XVII
5592-M             2-15-2007              TSO Table XVII
5588-M             3-15-2007              TSO Table XVII
5595-SV            3-15-2007              TSO Table XVII
5596-SV            3-15-2007              TSO Table XVII
5602-S             3-15-2007              TSO Table XVII
5589-S             4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5593-SV2           4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5597-S2            4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5607-M             4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5611-S             4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5613-SV            4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5615-S             4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5616-M             4-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5617-V             4-19-2007              TSO Table XVI
5587-MS2           5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5600-MS2           5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5620-S             5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5621-M             5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5622-M             5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5623-S             5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5627-SV            5-17-2007              TSO Table XVII
5637-SV            5-17-2007              TSO Table XVI
5508-S             6-21-2007              TSO Table XVII
5629-S             6-21-2007              TSO Table XVII
5630-S             6-21-2007              TSO Table XVII
5632-M             6-21-2007              TSO Table XVII
5634-SV            6-21-2007              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5639-SV            6-21-2007              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5626-S             7-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5637-M             7-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5638-MS2           7-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5639-SV            7-19-2007              TSO Table XVI
5643-S             7-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5644-V2            7-19-2007              TSO Table XVI
5647-M             7-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5648-M             7-19-2007              TSO Table XVII
5650-SV            7-19-2007              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5610-MS            8-16-2007              TSO Table XVII
5642-MV2           8-16-2007              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5652-S             8-16-2007              TSO Table XVII
5655-S             8-16-2007              TSO Table XVII
5658-V5            8-16-2007              TSO Table XVI
5458-S             9-20-2007              TSO Table XVII
5598-MS2           9-20-2007              TSO Table XVII
5612-S             9-20-2007              TSO Table XVII
5651-S             9-20-2007              TSO Table XVII
5657-V             9-20-2007              TSO Table XVI
5659-M3            9-20-2007              TSO Table XVII
5660-SV2           9-20-2007              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5662-SV            9-20-2007              TSO Table XVII
5662-SV2           9-20-2007              TSO Table XVI
5666-V2            9-20-2007              TSO Table XVI
5514-M4S2          10-18-2007             TSO Table XVII
5645-S2            10-18-2007             TSO Table XVII
5669-SV3           10-18-2007             TSO Table XVII
5672-M             10-18-2007             TSO Table XVII
5673-M             10-18-2007             TSO Table XVII
5661-S2            11-15-2007             TSO Table XVII
5676-MV            11-15-2007             TSO Table XVII
5679-M             11-15-2007             TSO Table XVII
5681-S             11-15-2007             TSO Table XVII
5684-S             11-15-2007             TSO Table XVII
5631-MS            12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5641-MS2           12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5668-SV2           12-20-2007             TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5674-S             12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5675-SV            12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5686-S2            12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5687-M             12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5688-S             12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5690-M             12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5692-SV            12-20-2007             TSO Table XVI
5693-M             12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5694-MS            12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5709-S             12-20-2007             TSO Table XVII
5636-MS2           1-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5682-MV2           1-17-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5698-SV            1-17-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5699-SV            1-17-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5700-SV            1-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5702-S             1-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5712-SV            1-17-2008              TSO Table XVI
5703-M3            2-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5704-S             2-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5707-S             2-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5708-S2V           3-20-2008              TSO Table XVII
5720-S             3-20-2008              TSO Table XVII
5691-S2            4-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5711-V             4-17-2008              TSO Table XVI
5714-MSV           4-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5718-MS2           4-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5719-SV            4-17-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5723-MV4           4-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5725-S2            4-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5727-V2            4-17-2008              TSO Table XVI
5713-S             5-15-2008              TSO Table XVII
5721-SV            5-15-2008              TSO Table XVII
5730-MV2           6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5731-M             6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5732-SV            6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5734-S             6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5736-M             6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5741-M             6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5742-S             6-19-2008              TSO Table XVII
5735-MV3           7-17-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5745-MSV2          7-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5746-SV            7-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5747-S             7-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5748-S2            7-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5750-S             7-17-2008              TSO Table XVII
5697-M             8-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5749-MS            8-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5752-S             8-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5756-MV2           8-21-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5757-MV3           8-21-2008              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5758-S             8-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5761-M             8-21-2008              TSO Table XVII
5762-S2V2          9-18-2008              TSO Table XVII
5765-M             9-18-2008              TSO Table XVII
5767-S             9-18-2008              TSO Table XVII
5764-S             10-16-2008             TSO Table XVII
5769-V2            10-16-2008             TSO Table XVI
5770-V             10-16-2008             TSO Table XVI
5771-S             10-16-2008             TSO Table XVII
5787-S2V4          10-16-2008             TSO Table XVII
5772-SV            11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5773-M             11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5774-S             11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5783-MV            11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5784-V3            11-20-2008             TSO Table XVI
5785-SV            11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5788-M             11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5802-M             11-20-2008             TSO Table XVII
5737-M             12-18-2008             TSO Table XVII
5789-M             12-18-2008             TSO Table XVII
5795-S             1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5796-S4V4          1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5797-M             1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5801-S             1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5803-S2            1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5805-MS2           1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5811-M             1-15-2009              TSO Table XVII
5804-S             2-19-2009              TSO Table XVII
5809-MS2           3-19-2009              TSO Table XVII
5812-M             3-19-2009              TSO Table XVII
5813-MS            3-19-2009              TSO Table XVII
5754-V3            5-21-2009              TSO Table XVI
5755-V5            5-21-2009              TSO Table XVI
5815-M2V2          5-21-2009              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5816-SV3           5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5818-S             5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5819-M             5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5821-MV3           5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5822-SV2           5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5824-SV5           5-21-2009              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5825-MS2V8         5-21-2009              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5827-SV3           5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5829-S             5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5830-SV            5-21-2009              TSO Table XVII
5833-SV38          5-21-2009              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5817-M             6-18-2009              TSO Table XVII
5831-M             6-18-2009              TSO Table XVII
5834-S             6-18-2009              TSO Table XVII
5838-V2            6-18-2009              TSO Table XVI
5844-SV2           6-18-2009              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5845-M             6-18-2009              TSO Table XVII
5849-SV3           6-18-2009              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5793-S             7-16-2009              TSO Table XVII
5832-S             7-16-2009              TSO Table XVII
5841-SV            7-16-2009              TSO Table XVII
5745-MV2           7-17-2008              TSO Table XVI
5735-MV3           8-20-2009              TSO Table XVI
5781-MS            8-20-2009              TSO Table XVII
5828-M2            8-20-2009              TSO Table XVII
5836-S             8-20-2009              TSO Table XVII
5854-S             8-20-2009              TSO Table XVII
-                  9-17-2009              TSO Table XVII
5840-SV            9-17-2009              TSO Table XVII
5856-SV            9-17-2009              TSO Table XVII
5857-MV            9-17-2009              TSO Table XVII
5858-SV            9-17-2009              TSO Table XVII
5865-M             9-17-2009              TSO Table XVII
5842-SV            10-15-2009             TSO Table XVII
5861-S             10-15-2009             TSO Table XVII
5863-M             10-15-2009             TSO Table XVII
5864-MV2           10-15-2009             TSO Table XVII
5866-SV2           10-15-2009             TSO Table XVII
5867-SV            10-15-2009             TSO Table XVII
5840-SV            12-17-2009             TSO Table XVII
5874-M             12-17-2009             TSO Table XVII
5875-M             12-17-2009             TSO Table XVII
5877-SV2           12-17-2009             TSO Table XVII
5883-MV2           12-17-2009             TSO Table XVII
5884-V3            12-17-2009             TSO Table XVI
5886-V2            1-21-2010              TSO Table XVI
5887-S2            1-21-2010              TSO Table XVII
5889-M             2-18-2010              TSO Table XVII
5890-SV2           2-18-2010              TSO Table XVII
5893-M             3-18-2010              TSO Table XVII
5901-V             4-15-2010              TSO Table XVI
5897-V2            5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5898-SV            5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5904-V             5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5907-V             5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5908-S2V2          5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5909-V             5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5919-SV            5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
CT-2009-03V        5-20-2010              TSO Table XVI
5914-SV            8-19-2010              TSO Table XVI
5922-S3V3          8-19-2010              TSO Table XVI
5936-SV            8-19-2010              TSO Table XVI
5932-SV2           10-21-2010             TSO Table XVI
5941-V             11-18-2010             TSO Table XVI
5947-V2            11-18-2010             TSO Table XVI
5948-SV3           1-20-2011              TSO Table XVI
5949-SV7           1-20-2011              TSO Table XVI
5960-V2            3-17-2011              TSO Table XVI
5962-V2            3-17-2011              TSO Table XVI
5965-V2            4-21-2011              TSO Table XVI
5961-SV            3-17-2011              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5895-S             5-20-2010              TSO Table XVII
5898-SV            5-20-2010              TSO Table XVII
5903-S2            5-20-2010              TSO Table XVII
5905-M             5-20-2010              TSO Table XVII
5908-S2V2          5-20-2010              TSO Table XVII
5910-SV            5-20-2010              TSO Table XVII
5902-M             6-17-2010              TSO Table XVII
5911-M             6-17-2010              TSO Table XVII
5917-S             6-17-2010              TSO Table XVII
5918-S             6-17-2010              TSO Table XVII
5919-SV            6-17-2010              TSO Table XVII
5914-SV            8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5920-M             8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5922-S3V3          8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5023-S             8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5924-MSV           8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5927-MV            8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5930-S             8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5931-S             8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5936-SV            8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5937-M             8-19-2010              TSO Table XVII
5940-M             10-21-2010             TSO Table XVII
5932-SV2           10-21-2010             TSO Table XVII
5933-S             10-21-2010             TSO Table XVII
5935-MS            10-21-2010             TSO Table XVII
5913-S             11-18-2010             TSO Table XVII
5946-S             11-18-2010             TSO Table XVII
5948-SV3           1-20-2011              TSO Table XVII
5949-SV7           1-20-2011              TSO Table XVII
5950-S             1-20-2011              TSO Table XVII
5955-S             1-20-2011              TSO Table XVII
5934-S2V4          2-17-2011              TSO Table XVII
5954-SV            2-17-2011              TSO Table XVII
5957-S2            2-17-2011              TSO Table XVII
5958-SV3           2-17-2011              TSO Table XVII
5942-MV            3-17-2011              TSO Table XVII
5961-SV            3-17-2011              TSO Table XVII
5963-SV            4-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5964-M2V           4-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5967-MV            4-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5966-S             5-19-2011              TSO Table XVII
5968-S             5-19-2011              TSO Table XVII
5969-M2            5-19-2011              TSO Table XVII
5971-SV            6-16-2011              TSO Table XVII
5972-S             6-16-2011              TSO Table XVII
5976-S             6-16-2011              TSO Table XVII
5973-SV4           7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5978-S             7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5979-SV            7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5980-S             7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5981-SV            7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5985-MV2           7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5998-MV            7-21-2011              TSO Table XVII
5983-SV            8-18-2011              TSO Table XVII
5984-V             8-18-2011              TSO Table XVI
5986-MV5           8-18-2011              TSO Table XVII
5993-MS2V2         8-18-2011              TSO Table XVII
5989-V3            9-15-2011              TSO Table XVI
5990-S             9-15-2011              TSO Table XVII
5994-MS            9-15-2011              TSO Table XVII
5995-S3V2          11-17-2011             TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5996-MS3V3         9-15-2011              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5997-MSV           9-15-2011              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
5999-MV            10-20-2011             TSO Table XVII
6000-MS            10-20-2011             TSO Table XVII
6001-S             10-20-2011             TSO Table XVII
6002-SV            9-15-2011              TSO Table XVII
6003-S             11-17-2011             TSO Table XVII
6004-S             9-15-2011              TSO Table XVII
6005-S             9-15-2011              TSO Table XVII
6007-S             9-15-2011              TSO Table XVII
6009-S             11-17-2011             TSO Table XVII
6011-MV2           10-20-2011             TSO Table XVII
6012-S             12-15-2011             TSO Table XVII
6014-S             11-17-2011             TSO Table XVII
6015-V2            11-17-2011             TSO Table XVI
6016-M             1-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6017-S             12-15-2011             TSO Table XVII
6018-S             11-17-2011             TSO Table XVII
6021-M             11-17-2011             TSO Table XVII
6022-SV            12-15-2011             TSO Table XVII
6025-V2            12-15-2011             TSO Table XVI
6024-S          1-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6027-S             1-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6019-S             2-16-2012              TSO Table XVII
6029-S3V2          3-15-2012              TSO Table XVII
6031-S             3-15-2012              TSO Table XVII
6032-M             3-15-2012              TSO Table XVII
6041-MV            3-15-2012              TSO Table XVII
6034-S          4-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6035-MSV5          4-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6037-MV2           4-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6042-S             5-17-2012              TSO Table XVII
6043-S             5-17-2012              TSO Table XVII
6046-S             6-21-2012              TSO Table XVII
6047-V4            6-21-2012              TSO Table XVI
6049-M             6-21-2012              TSO Table XVII
6052-V2            6-21-2012              TSO Table XVII
6053-MV2           7-19-2012              TSO Table XVII
6055-SV2           7-19-2012              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
6056-MSV2          7-19-2012              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
6058-V3            7-19-2012              TSO Table XVI
6033-SV            9-20-2012              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
6051-MS3           10-18-2012             TSO Table XVII
6067-MS            10-18-2012             TSO Table XVII
6068-MS            12-19-2013             TSO Table XVII
6068-MS            12-19-2013             TSO Table XVII
6070-MS2           10-18-2012             TSO Table XVII
6072-S             10-18-2012             TSO Table XVII
6073-V4            10-18-2012             TSO Table XVI
6074-M             10-18-2012             TSO Table XVII
6044-S             12-20-2012             TSO Table XVII
6082-S             1-17-2013              TSO Table XVII
6083-S             1-17-2013              TSO Table XVII
6087-M             2-21-2013              TSO Table XVII
6088-S             2-21-2013              TSO Table XVII
6089-S             2-21-2013              TSO Table XVII
6090-SV9           3-21-2013              TSO Table XVI,
                                          TSO Table XVII
6094-S             3-21-2013              TSO Table XVII
6095-SV9           4-18-2013              TSO Table XVII
6096-S             4-18-2013              TSO Table XVII
6097-S             4-18-2013              TSO Table XVII
6100-S             4-18-2013              TSO Table XVII
6101-S             4-18-2013              TSO Table XVII
6102-SV            5-16-2013              TSO Table XVII
6104-S             6-20-2013              TSO Table XVII
6105-S             5-16-2013              TSO Table XVII
6107-S             6-20-2013              TSO Table XVII
6108-MS2V7         6-20-2013              TSO Table XVII
6110-S             8-15-2013              TSO Table XVII
6111-S             8-15-2013              TSO Table XVII
6112-M             8-15-2013              TSO Table XVII
6114-S             8-15-2013              TSO Table XVII
6115-S2            8-15-2013              TSO Table XVII
6116-S             8-15-2013              TSO Table XVII
6117-S             9-19-2013              TSO Table XVII
6119-S             9-19-2013              TSO Table XVII
6121-M             9-19-2013              TSO Table XVII
6123-M             10-17-2013             TSO Table XVII
6125-S             10-17-2013             TSO Table XVII
6126-S             10-17-2013             TSO Table XVII
6130-MV2           11-21-2013             TSO Table XVII
6131-MV4           11-21-2013             TSO Table XVII
6133-M             11-21-2013             TSO Table XVII
6144-M             11-21-2013             TSO Table XVII
6146-S             12-19-2013             TSO Table XVII
6149-M             2-20-2014              TSO Table XVII
6153-S2            2-20-2014              TSO Table XVII
6155-MV            1-16-2014              TSO Table XVII
6158-M             3-20-2014              TSO Table XVII
6147-V             1-9-2014               TSO Table XVI
6151-V2            2-4-2014               TSO Table XVI
6154-V2            2-4-2014               TSO Table XVI
6156-V             3-4-2014               TSO Table XVI
6159-V2            4-1-2014               TSO Table XVI
6160-V3            3-4-2014               TSO Table XVI
6161-V             3-4-2014               TSO Table XVI
6162-V3            5-6-2014               TSO Table XVI
6164-V             3-4-2014               TSO Table XVI
6165-V             6-3-2014               TSO Table XVI
6166-V             4-1-2014               TSO Table XVI
6168-V             6-3-2014               TSO Table XVI
6169-V             5-6-2014               TSO Table XVI
6170-V             7-1-2014               TSO Table XVI
6173-V2            6-3-2014               TSO Table XVI
6174-V             6-3-2014               TSO Table XVI
6175-V             7-1-2014               TSO Table XVI
6177-MV            6-3-2014               TSO Table XVI
6178-V             8-5-2014               TSO Table XVI
6179-V             8-5-2014               TSO Table XVI
6180-V5            8-5-2014               TSO Table XVI
6181-V             7-1-2014               TSO Table XVI
6182-V2            6-3-2014               TSO Table XVI
6183-MV2           8-5-2014               TSO Table XVI
6187-V             8-5-2014               TSO Table XVI
6188-V2            8-5-2014               TSO Table XVI
6189-V             9-8-2014               TSO Table XVI
6192-V             9-8-2014               TSO Table XVI
6195-V             9-8-2014               TSO Table XVI
6196-MV2           10-7-2014              TSO Table XVI
6197-V             10-7-2014              TSO Table XVI
6199-MV            9-8-2014               TSO Table XVI
6202-V             10-7-2014              TSO Table XVI
6203-V             10-7-2014              TSO Table XVI
6204-V2            10-7-2014              TSO Table XVI
6205-MV            11-5-2014              TSO Table XVI
6206-V             11-5-2014              TSO Table XVI
6207-V2            12-2-2014              TSO Table XVI
6208-S             1-15-2015              TSO Table XVII
6209-V3            12-2-2014              TSO Table XVI
6210-S             6-18-2015              TSO Table XVII
6212-V2            11-5-2014              TSO Table XVI
6214-V2            2-3-2015               TSO Table XVI
6215-V             1-6-2015               TSO Table XVI
6216-MS            1-15-2015              TSO Table XVII
6217-S             1-15-2015              TSO Table XVII
6218-V2            1-6-2015               TSO Table XVI
6219-V             5-21-2015              TSO Table XVI
6220-MSV           8-20-2015              TSO Table XVII
6223-SV2           4-16-2015              TSO Table XVII
6224-V             3-3-2015               TSO Table XVI
6225-V2            4-8-2015               TSO Table XVI
6226-MV            5-21-2015              TSO Table XVII
6228-M             4-16-2015              TSO Table XVII
6229-V             4-8-2015               TSO Table XVI
6231-V             4-8-2015               TSO Table XVI
6234-V             5-5-2015               TSO Table XVI
6235-V             5-5-2015               TSO Table XVI
6236-S             8-20-2015              TSO Table XVII
6237-V             5-5-2015               TSO Table XVI
6238-V3            6-2-2015               TSO Table XVI
6239-MV3           7-16-2015              TSO Table XVII
6240-SV2           7-16-2015              TSO Table XVII
6241-M             6-18-2015              TSO Table XVII
6242-M             7-16-2015              TSO Table XVII
6243-V3            6-2-2015               TSO Table XVI
6246-S             6-18-2015              TSO Table XVII
6247-V             6-16-2015              TSO Table XVI
6248-V             6-16-2015              TSO Table XVI
6249-M             6-18-2015              TSO Table XVII
6250-V             7-7-2015               TSO Table XVI
6251-V             6-16-2015              TSO Table XVI
6252-MV            8-20-2015              TSO Table XVII
6253-S             7-16-2015              TSO Table XVII
6254-V             8-4-2015               TSO Table XVI
6255-V             9-1-2015               TSO Table XVI
6256-V             8-4-2015               TSO Table XVI
6257-V             8-4-2015               TSO Table XVI
6258-V             9-1-2015               TSO Table XVI
6259-V             8-4-2015               TSO Table XVI
6260-V             8-4-2015               TSO Table XVI
6261-MS            3-17-2016              TSO Table XVII
6262-S             11-19-2015             TSO Table XVII
6265-V3            9-1-2015               TSO Table XVI
6266-V             10-6-2015              TSO Table XVI
6268-V             10-6-2015              TSO Table XVI
6269-MS2           11-19-2015             TSO Table XVII
6271-V2            2-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
6272-S             11-19-2015             TSO Table XVII
6273-MS            12-17-2015             TSO Table XVII
6274-V3            2-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
6275-V             12-1-2015              TSO Table XVI
6278-V2            12-1-2015              TSO Table XVI
6276-V             1-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6279-V             12-15-2015             TSO Table XVI
6281-MV2           1-21-2016              TSO Table XVII
6282-V2            4-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6283-S             2-18-2016              TSO Table XVII
6284-V             2-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
6285-M             2-18-2016              TSO Table XVII
6286-V             2-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
6287-MV2           5-3-2016               TSO Table XVI, TSO Table XVII
6288-V3            3-1-2016               TSO Table XVI
6289-V5            3-1-2016               TSO Table XVI
6290-V             3-1-2016               TSO Table XVI
6291-V2            4-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6292-V2            4-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6293-V2            3-1-2016               TSO Table XVI
6297-V4            4-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6299-S             5-19-2016              TSO Table XVII
6300-V             5-3-2016               TSO Table XVI
6301-V             5-3-2016               TSO Table XVI
6304-M             7-21-2016              TSO Table XVII
6306-M2            7-21-2016              TSO Table XVII
6307-V2            7-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6309-V             6-7-2016               TSO Table XVI
6310-V4            6-7-2016               TSO Table XVI
6312-SV            7-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6312-SV            7-21-2016              TSO Table XVII
6313-V             7-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6314-SV2           7-5-2016               TSO Table XVI
6314-SV2           7-21-2016              TSO Table XVII
TUP-16-09          8-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-002          8-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-003          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-002          8-18-2016              TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-005          8-18-2016              TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-006          5-18-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-007          11-17-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-008          8-2-2016               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-009          9-15-2016              TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-013          9-6-2016               TSO Table XVI
6303-V             9-6-2016               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-011          10-20-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-012          10-20-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-014          10-20-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-015          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-015          1-3-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-017          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-017          12-15-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-020          10-4-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-021          11-1-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-022          11-17-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-023          1-3-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-024          11-1-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-025          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-025          12-15-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-026          11-1-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-027          12-15-2016             TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-028          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-029          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-030          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-031          12-6-2016              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-032          1-3-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-033          2-17-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-036          3-16-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-039          3-7-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-040          3-16-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-16-041          2-7-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-16-042          3-16-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-001          6-15-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-002          3-7-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-004          3-16-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-006          3-7-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-009          4-20-2017              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-011          7-11-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-012          10-19-2017             TSO Table XVI, TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-020          7-11-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-021          8-1-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-022          9-12-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-023          7-11-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-024          7-11-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-025          9-12-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-026          9-12-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-027          12-21-2017             TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-028          7-11-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-030          8-1-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-032          8-1-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-033          8-1-2017               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-034          10-19-2017             TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-036          1-18-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-037          10-17-2017             TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-038          10-17-2017             TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-039          11-16-2017             TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-040          10-19-2017             TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-041          10-17-2017             TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-042          10-17-2017             TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-043          10-17-2017             TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-044          10-3-2017              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-045          11-16-2017             TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-050          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-051          3-15-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-054          6-21-2018              TSO Table XVI, TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-055          2-15-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-056          6-5-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-056          6-21-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-057          2-15-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-058          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-059          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-062          2-15-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-063          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-065          3-6-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-067          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-068          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-069          3-6-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-070          2-20-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-17-071          5-17-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-17-072          5-17-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-001          3-6-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-002          5-17-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-003          8-6-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-004          3-6-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-005          4-19-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-007          4-3-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-008          4-3-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-009          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-010          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-011          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-012          4-3-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-013          5-23-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-014          5-1-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-016          6-21-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-017          4-3-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-018          5-1-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-019          4-3-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-019          4-19-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-020          7-5-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-021          5-1-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-021          5-23-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-022          5-23-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-024          5-1-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-025          7-19-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-026          6-21-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-027          7-5-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-028          6-19-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-029          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-030          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-031          6-19-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-032          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-033          6-19-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-034          7-5-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-035          7-5-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-037          10-18-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-038          7-5-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-039          7-17-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-040          10-18-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-041          7-17-2018              TSO Table XVI
VEXT-18-001        8-7-2018               TSO Table XVI
TUP-18-011         9-4-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-042          9-20-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-043          10-18-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-044          9-20-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-045          9-4-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-048          8-16-2018              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-049          8-6-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-050          10-18-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-051          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-052          11-15-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-053          9-4-2018               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-054          10-2-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-055          10-18-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-057          10-2-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-059          1-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-059          1-17-2019; 4-19-2019   TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-060          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-061          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-062          12-4-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-063          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-064          12-4-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-065          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-066          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-066          11-15-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-067          1-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-069          11-8-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-071          12-4-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-071          12-20-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-072          12-20-2018             TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-075          12-4-2018              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-076          1-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-076          1-17-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-078          1-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-080          1-17-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-084          3-5-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-085          1-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-086          3-21-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-087          3-21-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-18-089          2-26-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-090          2-26-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-093          3-5-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-092          4-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-18-094          3-21-2019              TSO Table XVII
VEXT-19-001        4-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-002          3-5-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-003          4-18-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-004          4-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-005          4-16-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-006          4-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-007          5-16-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-008          5-16-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-010          5-16-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-011          5-16-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-012          5-16-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-013          4-16-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-014          5-21-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-015          5-7-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-015          5-16-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-016          5-7-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-017          7-18-2019              TSO Table XVI
VEXT-19-002        5-21-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-019          5-21-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-022          5-21-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-020          6-20-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-021          6-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-022          5-21-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-023          6-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-023          6-20-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-027          9-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-028          6-4-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-030          7-2-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-031          9-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-032          7-2-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-033          8-6-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-034          8-6-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-034          8-15-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-035          7-2-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-036          10-17-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-037          8-6-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-037          8-15-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-038          8-6-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-040          9-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-041          8-6-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-042          11-5-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-043          11-21-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-044          10-1-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-044          10-17-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-045          9-3-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-046          8-6-2019               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-047          9-19-2019              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-048          10-1-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-050          11-21-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-051          11-21-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-052          5-20-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-053          10-17-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-054          10-1-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-055          11-5-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-057          11-21-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-58           10-1-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-062          11-5-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-063          11-19-2019             TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-063          12-19-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-065          1-7-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-068          11-19-2019             TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-069          12-3-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-074          1-7-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-075          12-19-2019             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-076          12-3-2019              TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-077          1-16-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-080          2-4-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-080          2-20-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-081          3-19-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-082          3-19-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-083          5-5-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-084          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-085          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-086          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-087          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-088          3-3-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-089          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-090          5-5-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-001          5-5-2020               TSO Table XVI
SEXT-20-001        5-21-2020              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-002        5-21-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-003          5-5-2020               TSO Table XVI
SEXT-20-003        5-21-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-003          6-16-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-005          6-24-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-006          6-2-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-007          5-5-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-008          5-19-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-008          6-24-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-015          6-2-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-019          6-2-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-022          7-16-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-027          9-17-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-028          6-16-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-029          9-17-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-030          10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-032          7-7-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-033          8-4-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-033          8-20-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-034          9-1-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-036          8-20-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-037          8-4-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-037          8-20-2020              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-004        8-20-2020              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-039          9-1-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-041          9-1-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-042-M        10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-042-S        10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-043          12-17-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-044          9-1-2020               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-046          10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-006        12-17-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-008        11-19-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-010        10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-011        10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-012        10-15-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-013        11-19-2020             TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-014        11-19-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-047          10-20-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-047          11-19-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-050          10-20-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-051          11-17-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-052          11-19-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-053          2-2-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-19-20-054       12-1-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-054          12-17-2020               TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-056          10-20-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-058          12-1-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-058          1-21-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-059          10-20-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-059          11-19-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-19-20-060       11-17-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-060          12-17-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-061          1-5-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-063          11-17-2020             TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-064          12-1-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-066          1-21-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-067          12-1-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-068          12-1-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-069          5-20-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-070          1-5-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-074          1-5-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-075          1-5-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-076          1-5-2021               TSO Table XVI
SEXT-20-015        1-21-2021              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-016        1-21-2021              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-017        1-21-2021              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-20-018        1-21-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-077          2-2-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-078          12-1-2020              TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-078          12-17-2020             TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-079          2-2-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-080          3-18-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-20-086          3-2-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-20-088          8-19-2021              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-21-001        3-18-2021              TSO Table XVII
SEXT-21-002        3-18-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-002          2-18-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-003          3-18-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-004          3-2-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-005          4-20-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-006          4-20-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-007          7-6-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-008          4-20-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-013          6-15-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-014          4-20-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-015          6-17-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-016          5-20-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-020          5-18-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-021          7-15-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-023          6-15-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-024          6-17-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-025          6-17-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-026          5-18-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-028          7-6-2021               TSO Table XVI
SEXT-21-003        5-20-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-030          7-15-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-031          6-15-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-034          6-15-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-035          10-21-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-036          11-18-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-037          10-21-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-038          11-18-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-041          7-6-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-043          9-7-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-044          8-3-2021               TSO Table XVI
AAD-21-001         7-6-2021               TSO Table XVII
SEXT-21-004        7-15-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-045          8-19-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-046          12-16-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-047          9-16-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-048          9-16-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-050          8-3-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-051          11-2-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-052          9-7-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-053          10-21-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-055          9-7-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-056          12-16-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-058          8-3-2021               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-060          11-18-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-061          8-3-2021               TSO Table XVI
SEXT-21-005        8-19-2021              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-062          9-7-2021               TSO Table XVI
SEXT-21-006        10-21-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-066          11-2-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-067          12-16-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-070          12-16-2021             TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-071          11-2-2021              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-073          10-5-2021              TSO Table XVI
SEXT-21-008        2-25-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-074          3-17-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-090          3-1-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-092          7-20-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-093          3-15-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-095          3-17-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-096          6-7-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-100          4-21-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-102          5-19-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-103          4-21-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-21-104          3-15-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-106          5-3-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-107          5-3-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-21-107          5-19-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-001          3-15-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-003          5-19-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-004          4-21-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-005          4-21-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-006          3-15-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-006          4-21-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-007          5-19-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-008          5-3-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-011          6-7-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-012          5-17-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-013          7-20-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-015          10-20-2022             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-017          6-7-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-017          6-16-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-018          6-7-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-020          10-4-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-021          5-17-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-022          9-15-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-023          5-17-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-026          9-20-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-026          10-20-2022             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-029          6-7-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-030          7-20-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-032          6-7-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-032          6-16-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-033          8-18-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-034          10-4-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-035          7-20-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-036          11-17-2022             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-037          3-21-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-038          8-18-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-039          9-15-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-040          8-18-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-041          11-1-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-042          9-15-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-044          9-6-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-048          9-6-2022               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-050          3-16-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-051          10-4-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-052          12-20-2022             TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-054          10-20-2022             TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-055          9-20-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-056          11-17-2022             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-057          10-4-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-057          10-20-2022             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-060          9-20-2022              TSO Table XVI
TUP-22-006         9-6-2022               TSO Table XVII
TUP-22-010         10-4-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-061          11-1-2022              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-066          3-16-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-067          1-19-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-068          12-20-2022             TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-071          1-19-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-072          1-19-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-073          11-17-2022             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-075          1-3-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-075          1-19-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-076          11-16-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-077          1-3-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-079          3-16-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-080          4-20-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-081          3-16-2023              TSO Table XVII
TUP-22-011         11-1-2022              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-086          3-21-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-087          12-20-2022             TSO Table XVI
VEXT-22-002        12-20-2022             TSO Table XVI
SEXT-22-001        1-19-2023              TSO Table XVII
TUP-23-001         3-21-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-090          4-20-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-092          5-18-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-095          3-7-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-22-095          3-16-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-096          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-098          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-22-100          3-21-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-002          5-18-2023              TSO Table XVII
APCD-23-003        6-15-2023              TSO Table XVI
APCD-23-003        6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-005          4-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-006          7-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-006          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
APCD-23-006        12-21-2023             TSO Table XVI
APCD-23-006        12-21-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-008          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-009          5-2-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-010          5-2-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-012          6-6-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-012          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-013          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-016          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-017          5-18-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-018          5-18-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-019          5-2-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-021          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-023          6-6-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-023          7-19-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-024          5-2-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-026          6-6-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-027          7-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-027          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-032          6-6-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-032          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-033          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-036          6-6-2023               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-036          6-15-2023              TSO Table XVII
TUP-23-004         6-20-2023              TSO Table XVII
VEXT-23-001        6-20-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-037          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-038          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-040          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-042          7-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-043          9-21-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-044          9-21-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-046          8-17-2023              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-055          7-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-061          7-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-063          7-18-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-066          8-15-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-071          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-072          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-074          10-19-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-075          11-16-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-078          11-7-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-079          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-080          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-081          10-17-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-082          11-7-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-085          11-21-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-086          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-086          10-19-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-087          10-3-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-087          10-19-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-088          11-21-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-089          11-7-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-089          11-16-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-092          11-21-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-093          12-19-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-093          1-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-094          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-094          1-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-096          11-7-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-096          11-16-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-097          12-5-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-097          12-21-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-098          11-7-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-099          1-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-102          11-21-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-105          12-19-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-108          12-5-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-108          12-21-2023             TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-109          12-5-2023              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-110          3-21-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-111          3-21-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-113          12-19-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-115          12-19-2023             TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-117          4-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-117          4-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-120          1-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-121          3-21-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-122          1-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-123          2-20-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-124          1-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-125          4-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-126          4-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-128          3-5-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-129          - -                    TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-130          4-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-131          4-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-23-132          3-21-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-23-133          4-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-003          3-21-2024              TSO Table XVII
AAD-24-003         11-19-2024             TSO Table XVII
VEXT-24-004        1-7-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-004          3-21-2024              TSO Table XVII
TUP-24-005         1-7-2025               TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-006          5-7-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-007          4-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-010          5-16-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-012          4-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-013          5-21-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-014          5-21-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-015          4-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-015          5-16-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-018          4-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-019          4-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-020          5-7-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-020          5-16-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-021          5-7-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-022          5-7-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-023          6-4-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-024          5-7-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-027          8-6-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-027          8-15-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-028          7-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-031          6-18-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-031          7-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-032          7-18-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-035          7-2-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-036          7-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-036          8-15-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-039          5-21-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-040          8-6-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-040          8-15-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-042          6-18-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-044          8-6-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-044          8-15-2024              TSO Table XVII
VEXT-24-003        9-17-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-045          10-1-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-046          10-1-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-047          9-19-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-049          10-1-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-049          10-17-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-053          8-6-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-054          8-6-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-055          9-17-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-056          7-16-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-058          9-19-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-060          10-1-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-060          10-17-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-062          9-17-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-064          9-3-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-064          9-19-2024              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-065          9-3-2024               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-066          3-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-067          11-19-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-067          12-19-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-070          10-17-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-072          9-17-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-073          9-17-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-074          11-19-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-074          12-19-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-075          10-1-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-076          11-19-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-076          12-19-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-077          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-078          11-21-2024             TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-079          10-15-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-080          1-7-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-080          2-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-081          4-17-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-082          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-085          10-15-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-087          11-19-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-088          10-15-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-089          12-17-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-090          12-17-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-090          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-091          11-19-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-092          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-093          1-7-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-093          2-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-094          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-096          12-3-2024              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-098          12-17-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-101          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-102          3-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-102          4-17-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-103          2-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-103          3-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-104          1-7-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-104          2-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-105          2-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-105          3-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-106          1-21-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-107          1-21-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-108          12-17-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-109          2-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-109          3-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-110          12-17-2024             TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-110          1-16-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-111          1-7-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-112          2-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-116          2-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-117          4-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-119          4-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-120          3-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-121          3-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-121          3-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-123          4-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-123          5-15-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-124          3-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-124          3-20-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-125          5-15-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-24-126          4-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-24-127          3-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
AAD-25-001         4-3-2025               TSO Table XVII
TUP-25-001         2-4-2025               TSO Table XVII
VEXT-25-001        4-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
VEXT-25-002        9-2-2025               TSO Table XVI
VEXT-25-003        9-2-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-001          3-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
AAD-25-002         4-3-2025               TSO Table XVII
TUP-25-002         2-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-002          4-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-003          2-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-006          3-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-007          3-4-2025               TSO Table XVI
TUP-25-007         9-2-2025               TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-008          3-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-009          3-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-011          4-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-012          6-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-015          4-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-019          6-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-020          8-5-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-021          5-20-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-021          6-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-023          4-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-024          5-20-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-025          6-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-026          6-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-029          5-6-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-030          5-20-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-031          7-1-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-032          6-18-2025              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-034          5-20-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-035          4-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-036          5-6-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-037          5-20-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-039          6-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-044          7-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-045          6-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-045          10-17-2025             TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-046          10-17-2025             TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-053          8-5-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-056          6-3-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-061          10-21-2025             TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-070          7-15-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-083          10-21-2025             TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-084          9-2-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-085          10-21-2025             TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-086          1-20-2026              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-096          11-18-2025             TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-099          1-20-2026              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-103          12-2-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-104          1-7-2025               TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-105          2-18-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-107          12-2-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-108          12-2-2025              TSO Table XVI
TUP-25-011         1-20-2026              TSO Table XVII
ZC-25-115          1-20-2026              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-119          12-2-2025              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-126          1-20-2026              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-127          1-20-2026              TSO Table XVI
ZC-25-128          1-20-2026              TSO Table XVI
VEXT-25-005        11-4-2025              TSO Table XVI
VEXT-25-006        11-18-2025             TSO Table XVI
                                         
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.         Date Passed Code Section
-                - -         TSO Table V
-                6-24-1968   40.01
80-136           8-27-1970   TSO Table XIII
18               1-18-1978   TSO Table XIII
24               1-18-1978   TSO Table X
7                3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
8                3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
9                3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
10               3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
11               3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
12               3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
13               3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
14               3-23-1978   TSO Table XIII
17               3-23-1978   TSO Table IX
7                4-21-1978   TSO Table XIII
9                4-21-1978   TSO Table X
10               4-21-1978   TSO Table X
2                5-18-1978   TSO Table X
11               5-18-1978   37.02
11A              5-18-1978   32.004
12               5-18-1978   TSO Table XIII
78-11            6-20-1978   TSO Table XIII
78-12            6-20-1978   TSO Table XIII
78-31            7-20-1978   TSO Table XIII
78-33            7-20-1978   TSO Table IX
78-52            8-24-1978   TSO Table XIII
78-57            8-24-1978   TSO Table X
78-58            8-24-1978   TSO Table X
78-75            9-14-1978   TSO Table XIII
78-78            9-14-1978   TSO Table X
78-79            9-14-1978   TSO Table X
78-84            10-26-1978  32.006
78-105           11-30-1978  TSO Table XIII
78-106           11-30-1978  32.001
78-114           11-30-1978  32.002
79-13            1-18-1979   TSO Table X
79-20            1-18-1979   TSO Table X
79-35            2-22-1979   TSO Table X
79-55            3-21-1979   TSO Table IX
79-58            4-18-1979   TSO Table XVI
                             51.02—
79-59            4-25-1979   51.07,
                             51.99
79-60            4-25-1979   91.01—
                             91.10
79-66            4-25-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-67            4-25-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-68            4-25-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-69            4-25-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-84            5-23-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-85            5-23-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-86            5-23-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-87            5-23-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-88            5-23-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-108           6-20-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-109           6-20-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-110           6-20-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-111           6-20-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-112           6-20-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-115           6-20-1979   TSO Table IX
79-118           6-20-1979   92.01,
                             92.02
79-119           6-20-1979   TSO Table IX
79-123           7-25-1979   TSO Table XVI
79-134           7-25-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-135           7-25-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-137           7-25-1979   TSO Table V
79-140           7-25-1979   TSO Table IX
79-144           7-25-1979   36.030
79-148           7-25-1979   33.015
79-152           8-29-1979   32.002
79-155           8-29-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-159           8-29-1979   TSO Table IX
79-160           8-29-1979   TSO Table IX
79-165           9-26-1979   TSO Table X
79-178           9-26-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-179           9-26-1979   TSO Table XIII
79-180           9-26-1979   71.01,
                             71.02
79-189           10-24-1979  TSO Table X
79-192           10-24-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-194           10-24-1979  TSO Table X
79-              11-14-1979  36.017
79-196           11-14-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-197           11-14-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-198           11-14-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-211           12-19-1979  TSO Table X
79-214           12-19-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-215           12-19-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-216           12-19-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-217           12-19-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-218           12-19-1979  TSO Table XIII
79-221           12-19-1979  TSO Table X
80-8             1-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-9             1-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-10            1-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-22            2-20-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-25            2-20-1980   TSO Table V
80-30            2-20-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-34            3-26-1980   36.031
80-42            3-26-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-46            4-23-1980   TSO Table XVI
80-47            4-23-1980   TSO Table XVI
80-59            4-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-60            4-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-67            4-23-1980   TSO Table X
80-69            4-23-1980   TSO Table X
80-72            5-21-1980   TSO Table XVI
80-73            5-21-1980   TSO Table XVI
80-84            5-21-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-85            5-21-1980   TSO Table X
80-88            5-21-1980   TSO Table III
80-92            6-25-1980   TSO Table X
80-103           6-25-1980   TSO Table X
80-106           6-25-1980   36.028
80-109           6-25-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-112           6-25-1980   TSO Table IX
80-93            7-23-1980   TSO Table X
80-115           7-23-1980   TSO Table X
80-125           7-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-126           7-23-1980   TSO Table XIII
80-129           7-23-1980   93.003,
                             93.004
80-144           8-27-1980   TSO Table X
80-145           8-27-1980   TSO Table X
81-33            8-27-1980   36.028
80-149           9-24-1980   TSO Table XVI
80-162           9-24-1980   TSO Table XIII
81-57            9-24-1980   36.028
80-169           10-29-1980  36.032
80-173           10-29-1980  TSO Table XIII
80-174           10-29-1980  TSO Table XIII
80-175           10-29-1980  TSO Table XIII
80-176           10-29-1980  TSO Table XIII
80-178           10-29-1980  TSO Table XIII
80-183           11-28-1980  32.001
80-185           11-28-1980  TSO Table XIII
80-186           11-28-1980  TSO Table XIII
81-7             1-22-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-11            1-22-1981   TSO Table IX
81-27            2-26-1981   TSO Table IX
81-34            2-26-1981   36.030
81-35            2-26-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-48            3-26-1981   TSO Table IX
81-49            3-26-1981   TSO Table X
81-59            4-23-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-70            4-23-1981   36.026
81-71            4-23-1981   40.08
-                5-28-1981   TSO Table XVI
81-82            5-28-1981   TSO Table X
81-83            5-28-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-84            5-28-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-85            5-28-1981   36.033
81-91            5-28-1981   TSO Table VI
81-99            6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-100           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-101           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-102           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-103           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-104           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-105           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
81-111           6-25-1981   TSO Table III
81-114           6-25-1981   TSO Table VI
-                7-23-1981   TSO Table XVI
81-122           7-23-1981   36.032
81-130           7-23-1981   TSO Table X
81-137           8-27-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-139           8-27-1981   33.014
81-145           8-27-1981   TSO Table X
-                9-24-1981   TSO Table XVI
81-169           9-24-1981   33.075,
                             33.076
81-170           9-24-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-172           9-24-1981   TSO Table XIII
81-178           9-24-1981   TSO Table III
                             116.01,
                             116.02,
                             116.15—
81-179           9-24-1981   116.18,
                             116.30—
                             116.32,
                             116.99
-                10-22-1981  TSO Table XVI
81-205           10-22-1981  70.10
81-206           10-22-1981  40.09
81-207           10-22-1981  TSO Table X
81-209           10-22-1981  TSO Table X
81-210           11-19-1981  36.030
81-211           11-19-1981  33.017
81-222           11-19-1981  115.01
-                12-17-1981  TSO Table XVI
81-224           12-17-1981  TSO Table X
81-225           12-17-1981  TSO Table XIII
81-226           12-17-1981  33.016
81-227           12-17-1981  40.08
81-229           12-17-1981  TSO Table IX
81-231           12-17-1981  TSO Table IV
81-232           12-17-1981  33.090
81-233           12-17-1981  33.105
82-1             1-28-1982   TSO Table XVI
82-9             1-28-1982   TSO Table X
82-10            1-28-1982   TSO Table IX
82-14            1-28-1982   TSO Table XV
82-15            1-28-1982   36.033
82-33            3-25-1982   TSO Table XIII
82-44            4-22-1982   TSO Table XIII
82-45            4-22-1982   TSO Table X
82-63            5-27-1982   TSO Table XIII
-                6-24-1982   TSO Table XVI
82-71            6-24-1982   TSO Table VI
82-72            6-24-1982   TSO Table VI
82-73            6-24-1982   TSO Table VI
82-74            6-24-1982   TSO Table VI
82-75            6-24-1982   TSO Table VI
-                7-22-1982   TSO Table IV
82-79            7-22-1982   TSO Table XVI
82-87            7-22-1982   40.10
82-92            7-22-1982   33.090
82-93            7-22-1982   TSO Table X
82-91            7-28-1982   156.01
82-99            8-26-1982   TSO Table XIII
82-100           8-26-1982   TSO Table XIII
82-101           8-26-1982   TSO Table XIII
82-104           8-26-1982   TSO Table XVI
82-108           8-26-1982   115.02
82-121           10-28-1982  TSO Table X
-                11-23-1982  TSO Table V
82-135           11-23-1982  TSO Table X
82-158           12-16-1982  TSO Table X
83-1             1-20-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-2             1-20-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-11            1-20-1983   TSO Table X
83-13            1-25-1983   TSO Table X
83-13A           2-17-1983   40.07
-                3-17-1983   115.02
83-19            3-17-1983   TSO Table XVI
83-20            3-17-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-27            4-21-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-38            5-19-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-39            5-19-1983   TSO Table III
83-42A           6-16-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-43A           6-16-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-44            6-16-1983   TSO Table III
83-45            6-16-1983   TSO Table III
83-46            6-16-1983   TSO Table III
83-49            6-16-1983   TSO Table VI
83-50            6-16-1983   TSO Table VI
83-51            6-16-1983   TSO Table VI
83-52            6-16-1983   TSO Table VI
83-53            6-16-1983   TSO Table VI
83-54            6-16-1983   TSO Table VI
83-61            7-21-1983   TSO Table XVI
83-62            7-21-1983   TSO Table XVI
83-67            7-21-1983   36.032
83-76            8-18-1983   TSO Table III
83-77            8-18-1983   TSO Table III
83-79            8-18-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-87            9-15-1983   TSO Table XVI
83-93            9-15-1983   TSO Table XIII
83-123           10-20-1983  TSO Table XVI
83-126           10-20-1983  TSO Table XIII
83-127           10-20-1983  TSO Table III
83-134           10-20-1983  TSO Table III
83-137           11-17-1983  TSO Table III
83-138           11-17-1983  TSO Table III
83-139           11-17-1983  TSO Table III
83-140           11-17-1983  TSO Table III
83-141           11-17-1983  TSO Table XII
83-142A          11-17-1983  TSO Table III
83-142B          11-17-1983  TSO Table III
83-143           11-17-1983  TSO Table X
83-152           12-15-1983  TSO Table XVI
84-1             1-19-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-2             1-19-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-10            2-16-1984   TSO Table III
84-13            2-16-1984   TSO Table III
                             118.01—
84-14            3-15-1984   118.08,
                             118.99
84-25            4-19-1984   TSO Table X
84-26            4-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-28            4-19-1984   TSO Table III
                             118.01—
84-29            4-19-1984   118.08,
                             118.99
84-38            4-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-40            5-17-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-41            5-17-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-48            5-17-1984   TSO Table III
84-49            5-17-1984   TSO Table III
84-50            5-17-1984   36.034
84-56            6-4-1984    TSO Table III
84-59            6-4-1984    TSO Table III
84-60            6-21-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-66            6-21-1984   TSO Table X
84-67            6-21-1984   TSO Table III
84-69            6-21-1984   TSO Table III
84-70            6-21-1984   TSO Table III
84-71            6-21-1984   TSO Table III
84-72            6-21-1984   TSO Table X
84-73            6-21-1984   TSO Table X
84-74            6-21-1984   36.032
84-75            6-21-1984   TSO Table III
84-93            6-21-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-94            6-21-1984   TSO Table XVI
86-68            6-21-1984   TSO Table III
84-82            7-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-83            7-19-1984   TSO Table X
84-84            7-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-85            7-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-87            7-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-91            7-19-1984   TSO Table III
84-97            8-16-1984   TSO Table III,
                             TSO Table IX
84-100           8-16-1984   38.01
84-107           8-16-1984   TSO Table III
84-108           8-16-1984   TSO Table X
84-110           9-20-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-111           9-20-1984   TSO Table XVI
84-112           9-20-1984   TSO Table XII
84-113           9-20-1984   TSO Table XIII
84-121           9-20-1984   TSO Table III
84-124           10-18-1984  TSO Table XVI
84-130           10-18-1984  TSO Table XIII
84-132           10-18-1984  TSO Table III
84-135           10-18-1984  TSO Table III
84-144           11-15-1984  TSO Table III
84-145           11-15-1984  TSO Table III
84-146           11-15-1984  TSO Table III
84-147           11-15-1984  TSO Table III
84-148           11-15-1984  TSO Table III
84-155           11-15-1984  32.001
84-162           12-20-1984  TSO Table XIII
84-164           12-20-1984  TSO Table III
85-3             1-17-1985   TSO Table III
85-4             1-17-1985   TSO Table III
85-6             2-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-7             2-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-8             2-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-12            2-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-14            3-21-1985   TSO Table XVI
85-16            3-21-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-18            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-19            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-21            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-22            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-23            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-24            3-21-1985   TSO Table IX
85-26            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-30            3-21-1985   TSO Table III
85-32            3-21-1985   TSO Table X
85-37            4-18-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-39            4-18-1985   35.01
85-40            4-18-1985   TSO Table III
85-47            5-16-1985   TSO Table XVI
85-55            5-16-1985   TSO Table III
85-57            5-16-1985   34.001—
                             34.003
85-58            6-20-1985   TSO Table XVI
85-59            6-20-1985   TSO Table XVII
85-60            6-20-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-61            6-20-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-62            6-20-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-63            6-20-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-64            6-20-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-69            6-20-1985   TSO Table III
85-70            6-20-1985   TSO Table III
85-71            6-20-1985   TSO Table VI
85-72            6-20-1985   TSO Table VI
85-73            6-20-1985   TSO Table VI
85-74            6-20-1985   10.20
85-75            6-20-1985   32.030,
                             32.031
85-78            7-18-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-82            7-18-1985   TSO Table III
85-84            7-18-1985   TSO Table III
85-86            7-18-1985   TSO Table III
85-88            7-18-1985   TSO Table VIII
85-90            7-18-1985   TSO Table III
85-92            8-8-1985    TSO Table IX
85-94            8-15-1985   TSO Table XVI
85-97            8-15-1985   37.02
85-104           8-15-1985   TSO Table III
85-105           8-15-1985   TSO Table III
85-106           8-15-1985   TSO Table III
85-108           8-15-1985   TSO Table X
85-83            9-19-1985   TSO Table III
85-109           9-19-1985   TSO Table XVI
85-111           9-19-1985   TSO Table XIII
85-114           9-19-1985   TSO Table III
85-124           9-19-1985   TSO Table III
85-125           9-19-1985   TSO Table III
85-130           10-17-1985  TSO Table XVI
85-132           10-17-1985  TSO Table XIII
85-136           10-17-1985  TSO Table III
85-141           10-17-1985  TSO Table III
85-143           10-17-1985  TSO Table III
85-159           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-160           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-161           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-162           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-163           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-164           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-165           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-166           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-167           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-168           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-169           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
85-170           11-21-1985  TSO Table III
                             93.021—
85-179           12-19-1985  93.023,
                             93.025,
                             93.026
85-185           12-19-1985  TSO Table XIII
85-186           12-19-1985  TSO Table X
86-13            2-20-1986   TSO Table XVI
86-14            2-20-1986   TSO Table XVI
86-15            2-20-1986   TSO Table XIII
86-27            2-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-33            3-20-1986   TSO Table XIII
86-34            3-20-1986   38.03
86-45            3-20-1986   TSO Table X
86-46            3-20-1986   TSO Table X
86-54            4-17-1986   TSO Table III
86-55            4-17-1986   TSO Table III
86-51            5-15-1986   93.040—93.049,
                             93.999
86-61            5-15-1986   TSO Table XVI
86-83            5-15-1986   40.11
86-85            6-19-1986   TSO Table III
86-89            6-19-1986   36.032
                             110.001—
                             110.003,
                             110.015—
                             110.026,
                             110.040—
                             110.044,
                             110.055—
                             110.073,
86-90            6-19-1986   110.090—
                             110.098,
                             110.115—
                             110.121,
                             110.135—
                             110.142,
                             110.155—
                             110.157,
                             110.999
86-92            7-17-1986   TSO Table III
86-93            7-17-1986   TSO Table X
86-96            8-21-1986   TSO Table XVI
86-98            8-21-1986   TSO Table III
86-107           8-21-1986   TSO Table III
86-108           8-21-1986   TSO Table III
86-120           9-18-1986   TSO Table V
86-121           9-18-1986   TSO Table IX
86-122           9-18-1986   TSO Table X
86-123           9-18-1986   32.001
86-124           10-16-1986  TSO Table XIII
86-125           10-16-1986  TSO Table XIII
86-126           10-16-1986  TSO Table XIII
86-127           10-16-1986  TSO Table XIII
86-132           10-16-1986  TSO Table III
86-139           10-16-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-140           10-16-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-141           10-16-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-143           11-20-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-144           11-20-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-146           11-20-1986  TSO Table III
86-147           11-20-1986  TSO Table III
86-148           11-20-1986  TSO Table III
86-149           11-20-1986  TSO Table III
86-159           11-25-1986  TSO Table III
86-161           12-18-1986  TSO Table III
86-163           12-18-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-164           12-18-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-165           12-18-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-166           12-18-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-167           12-18-1986  Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-150           1-15-1987   TSO Table III
87-1             1-15-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-3             1-15-1987   TSO Table III
87-8             2-19-1987   TSO Table X
87-9             2-19-1987   TSO Table III
Agree. 87-11     2-19-1987   TSO Table III
Agree. 87-12     2-19-1987   TSO Table III
87-14            2-19-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-16            2-19-1987   TSO Table III
87-18            2-19-1987   TSO Table III
87-22            3-19-1987   111.02
87-23            3-19-1987   111.03
87-24            3-19-1987   111.05
87-26            3-19-1987   TSO Table III
87-36            4-16-1987   TSO Table VIII
87-40            4-16-1987   TSO Table X
87-45            4-16-1987   TSO Table VIII
87-48            5-21-1987   TSO Table XIV
87-52            5-21-1987   TSO Table III
87-53            5-21-1987   TSO Table VII
87-55            5-21-1987   TSO Table X
-                6-18-1987   TSO Table VIII
87-67            6-18-1987   TSO Table III
87-68            7-16-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-69            7-16-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-70            7-16-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-74            7-16-1987   TSO Table X
                             51.02,
                             51.03,
                             51.05,
87-75            7-16-1987   51.07,
                             51.08,
                             51.10,
                             51.13,
                             51.99
-                8-20-1987   TSO Table VIII
87-85            8-20-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-86            8-20-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-87            8-20-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-88            8-20-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-89            8-20-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-91            8-20-1987   TSO Table III
87-94            8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-95            8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-96            8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-97            8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-98            8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-99            8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-100           8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-101           8-20-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-102           8-20-1987   TSO Table III
87-114           9-17-1987   TSO Table XIII
87-132           9-17-1987   TSO Table X
-                10-15-1987  TSO Table VIII
-                10-15-1987  TSO Table VIII
-                10-15-1987  TSO Table VIII
87-134           10-15-1987  TSO Table XVI
87-139           10-15-1987  TSO Table III
87-140           10-15-1987  TSO Table III
87-141           10-15-1987  TSO Table III
87-142           10-15-1987  TSO Table III
87-151           11-19-1987  TSO Table XVI
87-156           11-19-1987  TSO Table XII
87-157           11-19-1987  TSO Table XII
87-158           11-19-1987  TSO Table XII
87-159           11-19-1987  TSO Table XII
87-167           11-19-1987  TSO Table III
87-168           11-19-1987  Ch. 73, Sch. I
87-170           11-19-1987  TSO Table III
87-173           11-19-1987  TSO Table III
87-161           12-17-1987  156.01
87-178           12-17-1987  TSO Table XIII
87-180           12-17-1987  TSO Table III
87-185           12-17-1987  TSO Table III
87-187           12-17-1987  TSO Table X
87-188           12-17-1987  TSO Table VIII
87-189           12-17-1987  TSO Table VIII
88-5             1-21-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-6             1-21-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-7             1-21-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-8             1-21-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-9             1-21-1988   TSO Table XII
88-11            1-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-16            2-18-1988   TSO Table III
88-18            2-18-1988   TSO Table III
88-19            2-18-1988   TSO Table III
88-21            2-18-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-22            2-18-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-23            2-18-1988   TSO Table III
88-24            2-18-1988   TSO Table III
88-25            2-18-1988   TSO Table XII
-                3-17-1988   TSO Table VIII
-                3-17-1988   TSO Table VIII
-                3-17-1988   TSO Table VIII
-                3-17-1988   TSO Table VIII
88-28            3-17-1988   50.20—
                             50.26
88-29            3-17-1988   TSO Table III
88-33            3-17-1988   TSO Table III
88-40            4-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-41            4-21-1988   TSO Table XII
88-42            4-21-1988   TSO Table X
88-43            4-21-1988   TSO Table X
88-45            4-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-51            4-21-1988   TSO Table X
88-52            4-21-1988   TSO Table X
88-53            4-21-1988   TSO Table X
88-54            4-21-1988   TSO Table VIII
88-55            4-21-1988   TSO Table VIII
-                5-19-1988   TSO Table VIII
-                5-19-1988   TSO Table VIII
88-61            5-19-1988   TSO Table X
88-63            5-19-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-69            6-16-1988   TSO Table XVI
88-70            6-16-1988   TSO Table XVI
88-76            6-16-1988   TSO Table III
88-79            6-16-1988   TSO Table VII
88-80            6-16-1988   TSO Table X
88-84            6-16-1988   TSO Table I
88-85            7-21-1988   TSO Table XIII
88-86            7-21-1988   TSO Table XIII
88-88            7-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-89            7-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-91            7-21-1988   TSO Table IX
88-94            7-21-1988   Ch. 72, Sch. II
88-95            7-21-1988   TSO Table II
88-96            7-21-1988   TSO Table XII
88-99            7-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-100           7-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-104           7-21-1988   TSO Table III
88-108           8-18-1988   TSO Table XII
88-112           8-18-1988   TSO Table X
88-113           8-18-1988   TSO Table X
88-114           8-18-1988   TSO Table X
-                9-15-1988   TSO Table VIII
-                9-15-1988   TSO Table VIII
88-116           9-15-1988   TSO Table XVII
88-119           9-15-1988   TSO Table XIII
88-121           9-15-1988   TSO Table III
88-130           9-15-1988   TSO Table X
88-131           9-15-1988   TSO Table III
-                10-20-1988  TSO Table VIII
-                10-20-1988  TSO Table VIII
-                10-20-1988  TSO Table VIII
-                10-20-1988  TSO Table VIII
88-138           10-20-1988  TSO Table X
88-139           10-20-1988  TSO Table III
-                11-17-1988  TSO Table VIII
88-158           11-17-1988  TSO Table III
88-159           11-17-1988  TSO Table III
88-161           11-17-1988  TSO Table III
88-162           11-17-1988  TSO Table III
88-163           11-17-1988  TSO Table III
88-165           11-17-1988  TSO Table X
88-166           11-17-1988  TSO Table X
88-173           11-17-1988  36.001—
                             36.008
88-177           12-15-1988  TSO Table III
88-182           12-15-1988  TSO Table X
88-185           12-15-1988  TSO Table III
88-191           12-15-1988  TSO Table III
-                1-19-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                1-19-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                1-19-1989   TSO Table VIII
89-1             1-19-1989   TSO Table XVII
89-3             1-19-1989   TSO Table III
89-4             1-19-1989   TSO Table III
89-14            1-19-1989   TSO Table III
89-15            1-19-1989   TSO Table III
89-17            1-19-1989   TSO Table X
-                2-16-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                2-16-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                2-16-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                2-16-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                2-16-1989   TSO Table VIII
-                2-16-1989   TSO Table VIII
89-25            2-16-1989   Ch. 72, Sch. III
89-30            3-16-1989   TSO Table III
89-32            3-16-1989   TSO Table III
89-34            3-16-1989   TSO Table III
89-36            3-16-1989   TSO Table III
89-38            3-16-1989   TSO Table III
89-45            3-16-1989   TSO Table III
89-53            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-54            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-56            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-58            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-59            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-60            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-61            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-62            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-63            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-64            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-65            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-66            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-67            4-20-1989   70.10
89-68            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-72            4-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-74            5-18-1989   38.04
89-79            5-18-1989   Ch. 73, Sch. I
89-82            5-18-1989   Ch. 72, Sch. II
89-117           6-14-1989   TSO Table VI
89-95            6-15-1989   TSO Table X
89-99            6-15-1989   TSO Table XVII
89-100           6-15-1989   TSO Table III
89-103           6-15-1989   TSO Table III
89-104           6-15-1989   TSO Table X
89-105           6-15-1989   Ch. 72, Sch. II
89-106           6-15-1989   TSO Table X
89-107           6-15-1989   TSO Table III
89-109           6-15-1989   TSO Table VII
89-111           6-15-1989   39.02
89-113           6-15-1989   36.032
89-115           6-15-1989   TSO Table VI
89-116           6-15-1989   TSO Table VI
89-118           6-15-1989   TSO Table VI
89-119           6-15-1989   TSO Table VI
89-120           6-15-1989   TSO Table VI
89-121           6-15-1989   TSO Table VI
89-164           6-15-1989   TSO Table IX
89-166           7-20-1989   91.03
89-167           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-168           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-169           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-175           7-20-1989   TSO Table X
89-176           7-20-1989   TSO Table X
89-177           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-178           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-179           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-180           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-181           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-182           7-20-1989   TSO Table III
89-183           7-20-1989   50.22
89-189           7-20-1989   53.01
89-188           8-17-1989   TSO Table XIII
89-189           8-17-1989   TSO Table XIII
89-201           8-17-1989   TSO Table III
89-202           8-17-1989   TSO Table X
89-203           8-17-1989   Ch. 72, Sch. II
89-204           8-17-1989   TSO Table VII
89-208           8-17-1989   35.07
89-209           8-17-1989   TSO Table III
89-210           8-17-1989   TSO Table III
89-212           8-17-1989   TSO Table X
89-217           8-17-1989   TSO Table III
89-218           8-17-1989   TSO Table X
89-196           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-221           9-21-1989   TSO Table XVI
89-222           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-223           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-224           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-225           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-226           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-227           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-228           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-229           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-230           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-231           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-235           9-21-1989   TSO Table X
89-236           9-21-1989   TSO Table X
89-238           9-21-1989   TSO Table IX
89-239           9-21-1989   TSO Table XIII
89-240           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-241           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-242           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-244           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-245           9-21-1989   TSO Table VII
89-246           9-21-1989   TSO Table VII
89-247           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-248           9-21-1989   Ch. 72, Sch. II
89-252           9-21-1989   36.009
89-255           9-21-1989   TSO Table X
89-256           9-21-1989   TSO Table III
89-257           9-21-1989   TSO Table XIII
89-258           9-21-1989   38.02
89-267           10-19-1989  TSO Table III
89-268           10-19-1989  TSO Table III
89-269           10-19-1989  38.02
89-271           10-19-1989  TSO Table III
89-272           10-19-1989  TSO Table III
89-274           10-19-1989  TSO Table III
89-275           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-278           10-19-1989  TSO Table I
89-280           10-19-1989  TSO Table XII
89-281           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-282           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-283           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-284           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-285           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-286           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-288           10-19-1989  TSO Table X
89-263           10-29-1989  158.01
89-266           11-16-1989  TSO Table III
89-292           11-16-1989  TSO Table XVII
89-293           11-16-1989  TSO Table XVII
89-294           11-16-1989  TSO Table III
89-296           11-16-1989  TSO Table III
89-301           11-16-1989  Ch. 72, Sch. I
89-303           11-16-1989  TSO Table X
89-305           11-16-1989  TSO Table III
89-306           11-16-1989  50.03
89-315           11-16-1989  31.07
89-311           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-318           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-319           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-323           12-21-1989  38.05
89-326           12-21-1989  TSO Table X
89-327           12-21-1989  TSO Table X
89-329           12-21-1989  TSO Table X
89-330           12-21-1989  50.02
89-335           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-336           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-337           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-338           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-339           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-340           12-21-1989  TSO Table III
89-341           12-21-1989  TSO Table X
90-4             1-18-1990   TSO Table III
90-6             1-18-1990   TSO Table III
90-7             1-18-1990   TSO Table III
90-8             1-18-1990   Ch. 72, Sch. II
90-11            1-18-1990   94.01
90-12            1-18-1990   94.01
90-19            2-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-22            2-15-1990   TSO Table IX
90-24            2-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-26            2-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-27            2-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-28            2-15-1990   TSO Table III
                             70.01—
                             70.08,
                             70.25,
                             70.26,
                             70.99,
                             74.02—
                             74.11,
90-29            2-15-1990   74.13—
                             74.19,
                             74.99,
                             75.01—
                             75.03,
                             75.15—
                             75.24,
                             75.99
90-42            3-15-1990   TSO Table IX
90-44            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-45            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-47            3-15-1990   TSO Table V
90-48            3-15-1990   TSO Table V
90-49            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-51            3-15-1990   TSO Table X
90-52            3-15-1990   TSO Table VII
90-53            3-15-1990   TSO Table VII
90-54            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-55            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-56            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-57            3-15-1990   Ch. 72, Sch. I
90-58            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-60            3-15-1990   TSO Table X
90-63            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-65            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
90-66            3-15-1990   TSO Table III
89-73            4-19-1990   94.02
90-71            4-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-72            4-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-75            4-19-1990   36.037
90-77            4-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-78            4-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-79            4-19-1990   Ch. 73, Sch. I
90-85            4-19-1990   157.02
90-89            4-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-90            4-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-81            5-17-1990   33.002
90-92            5-17-1990   159.01
90-94            5-17-1990   TSO Table III
90-95            5-17-1990   TSO Table III
90-100           5-17-1990   TSO Table III
90-101           5-17-1990   TSO Table II
90-103           5-17-1990   TSO Table XII
                             110.003,
                             110.016,
                             110.020—
                             110.024,
90-104           5-17-1990   110.121,
                             110.135,
                             110.140,
                             110.141,
                             110.156
90-109           5-17-1990   TSO Table III
90-110           5-17-1990   TSO Table III
90-111           5-17-1990   TSO Table X
90-113           6-12-1990   TSO Table III
90-114           6-21-1990   TSO Table XVII
90-115           6-21-1990   TSO Table XVII
90-120           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-121           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-125           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-127           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-128           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-129           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-131           6-21-1990   TSO Table X
90-132           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-133           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-134           6-21-1990   36.032
90-135           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-136           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-143           6-21-1990   TSO Table III
90-148           6-21-1990   157.01
90-160           7-9-1990    36.023
90-151           7-19-1990   TSO Table X
90-152           7-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-153           7-19-1990   TSO Table III
90-154           7-19-1990   Ch. 72, Sch. II
90-155           7-19-1990   TSO Table VII
90-156           7-19-1990   110.017
90-161           7-19-1990   36.023
90-173           8-16-1990   TSO Table III
90-181           9-20-1990   TSO Table XVII
90-186           9-20-1990   TSO Table III
90-189           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-192           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-193           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-194           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-195           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-196           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-197           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-199           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-200           9-20-1990   TSO Table III
90-203           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-204           9-20-1990   TSO Table X
90-207           9-20-1990   36.023
90-235           11-15-1990  TSO Table III
90-238           11-15-1990  32.001
90-242           11-15-1990  TSO Table III
90-243           11-15-1990  TSO Table X
90-244           11-15-1990  TSO Table V
90-245           11-15-1990  TSO Table VII
90-246           11-15-1990  Ch. 73, Sch. I
90-249           11-15-1990  TSO Table X
90-250           11-15-1990  TSO Table III
90-251           11-15-1990  36.036
90-253           11-15-1990  TSO Table III
90-254           11-15-1990  TSO Table III
90-281           12-20-1990  TSO Table III
90-282           12-20-1990  TSO Table III
90-283           12-20-1990  TSO Table X
90-284           12-20-1990  TSO Table X
90-287           12-20-1990  36.023
90-289           12-20-1990  TSO Table X
90-294           12-20-1990  TSO Table X
91-13            1-17-1991   Ch. 72, Sch. II
91-14            1-17-1991   TSO Table X
91-15            1-17-1991   TSO Table III
91-16            1-17-1991   TSO Table X
91-17            1-17-1991   TSO Table III
91-18            1-17-1991   TSO Table X
91-19            1-17-1991   TSO Table II
91-20            1-17-1991   50.01
91-24            1-17-1991   TSO Table III
91-25            1-17-1991   TSO Table III
91-27            1-17-1991   TSO Table III
91-45            2-2-1991    TSO Table X
91-25A           2-21-1991   TSO Table III
91-34            2-21-1991   TSO Table III
91-38            2-21-1991   TSO Table II
91-40            2-21-1991   TSO Table VII
91-41            2-21-1991   TSO Table III
91-43            2-21-1991   TSO Table X
91-44            2-21-1991   TSO Table X
91-46            2-21-1991   TSO Table X
91-47            2-21-1991   36.035
91-51            2-21-1991   36.023
91-54            2-21-1991   32.013
91-64            3-21-1991   TSO Table III
91-75            3-21-1991   TSO Table III
91-77            3-21-1991   TSO Table X
91-78            3-21-1991   TSO Table X
91-81            3-21-1991   TSO Table III
91-90            4-18-1991   TSO Table X
91-98            4-18-1991   TSO Table X
91-100           4-18-1991   TSO Table X
91-102           4-18-1991   TSO Table X
91-109           4-18-1991   36.023
91-121           5-16-1991   TSO Table III
91-124           5-16-1991   TSO Table X
91-125           5-16-1991   TSO Table X
91-126           5-16-1991   TSO Table X
91-131           5-16-1991   TSO Table X
91-132           5-16-1991   TSO Table III
91-138           5-16-1991   36.032
91-73            6-20-1991   TSO Table X
91-142           6-20-1991   TSO Table XIII
91-143           6-20-1991   161.01
91-148           6-20-1991   TSO Table III
91-151           6-20-1991   TSO Table X
91-156           6-20-1991   TSO Table X
91-162           6-20-1991   TSO Table X
91-166           6-20-1991   TSO Table X
91-169           6-20-1991   TSO Table VI
91-169R          7-1-1991    TSO Table VI
91-174           7-18-1991   TSO Table XVII
91-176           7-18-1991   TSO Table XIII
91-185           7-18-1991   TSO Table III
91-189           7-18-1991   Ch. 72, Sch. II
91-191           7-18-1991   TSO Table X
91-195           7-18-1991   TSO Table X
91-197           8-1-1991    TSO Table X
91-201           8-15-1991   TSO Table XVI
91-211           8-15-1991   TSO Table III
91-213           8-15-1991   TSO Table X
91-215           8-15-1991   36.023
91-218           8-15-1991   TSO Table III
91-219           8-15-1991   TSO Table X
91-216           9-19-1991   33.018
91-230           9-19-1991   TSO Table X
91-235           9-19-1991   TSO Table X
91-236           9-19-1991   TSO Table VII
91-242           9-19-1991   TSO Table III
91-243           9-19-1991   TSO Table III
91-244           9-19-1991   TSO Table X
91-288           11-21-1991  TSO Table VII
91-292           11-21-1991  50.20—
                             50.27
91-294           11-21-1991  TSO Table III
91-295           11-21-1991  TSO Table X
91-296           11-21-1991  TSO Table X
91-297P          11-21-1991  TSO Table X
91-298           11-21-1991  TSO Table X
91-299           11-21-1991  TSO Table X
92-2             1-16-1992   TSO Table VIII
92-4             1-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-8             1-16-1992   Ch. 72, Sch. II
92-15            1-16-1992   TSO Table X
92-19            1-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-20            1-16-1992   TSO Table III
93-32            2-18-1992   156.01
92-30            2-20-1992   TSO Table X
92-31            2-20-1992   Ch. 72, Sch. III
92-32            2-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-33            2-20-1992   Ch. 73, Sch. I
92-34            2-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-41            2-20-1992   TSO Table X
92-42            2-20-1992   TSO Table X
92-43            2-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-44            2-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-47            2-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-50            2-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-51            2-20-1992   TSO Table X
92-52            3-19-1992   TSO Table II
92-57            3-19-1992   TSO Table III
92-70            4-16-1992   Ch. 72, Sch. II
92-73            4-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-74            4-16-1992   TSO Table X
92-80            4-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-81            4-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-82            4-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-83            4-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-84            4-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-120           6-18-1992   TSO Table XVII
92-124           6-18-1992   TSO Table XIII
92-129           6-18-1992   TSO Table III
92-130           6-18-1992   TSO Table III
92-131           6-18-1992   TSO Table III
92-132           6-18-1992   TSO Table III
92-133           6-18-1992   TSO Table III
92-134           6-18-1992   TSO Table III
92-135           6-18-1992   TSO Table VII
92-136           6-18-1992   TSO Table VII
92-139           6-18-1992   36.055—
                             36.060
92-151           7-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-153           7-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-154           7-16-1992   TSO Table X
92-156           7-16-1992   TSO Table VI
92-157           7-16-1992   TSO Table VI
92-158           7-16-1992   TSO Table VI
92-159           7-16-1992   TSO Table VI
92-160           7-16-1992   TSO Table VI
92-161           7-16-1992   TSO Table VI
92-163           7-16-1992   TSO Table III
92-167           8-20-1992   158.01
92-184           8-20-1992   TSO Table III
92-187           8-20-1992   TSO Table III
                             166.001 -
                             166.003,
                             166.015,
                             166.016,
                             166.025 -
92-192           9-17-1992   166.041,
                             166.050 -
                             166.054,
                             166.065,
                             166.066,
                             166.999
92-201           9-17-1992   TSO Table III
92-207           9-17-1992   51.03
92-221           10-15-1992  32.045—
                             32.052
92-225           10-15-1992  TSO Table III
92-227           10-15-1992  TSO Table III
92-233           11-19-1992  TSO Table X
92-234           11-19-1992  TSO Table X
92-235           11-19-1992  TSO Table X
92-248           11-19-1992  93.061—
                             93.065
92-269           12-17-1992  TSO Table III
92-23            1-21-1993   TSO Table X
93-8             1-21-1993   TSO Table III
93-16            1-21-1993   TSO Table III
93-20            1-21-1993   Ch. 72, Sch. II
93-24            1-21-1993   TSO Table X
93-26            1-21-1993   TSO Table III
93-36            2-18-1993   TSO Table III
93-42            2-18-1993   TSO Table III
93-43            2-18-1993   TSO Table III
93-66            3-18-1993   TSO Table III
93-67            3-18-1993   TSO Table III
93-68            3-18-1993   Ch. 72, Sch. II
93-69            3-18-1993   TSO Table III
93-72            3-18-1993   Ch. 72, Sch. I
93-83            4-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-84            4-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-94            4-15-1993   117.01—
                             117.09
93-95            4-15-1993   TSO Table III
93-100           4-15-1993   Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             162.01,
                             162.02,
                             162.15—
                             162.19,
93-21            5-20-1993   162.30,
                             162.45,
                             162.46,
                             162.60,
                             162.61,
                             162.99
93-106           5-20-1993   TSO Table XVII
93-109           5-20-1993   TSO Table III
93-114           5-20-1993   Ch. 72, Sch. II
93-115           5-20-1993   TSO Table III
93-116           5-20-1993   TSO Table III
93-117           5-20-1993   TSO Table III
93-131           6-7-1993    TSO Table III
93-125           6-17-1993   TSO Table XVII
93-132           6-17-1993   TSO Table III
93-135           6-17-1993   TSO Table III
93-138           6-17-1993   TSO Table III
93-139           6-17-1993   117.06
93-144           6-17-1993   36.055—
                             36.060
93-143           7-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-151           7-15-1993   36.028
93-152           7-15-1993   TSO Table III
93-156           7-15-1993   TSO Table III
93-161           7-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-162           7-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-164           7-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-165           7-15-1993   TSO Table X
93-167           7-15-1993   TSO Table VI
93-168           7-15-1993   TSO Table VI
93-169           7-15-1993   TSO Table VI
93-170           7-15-1993   TSO Table VI
93-171           7-15-1993   TSO Table VI
93-172           7-15-1993   TSO Table VI
93-174           7-15-1993   33.105
93-176           7-15-1993   36.038
93-179           8-12-1993   36.023
93-182           8-19-1993   TSO Table III
93-188           8-19-1993   TSO Table XIII
93-191           8-19-1993   TSO Table III
93-192           8-19-1993   TSO Table X
93-193P          8-19-1993   TSO Table IX
93-199           9-16-1993   TSO Table III
93-200           9-16-1993   TSO Table III
93-203           9-16-1993   TSO Table III
93-205           9-16-1993   TSO Table III
93-206           9-16-1993   TSO Table III
93-211           9-16-1993   TSO Table X
93-212           9-16-1993   TSO Table X
93-214           9-16-1993   TSO Table III
192              9-16-1993   TSO Table IX
93-216           10-14-1993  TSO Table III
93-223           10-21-1993  TSO Table III
93-224           10-21-1993  TSO Table III
93-225           10-21-1993  TSO Table III
93-226           10-21-1993  TSO Table III
93-244           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-245           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-246           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-247           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-248           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-262           11-18-1993  TSO Table X
93-264P          11-18-1993  38.06
93-265           11-18-1993  TSO Table X
93-266           11-18-1993  TSO Table X
93-267           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-268           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-271           11-18-1993  TSO Table III
93-217           12-16-1993  33.120—
                             33.123
93-273           12-16-1993  TSO Table III
93-276           12-16-1993  TSO Table III
93-282           12-16-1993  Ch. 72, Sch. II
93-283           12-16-1993  TSO Table X
93-284           12-16-1993  TSO Table X
93-285           12-16-1993  TSO Table X
93-287           12-16-1993  TSO Table III
93-292           12-16-1993  TSO Table X
94-4             1-20-1994   TSO Table III
94-5             1-20-1994   TSO Table III
94-6             1-20-1994   TSO Table III
94-10            1-20-1994   TSO Table III
94-16            1-20-1994   Ch. 72, Sch. II
94-20            1-20-1994   TSO Table III
94-23            1-20-1994   36.021
94-26            1-20-1994   TSO Table X
94-32            2-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-33            2-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-34            2-17-1994   TSO Table XIII
94-42            2-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-45            2-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-46            2-17-1994   TSO Table X
94-47            2-17-1994   TSO Table VII
94-57            3-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-67            3-17-1994   Ch. 72, Sch. II
94-68            3-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-69            3-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-71            3-17-1994   TSO Table X
94-72            3-17-1994   TSO Table X
94-73            3-17-1994   TSO Table X
94-76            3-17-1994   TSO Table III
94-80            3-17-1994   36.033
94-82            3-17-1994   TSO Table X
94-83            3-17-1994   TSO Table X
94-105           4-21-1994   Ch. 72, Sch. II
94-106           4-21-1994   TSO Table III
94-107           4-21-1994   TSO Table III
94-110           4-21-1994   TSO Table III
94-111           4-21-1994   TSO Table III
                             110.003,
94-50            5-19-1994   110.095,
                             110.099,
                             110.141
94-123           5-19-1994   TSO Table III
94-124           5-19-1994   TSO Table III
94-128           5-19-1994   TSO Table III
94-129           5-19-1994   TSO Table III
94-130           5-19-1994   TSO Table III
94-131           5-19-1994   115.02
94-132           5-19-1994   TSO Table II
                             95.02,
94-134           5-19-1994   95.04,
                             95.05
94-145           6-9-1994    157.02
94-149           6-16-1994   TSO Table XIII
94-150           6-16-1994   TSO Table XIII
94-160           6-16-1994   TSO Table III
94-161           6-16-1994   Ch. 72, Sch. II
94-162           6-16-1994   Ch. 72, Sch. I
94-170           6-16-1994   157.01
94-171           6-16-1994   TSO Table III
94-173           6-16-1994   TSO Table III
94-174           6-16-1994   TSO Table III
94-189           7-21-1994   TSO Table III
94-190           7-21-1994   TSO Table III
94-191           7-21-1994   TSO Table X
94-208           7-21-1994   TSO Table X
94-218           8-18-1994   TSO Table XIII
94-230a          8-18-1994   TSO Table III
94-230c          8-18-1994   TSO Table III
94-240           9-15-1994   TSO Table III
94-249           10-20-1994  TSO Table III
94-250           10-20-1994  TSO Table III
94-251           10-20-1994  TSO Table III
94-252           10-20-1994  TSO Table III
94-253           10-20-1994  TSO Table III
94-282           11-17-1994  TSO Table III
94-285           11-17-1994  TSO Table III
94-294           11-17-1994  TSO Table XIII
94-295           11-17-1994  TSO Table III
94-296           11-17-1994  TSO Table III
94-297           11-17-1994  TSO Table III
94-308           11-17-1994  TSO Table III
94-315           12-15-1994  TSO Table III
94-316           12-15-1994  TSO Table III
94-319           12-15-1994  TSO Table III
94-321           12-15-1994  TSO Table V
94-324           12-15-1994  TSO Table X
94-326           12-15-1994  TSO Table III
94-328           12-15-1994  TSO Table VII
94-329           12-15-1994  TSO Table X
94-330           12-15-1994  TSO Table III
94-331           12-15-1994  39.03
                             93.080—
                             93.085,
94-229           1-19-1995   93.087,
                             93.101—
                             93.105,
                             93.107
95-5             1-19-1995   TSO Table IX
95-7             1-19-1995   TSO Table III
95-10            1-19-1995   TSO Table III
95-13            1-19-1995   Ch. 73, Sch. I
95-15            1-19-1995   TSO Table III
95-22            1-19-1995   TSO Table X
95-28            2-16-1995   TSO Table X
95-34            2-16-1995   TSO Table XIII
95-35            2-16-1995   TSO Table III
95-37            2-16-1995   TSO Table III
                             110.015,
95-38            2-16-1995   110.017,
                             110.019—
                             110.023
95-41            2-16-1995   TSO Table X
95-48            3-16-1995   TSO Table XVI
95-49            3-16-1995   TSO Table III,
                             TSO Table IX
95-56            3-16-1995   Ch. 72, Sch. II
95-57            3-16-1995   Ch. 72, Sch. I
95-60            3-16-1995   130.01,
                             130.99
95-61            3-16-1995   TSO Table X
95-62            3-16-1995   TSO Table III
95-66            4-13-1995   TSO Table III
95-72            4-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-74            4-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-75            4-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-78            4-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-79            4-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-82            4-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-83            4-20-1995   Ch. 72, Sch. II
95-84            4-20-1995   TSO Table XIII
95-87            4-20-1995   96.01,
                             96.99
95-88            4-20-1995   110.020,
                             110.021
95-95            5-18-1995   TSO Table III
95-98            5-18-1995   TSO Table XIII
95-100           5-18-1995   TSO Table III
95-101           5-18-1995   TSO Table X
95-102           5-18-1995   TSO Table X
95-103           5-18-1995   TSO Table X
95-104           5-18-1995   TSO Table X
95-108           5-18-1995   TSO Table II
95-109           5-18-1995   TSO Table XII
95-113           6-15-1995   TSO Table XIII
95-114           6-15-1995   TSO Table III
95-115           6-15-1995   TSO Table IX
95-118           6-15-1995   TSO Table III
95-119           6-15-1995   TSO Table III
95-122           6-15-1995   TSO Table III
95-127           6-15-1995   36.055—
                             36.060
95-128           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-129           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-130           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-131           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-132           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-133           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-134           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-135           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-136           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-137           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-138           6-15-1995   TSO Table VI
95-126           7-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-140           7-20-1995   158.01
95-152           7-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-153           7-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-154           7-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-156           7-20-1995   TSO Table III
95-159           7-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-160           7-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-163           7-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-164           7-20-1995   TSO Table X
95-143           8-17-1995   TSO Table III
95-172           8-17-1995   40.12
95-176           8-17-1995   TSO Table X
95-179           8-17-1995   TSO Table X
95-166           9-21-1995   158.02
95-188           9-21-1995   TSO Table III
95-194           9-21-1995   TSO Table XIII
95-198           9-21-1995   TSO Table III
95-199           9-21-1995   TSO Table III
95-208           9-21-1995   TSO Table III
95-209           9-21-1995   TSO Table X
95-214           9-21-1995   157.01
95-215           9-21-1995   157.02
95-219           9-21-1995   TSO Table III
95-223           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-226           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-227           10-19-1995  40.13
95-228           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-229           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-230           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-233           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-234           10-19-1995  TSO Table III
95-237           10-19-1995  TSO Table X
95-240           10-19-1995  TSO Table X
95-251           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-254           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-258           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-259           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-261           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-263           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-267           11-16-1995  TSO Table III
95-282           12-21-1995  40.14
95-286           12-21-1995  TSO Table XII
95-288           12-21-1995  Ch. 72, Sch. II
95-289           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-290           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-291           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-292           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-293           12-21-1995  TSO Table VII
95-302           12-21-1995  36.039
95-303           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-304           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
95-307           12-21-1995  36.023
95-310           12-21-1995  TSO Table III
96-6             1-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-7             1-18-1996   TSO Table IX
96-9             1-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-10            1-18-1996   36.028
96-12            1-18-1996   Ch. 72, Sch. II
96-14            1-18-1996   TSO Table X
96-14B           1-18-1996   TSO Table X
96-27            2-15-1996   TSO Table III
96-29            2-15-1996   TSO Table III
96-31            2-15-1996   TSO Table X
96-32            2-15-1996   Ch. 72, Sch. II
96-37            2-15-1996   36.040
96-39            2-15-1996   TSO Table III
-                3-21-1996   TSO Table XVI
96-33            3-21-1996   50.01
96-43            3-21-1996   TSO Table IX
96-44            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-45            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-49            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-50            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-51            3-21-1996   TSO Table X
96-52            3-21-1996   TSO Table X
96-53            3-21-1996   TSO Table X
96-54            3-21-1996   TSO Table X
96-55            3-21-1996   TSO Table X
96-56            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-57            3-21-1996   Ch. 73, Sch. I
96-58            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-59            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-60            3-21-1996   TSO Table X
96-61            3-21-1996   TSO Table III
96-72            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-73            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-75            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-81            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-82            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-84            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-85            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-86            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-87            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-88            4-18-1996   TSO Table X
96-89            4-18-1996   TSO Table III
96-96            5-16-1996   TSO Table III
96-101           5-16-1996   TSO Table IV
96-108           5-16-1996   40.15
96-109           5-16-1996   TSO Table III
96-113           5-16-1996   TSO Table X
96-114           5-16-1996   TSO Table III
96-115           5-16-1996   TSO Table X
96-120           6-6-1996    TSO Table X
96-131           6-20-1996   TSO Table II
96-134           6-20-1996   TSO Table X
                             34.092,
96-135           6-20-1996   34.106—
                             34.113
96-136           6-20-1996   TSO Table X
95-159           7-24-1996   Ch. 72, Sch. II,
                             Ch. 73, Sch. I
96-156           7-24-1996   TSO Table III
96-157           7-24-1996   TSO Table III
96-158           7-24-1996   TSO Table III
96-160           7-24-1996   Ch. 73, Sch. I
96-173           8-15-1996   TSO Table III
96-176           8-15-1996   TSO Table III
96-178           8-15-1996   TSO Table X
96-186           8-15-1996   TSO Table X
96-202           9-19-1996   TSO Table III
96-205           9-19-1996   TSO Table III
96-206           9-19-1996   Ch. 72, Sch. II
96-207           9-19-1996   TSO Table X
96-209           9-19-1996   TSO Table X
96-212           9-19-1996   TSO Table X
96-213           9-19-1996   TSO Table X
96-214           9-19-1996   TSO Table III
96-215           9-19-1996   TSO Table X
-                10-17-1996  TSO Table XVI
96-222           10-17-1996  TSO Table III
96-237           10-17-1996  TSO Table III
96-235           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-236           11-21-1996  TSO Table X
96-250           11-21-1996  117.01—
                             117.09
96-254           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-258           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-259           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-261           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-262           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-263           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-264           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-265           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-266           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-267           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-268           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-270           11-21-1996  TSO Table IX
96-271           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-274           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-277           11-21-1996  TSO Table X
96-278           11-21-1996  TSO Table X
96-279           11-21-1996  TSO Table X
96-280           11-21-1996  TSO Table XV
96-281           11-21-1996  TSO Table XV
96-282           11-21-1996  TSO Table XV
96-283           11-21-1996  TSO Table XV
96-284           11-21-1996  TSO Table XV
96-285           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-287           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-288           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-289           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
96-296           11-21-1996  TSO Table III
97-3             1-16-1997   TSO Table IX
97-12            1-16-1997   TSO Table X
-                2-20-1997   TSO Table XVI
97-19            2-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-20            2-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-26            2-20-1997   TSO Table III
97-31            2-20-1997   TSO Table XV
97-32            2-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-33            2-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-35            2-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-36            2-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-52            3-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-53            3-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-54            3-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-56            3-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-57            3-20-1997   TSO Table X
                             110.016,
                             110.019—
                             110.021,
                             110.024,
                             110.027,
97-59            3-20-1997   110.044,
                             110.074,
                             110.120,
                             110.122,
                             110.123,
                             110.139,
                             110.141
97-61            3-20-1997   TSO Table X
97-57            4-17-1997   TSO Table X
97-69            4-17-1997   TSO Table X
97-76            4-17-1997   TSO Table III
97-77            4-17-1997   TSO Table III
97-78            4-17-1997   Ch. 72, Sch. II
97-83            4-17-1997   TSO Table X
97-98            5-15-1997   TSO Table X
97-99            5-15-1997   TSO Table X
97-100           5-15-1997   TSO Table X
97-101           5-15-1997   Ch. 72, Sch. II
97-102           5-15-1997   TSO Table X
97-106           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-107           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-108           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-109           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-110           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-111           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-112           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-113           5-15-1997   TSO Table III
97-115           5-15-1997   TSO Table X
97-105           6-19-1997   TSO Table X
97-116           6-19-1997   TSO Table XVI
97-123           6-19-1997   TSO Table X
97-128           6-19-1997   TSO Table III
97-129           6-19-1997   Ch. 72, Sch. II
97-130           6-19-1997   TSO Table X
97-131           6-19-1997   TSO Table VII
97-132           6-19-1997   TSO Table X
97-140           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-141           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-142           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-143           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-144           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-145           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-146           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-147           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-148           6-19-1997   TSO Table VI
97-152           6-19-1997   TSO Table X
97-141 (amended) 7-17-1997   TSO Table VI
97-148 (amended) 7-17-1997   TSO Table VI
97-154           7-17-1997   TSO Table X
97-155           7-17-1997   TSO Table X
97-166           7-17-1997   TSO Table III
97-167           7-17-1997   TSO Table III
97-171           7-17-1997   TSO Table III
98-215           8-20-1997   Ch. 72, Sch. II
97-172           8-21-1997   TSO Table III
97-177           8-21-1997   TSO Table III
97-180           8-21-1997   TSO Table III
97-181           8-21-1997   TSO Table X
97-186           8-21-1997   TSO Table III
97-188           8-21-1997   TSO Table X
97-194           8-21-1997   TSO Table III
98-191           8-21-1997   TSO Table X
97-209           9-18-1997   TSO Table III
97-210           9-18-1997   TSO Table III
97-211           9-18-1997   TSO Table III
97-213           9-18-1997   TSO Table X
97-218           9-18-1997   TSO Table IX
97-219           9-18-1997   TSO Table III
97-226           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-227           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-228           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-229           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-230           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-231           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-232           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-233           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-234           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-235           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-236           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-239           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-241           10-16-1997  TSO Table II
97-243           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-244           10-16-1997  TSO Table IX
97-245           10-16-1997  TSO Table IX
97-246           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-249           10-16-1997  TSO Table III
97-250           10-16-1997  TSO Table X
97-258           11-20-1997  TSO Table III
97-261           11-20-1997  TSO Table III
97-262           11-20-1997  TSO Table III
97-268           11-20-1997  TSO Table X
97-269           11-20-1997  TSO Table X
97-270           11-20-1997  TSO Table X
97-271           11-20-1997  TSO Table X
97-272           11-20-1997  TSO Table X
97-274           11-20-1997  TSO Table III
97-275           11-20-1997  TSO Table III
97-277           11-20-1997  TSO Table III
97-278           11-20-1997  TSO Table IX
97-279           11-20-1997  TSO Table IX
97-288           12-18-1997  TSO Table III
97-292           12-18-1997  TSO Table III
97-293           12-18-1997  Ch. 72, Sch. II
97-296           12-18-1997  TSO Table X
97-297           12-18-1997  TSO Table III
97-299           12-18-1997  TSO Table III
97-300           12-18-1997  TSO Table III
97-301           12-18-1997  TSO Table III
97-302           12-18-1997  TSO Table IX
98-1             1-15-1998   TSO Table III
98-2             1-15-1998   TSO Table III
98-3             1-15-1998   TSO Table III
98-11            1-15-1998   70.12,
                             70.99
98-12            1-15-1998   TSO Table III
98-14            1-15-1998   TSO Table III
98-15            1-15-1998   TSO Table III
98-17            1-15-1998   TSO Table IX
99-54            2-18-1998   TSO Table III
99-55            2-18-1998   TSO Table III
98-20            2-19-1998   158.01
98-21            2-19-1998   TSO Table X
98-31            2-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-33            2-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-35            2-19-1998   TSO Table X
98-36            2-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-37            2-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-39            2-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-45            2-19-1998   TSO Table IX
98-47            2-19-1998   TSO Table X
98-54            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-56            3-19-1998   36.028
98-60            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-61            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-62            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-63            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-64            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-65            3-19-1998   TSO Table III,
                             TSO Table X
98-66            3-19-1998   TSO Table X
98-69            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-74            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-81            3-19-1998   TSO Table III
98-93            3-19-1998   TSO Table X
98-106(a)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-106(b)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-106(c)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(a)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(b)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(c)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(d)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(e)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(f)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-107(g)        4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-109           4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-112           4-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-131           5-21-1998   TSO Table III
98-132           5-21-1998   TSO Table III
98-133           5-21-1998   TSO Table III
98-134           5-21-1998   TSO Table III
98-162           6-18-1998   TSO Table III
98-163           6-18-1998   TSO Table III
98-164           6-18-1998   TSO Table III
98-165           6-18-1998   TSO Table III
98-167           6-18-1998   TSO Table VII
98-173           6-18-1998   TSO Table III
98-192           7-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-193           7-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-194           7-16-1998   TSO Table III
98-214           8-20-1998   TSO Table X
98-218           8-20-1998   TSO Table III
98-219           8-20-1998   TSO Table III
98-220           8-20-1998   TSO Table III
98-221           8-20-1998   TSO Table III
98-234           9-17-1998   TSO Table III
98-235           9-17-1998   TSO Table III
98-241           9-17-1998   TSO Table III
98-242           9-17-1998   Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-244           9-17-1998   Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-245           9-17-1998   Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-278           10-15-1998  TSO Table III
98-279           10-15-1998  TSO Table III
98-294           10-15-1998  TSO Table III
98-297           10-15-1998  TSO Table III
98-335           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-336           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-337           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-338           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-340           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-341           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-342           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-343           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-345           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-347           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-348           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-349           11-19-1998  Ch. 72, Sch. II
98-350           11-19-1998  TSO Table III
98-355           11-19-1998  TSO Table III
98-356           11-19-1998  TSO Table III
98-358           11-19-1998  TSO Table III
98-363           11-19-1998  TSO Table X
98-365           11-19-1998  TSO Table X
98-378           12-17-1998  TSO Table X
98-379           12-17-1998  TSO Table VII
98-381           1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-4             1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-10            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-11            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-12            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-13            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-14            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-15            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-16            1-21-1999   TSO Table III
99-20            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-21            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-22            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-23            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-24            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-25            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-26            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-27            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-28            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-29            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-30            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-31            1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-105           1-21-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-52            2-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-53            2-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-56            2-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-60            2-18-1999   TSO Table VII
                             90.01 -
                             90.04,
                             90.06 -
                             90.08,
                             90.12,
99-61            2-18-1999   90.14,
                             90.15,
                             90.17 -
                             90.23,
                             90.25,
                             90.99
99-87            3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-94            3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-95            3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-96            3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-97            3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-98            3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-104           3-18-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-106           3-18-1999   Ch. 73, Sch. I
99-111           3-18-1999   TSO Table VII
99-113           3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-116           3-18-1999   74.99
99-121A          3-18-1999   TSO Table IX
99-127           3-18-1999   TSO Table III
99-135           4-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-136           4-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-137           4-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-138           4-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-139           4-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-143           4-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-146           4-15-1999   TSO Table X
99-151           4-15-1999   TSO Table X
99-145           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-160           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-162           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-163           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-164           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-169           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-171           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-172           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-173           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-174           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-175           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-176           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-178           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-180           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-182           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-192           5-20-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-193           5-20-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-194           5-20-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-195           5-20-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-196           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-197           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-198           5-20-1999   TSO Table III
99-202           5-20-1999   TSO Table X
99-204           5-20-1999   TSO Table X
99-206           5-20-1999   TSO Table X
99-209           5-20-1999   TSO Table X
                             93.001—
                             93.009,
                             93.021—
                             93.023,
                             93.025,
                             93.026,
                             93.029,
99-210           5-20-1999   93.040—
                             93.049,
                             93.060—
                             93.065,
                             93.080—
                             93.087,
                             93.100—
                             93.108,
                             93.999
99-212           5-20-1999   TSO Table IX
99-215           5-20-1999   TSO Table X
99-217           5-20-1999   TSO Table XII
99-218           6-17-1999   TSO Table X
99-222           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-228           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-229           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-230           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-231           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-232           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-233           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-234           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-235           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-237           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-248           6-17-1999   TSO Table X
99-252           6-17-1999   TSO Table X
99-253           6-17-1999   TSO Table III
99-254           6-17-1999   TSO Table X
99-256           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-257           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-258           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-259           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-260           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-261           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-262           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-263           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-264           6-17-1999   TSO Table VI
99-267           7-15-1999   TSO Table X
99-271           7-15-1999   TSO Table XII
99-275           7-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-277           7-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-279           7-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-281           7-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-282           7-15-1999   TSO Table III
99-288           7-15-1999   TSO Table X
99-291           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-297           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-300           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-302           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-303           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-304           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-306           8-19-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-307           8-19-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-308           8-19-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-309           8-19-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-310           8-19-1999   Ch. 72, Sch. II
99-312           8-19-1999   TSO Table X
99-314           8-19-1999   TSO Table X
99-316           8-19-1999   TSO Table X
99-317           8-19-1999   TSO Table X
99-318           8-19-1999   TSO Table X
99-319           8-19-1999   TSO Table X
                             119.001—
                             119.005,
                             119.020,
                             119.021,
                             119.035—
                             119.039,
                             119.050—
                             119.056,
                             119.070—
                             119.073,
99-320           8-19-1999   119.085—
                             119.088,
                             119.100—
                             119.112,
                             119.125—
                             119.128,
                             119.140,
                             119.141,
                             119.155,
                             119.156,
                             119.999
99-321           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-322           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-325           8-19-1999   TSO Table IX
99-327           8-19-1999   TSO Table III
99-324           9-16-1999   TSO Table IX
99-331           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-341           9-16-1999   TSO Table X
99-345           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-347           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-349           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-351           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-353           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-354           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-355           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-358           9-16-1999   TSO Table X
99-359A          9-16-1999   TSO Table XII
99-360           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-361           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-362           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-363           9-16-1999   TSO Table III
99-365           9-16-1999   TSO Table IX
99-367           9-16-1999   TSO Table VII
99-324           10-21-1999  TSO Table IX
99-375           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-376           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-379           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-380           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-383           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-384           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-386           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-387           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-394           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-395           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-396           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-397           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-398           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-399           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-400           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-401           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-403           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-405           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-408           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-411           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-413           10-21-1999  TSO Table X
99-415           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-416           10-21-1999  TSO Table III
99-419           10-21-1999  TSO Table IX
99-426           11-18-1999  TSO Table X
99-429           11-18-1999  TSO Table X
99-433           11-18-1999  TSO Table X
99-434           11-18-1999  TSO Table X
99-441           11-18-1999  TSO Table X
99-443           11-18-1999  TSO Table X
99-453           11-18-1999  TSO Table III
99-455           11-18-1999  TSO Table IX
99-456           11-18-1999  TSO Table IX
99-462           11-18-1999  TSO Table III
99-469           12-16-1999  TSO Table III
99-472           12-16-1999  TSO Table III
99-474           12-16-1999  TSO Table VII
99-475           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-476           12-16-1999  TSO Table XII
99-478           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-480           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-484           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-486           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-487           12-16-1999  TSO Table III
99-488           12-16-1999  TSO Table III
99-489           12-16-1999  TSO Table III
99-490           12-16-1999  TSO Table III
99-493           12-16-1999  TSO Table IX
99-498           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-499           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
99-500           12-16-1999  TSO Table X
00-01            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-02            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-10            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-15            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-17            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-30            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-31            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-32            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-33            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-34            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-35            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-36            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-37            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-38            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-40            1-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-41            1-20-2000   Ch. 72, Sch. II
00-43            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-45            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-47            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-49            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-51            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-53            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-57            1-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-70            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-71            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-72            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-73            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-74            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-75            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-76            2-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-79            2-17-2000   TSO Table X
00-92            2-17-2000   TSO Table IX
00-95            2-17-2000   TSO Table X
00-100           3-16-2000   TSO Table X
00-101           3-16-2000   TSO Table III
00-103           3-16-2000   TSO Table X
00-114           3-16-2000   TSO Table VII
00-117           3-16-2000   Ch. 72, Sch. II
00-118           3-16-2000   TSO Table X
00-122           3-16-2000   TSO Table X
00-125           3-16-2000   TSO Table X
00-126           3-16-2000   TSO Table X
00-129           3-16-2000   TSO Table XII
00-131           3-16-2000   TSO Table IX
                             110.003,
00-133           3-16-2000   110.095,
                             110.099
00-134           3-16-2000   TSO Table III
00-135           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-139           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-141           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-142           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-143           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-147           4-20-2000   40.16
00-148           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-151           4-20-2000   TSO Table VII
00-153           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-155           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-157           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-158           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-159           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-160           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-161           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-162           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-163           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-164           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-165           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-166           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-167           4-20-2000   Ch. 72, Sch. II
00-168           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-169           4-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-171           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-173           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-178           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-179           4-20-2000   32.014
00-181           4-20-2000   TSO Table IX
00-182           4-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-185           4-20-2000   TSO Table VI
00-186           5-18-2000   TSO Table X
00-191           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-192           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-196           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-197           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-198           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-199           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-200           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-202           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-204           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-205           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-206           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-207           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-209           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-211           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-213           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-215           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-217           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-219           5-18-2000   Ch. 72, Sch. II
00-224           5-18-2000   TSO Table X
00-225           5-18-2000   Ch. 72, Sch. I
00-227           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-228           5-18-2000   TSO Table III
00-231           5-18-2000   130.15—
                             130.21, 130.99
00-193           6-15-2000   TSO Table III
00-248           6-15-2000   TSO Table VII
00-252           6-15-2000   TSO Table X
00-253           6-15-2000   TSO Table X
00-254           6-15-2000   TSO Table III
00-258           6-15-2000   TSO Table X
00-259           6-15-2000   TSO Table IX
00-266           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-270           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-271           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-272           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-273           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-274           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-275           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-277           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-279           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-280           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-282           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-284           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-285           7-20-2000   TSO Table III
00-286           7-20-2000   Ch. 72, Sch. II
00-301           7-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-302           7-20-2000   TSO Table X
00-307           8-3-2000    TSO Table V
00-317           8-17-2000   TSO Table IX
00-319           8-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-322           8-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-324           8-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-325           8-17-2000   TSO Table X
00-327           8-17-2000   TSO Table X
00-328           8-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-329           8-17-2000   TSO Table III
00-333           8-17-2000   TSO Table X
00-335           8-17-2000   TSO Table X
00-330           9-21-2000   TSO Table X
00-342           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-344           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-346           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-347           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-348           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-349           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-350           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-351           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-352           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-354           9-21-2000   TSO Table X
00-355           9-21-2000   TSO Table VII
00-360           9-21-2000   TSO Table X
00-363           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-367           9-21-2000   TSO Table X
00-369           9-21-2000   TSO Table IX
00-370           9-21-2000   TSO Table X
00-373           9-21-2000   TSO Table X
00-377           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-379           9-21-2000   TSO Table III
00-369           10-19-2000  TSO Table IX
00-378           10-19-2000  115.02
00-385           10-19-2000  TSO Table III
00-387           10-19-2000  TSO Table III
00-393           10-19-2000  TSO Table III
00-399           10-19-2000  TSO Table III
00-401           10-19-2000  TSO Table III
00-402           10-19-2000  Ch. 73, Sch. I
00-410           10-19-2000  TSO Table X
00-414           10-19-2000  TSO Table X
00-417           10-19-2000  113.02
00-418           10-19-2000  TSO Table III
00-420           10-19-2000  TSO Table XII
                             54.01—
00-398           11-16-2000  54.05,
                             54.99
00-426           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-431           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-432           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-433           11-16-2000  TSO Table III
00-439           11-16-2000  TSO Table III
00-446           11-16-2000  TSO Table III
00-458           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-460           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-462           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-465           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-466           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-469           11-16-2000  93.023,
                             93.026
00-470           11-16-2000  TSO Table III
00-474           11-16-2000  TSO Table XII
00-478           11-16-2000  TSO Table X
00-486           12-21-2000  TSO Table III
00-487           12-21-2000  TSO Table IX
00-490           12-21-2000  TSO Table III
00-500           12-21-2000  TSO Table III
00-501           12-21-2000  TSO Table VII
01-04            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-05            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-7             1-18-2001   TSO Table IX
01-17            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-18            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-19            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-20            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-21            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-22            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-23            1-18-2001   TSO Table III
01-29            1-18-2001   TSO Table X
01-15            2-15-2001   TSO Table X
01-38            2-15-2001   TSO Table IX
01-42            2-15-2001   TSO Table IX
01-44            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-45            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-46            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-47            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-49            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-53            2-15-2001   TSO Table X
01-55            2-15-2001   TSO Table X
01-58            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-60            2-15-2001   TSO Table III
-                3-15-2001   TSO Table XVI
01-66            3-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-67            3-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-74            3-15-2001   TSO Table V
01-75            3-15-2001   TSO Table III
01-77            3-15-2001   TSO Table VII
01-81            3-15-2001   TSO Table X
01-98            4-19-2001   TSO Table III,
                             TSO Table X
01-105           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-106           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-107           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-108           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-109           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-110           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-111           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-112           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-113           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-114           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-115           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-116           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-117           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-118           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-120           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-121           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-122           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-123           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-124           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-125           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-127           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-129           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-131           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-133           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-135           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-137           4-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-149           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-150           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-154           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-156           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-157           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-160           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-164           4-19-2001   36.075—
                             36.090
01-165           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-168           4-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-171           4-19-2001   TSO Table XII
01-155           5-17-2001   TSO Table VII
01-176           5-17-2001   TSO Table XVII
01-177           5-17-2001   TSO Table XVII
01-181           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-184           5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-185           5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-186           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-188           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-190           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-191           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-192           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-193           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-194           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-196           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-198           5-17-2001   TSO Table III
01-200           5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-202           5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-203           5-17-2001   Ch. 72, Sch. II
01-204           5-17-2001   Ch. 72, Sch. II
01-205           5-17-2001   Ch. 72, Sch. II
01-206           5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-211A          5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-211B          5-17-2001   TSO Table X
01-213           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-217           6-21-2001   TSO Table XVI
01-227           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-230           6-21-2001   50.01
01-232           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-233           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-235           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-237           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-239           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-240           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-243           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-245           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-247           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-249           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-251           6-21-2001   TSO Table X
01-252           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-254           6-21-2001   Ch. 72, Sch. II
01-255           6-21-2001   Ch. 72, Sch. II
01-257           6-21-2001   TSO Table V
01-258           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-259           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-261           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-263           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-265           6-21-2001   TSO Table III
01-267           6-21-2001   36.032
01-268           6-21-2001   TSO Table IX
01-272A          6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-273           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-274           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-275           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-276           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-277           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-278           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-279           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-280           6-21-2001   TSO Table VI
01-282           7-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-283           7-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-288           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-291           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-293           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-295           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-297           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-300           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-301           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-302           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-303           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-304           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-305           7-19-2001   TSO Table X
01-306           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-308           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-313           7-19-2001   TSO Table VI
01-314           7-19-2001   TSO Table VI
01-316           7-19-2001   TSO Table III
01-247C          8-16-2001   TSO Table XII
01-260           8-16-2001   TSO Table X
01-318           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-319           8-16-2001   TSO Table XVI
01-321           8-16-2001   TSO Table XVI
01-323           8-16-2001   158.02
01-326           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-331           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-332           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-334           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-338           8-16-2001   TSO Table II
01-339           8-16-2001   90.14
01-341           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-345           8-16-2001   TSO Table III
01-346A          8-16-2001   TSO Table XII
01-346B          8-16-2001   TSO Table XII
01-346C          8-16-2001   TSO Table XII
01-347A          8-16-2001   TSO Table XII
01-347B          8-16-2001   TSO Table XII
01-348           8-16-2001   TSO Table IX
01-349           8-16-2001   TSO Table IX
01-364           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-365           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-367           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-369           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-370           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-371           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-374           9-20-2001   TSO Table VII
01-375           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-377           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-379           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-381           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-384           9-20-2001   TSO Table IX
01-385           9-20-2001   TSO Table X
01-386           9-20-2001   TSO Table X
01-389           9-20-2001   TSO Table X
01-390           9-20-2001   TSO Table XII
01-391           9-20-2001   TSO Table III
01-394           10-18-2001  TSO Table XVII
01-398           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-405           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-409           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-413           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-414           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-415           10-18-2001  TSO Table X
01-417           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-419           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-422           10-18-2001  TSO Table X
01-424           10-18-2001  TSO Table X
01-425           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-427           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-428           10-18-2001  TSO Table X
01-433           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-435           10-18-2001  TSO Table X
01-439           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-440           10-18-2001  TSO Table III
01-436           11-15-2001  TSO Table XII
01-441           11-15-2001  TSO Table XVII
01-451           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-452           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-453           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-454           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-455           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-456           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-463           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-464           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-468           11-15-2001  TSO Table X
01-470           11-15-2001  34.113
01-471           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-473           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-475           11-15-2001  50.01
01-477           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-478           11-15-2001  TSO Table X
01-479           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-482           11-15-2001  TSO Table X
01-486           11-15-2001  36.023
01-487           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-488           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-489           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-490           11-15-2001  TSO Table III
01-491           11-15-2001  TSO Table IX
01-492           11-15-2001  TSO Table IX
01-496           11-15-2001  TSO Table XII
01-450           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-499           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-501           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-503           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-504           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-510           12-20-2001  TSO Table X
01-517           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-519           12-20-2001  TSO Table X
01-520           12-20-2001  TSO Table X
01-521           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-531           12-20-2001  70.12,
                             70.99
01-532           12-20-2001  TSO Table X
01-533           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-535           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-536           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-537           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-539           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-541           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-543           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-545           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-547           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-549           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-550           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-553           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-555           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-557           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-560           12-20-2001  TSO Table X
01-561           12-20-2001  TSO Table X
01-562           12-20-2001  TSO Table VII
01-568           12-20-2001  TSO Table III
01-569           12-20-2001  TSO Table IX
01-570           12-20-2001  TSO Table IX
02-01            1-17-2002   TSO Table III
02-04            1-17-2002   TSO Table III
02-07            1-17-2002   TSO Table III
02-09            1-17-2002   TSO Table XIV
02-12            1-17-2002   TSO Table X
02-13            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-14            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-15            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-16            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-17            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-18            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-19            1-17-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-30            1-17-2002   TSO Table III
02-31            1-17-2002   TSO Table III
02-35            2-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-43            2-21-2002   TSO Table IX
02-50            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-51            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-52            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-53            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-54            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-55            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-56            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-57            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-58            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-59            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-65            2-21-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-66            2-21-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-67            2-21-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-68            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-71            2-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-72            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-73            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-75            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-76            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-77            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-78            2-21-2002   93.023
02-79            2-21-2002   118.03,
                             118.04
02-80            2-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-82            2-21-2002   34.107
02-83            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-84            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-85            2-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-87            2-21-2002   TSO Table X
01-108           3-21-2002   TSO Table VII
02-90            3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-91            3-21-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-99            3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-100           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-102           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-103           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-104           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-105           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-106           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-110           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-113           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-117           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-119           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-121           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-123           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-124           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-125           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-126           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-127           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-128           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-129           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-130           3-21-2002   TSO Table X
02-131           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-133           3-21-2002   TSO Table III
02-139           4-18-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-140           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-149           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-154           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-155           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-157           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-159           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-160           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-161           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-162           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-163           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-164           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-165           4-18-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-166           4-18-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-167           4-18-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-171           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-173           4-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-174           4-18-2002   TSO Table VII
02-180           4-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-188           4-18-2002   TSO Table IX
02-189           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-190           4-18-2002   TSO Table XII
02-191           4-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-192           5-16-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-197           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-198           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-199           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-208           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-209           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-211           5-16-2002   TSO Table X
02-212           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-214           5-16-2002   TSO Table X
02-215           5-16-2002   TSO Table X
02-216           5-16-2002   TSO Table X
02-217           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-222           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-224           5-16-2002   TSO Table X
02-226           5-16-2002   TSO Table IX
02-227           5-16-2002   TSO Table X
02-228           5-16-2002   TSO Table III
02-230           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-241           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-242           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-249           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-250           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-251           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-252           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-254           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-255           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-256           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-257           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-258           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-259           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-260           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-262           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-267           6-20-2002   TSO Table X
02-268           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-269           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-271           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-273           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-277           6-20-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-278           6-20-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-279           6-20-2002   Ch. 72, Sch. II
02-280           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-283           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-285           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-287           6-20-2002   TSO Table X
02-288           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-289           6-20-2002   70.12,
                             70.99
02-291           6-20-2002   TSO Table III
02-292           6-20-2002   TSO Table X
02-295           6-20-2002   TSO Table X
02-300A          6-20-2002   TSO Table VI
02-300B          6-20-2002   TSO Table VI
02-263           7-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-308           7-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-314           7-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-317           7-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-319           7-18-2002   TSO Table III
02-322           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-325           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-330           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-332           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-335           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-336           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-337           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-338           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-339           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-340           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-341           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-342           7-18-2002   TSO Table X
02-346           8-15-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-347           8-15-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-348           8-15-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-349           8-15-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-350           8-15-2002   TSO Table XVI
02-355           8-15-2002   TSO Table III
02-356           8-15-2002   TSO Table III
02-368           8-15-2002   TSO Table III
02-370           8-15-2002   TSO Table III
02-372           8-15-2002   TSO Table X
02-373           8-15-2002   TSO Table X
02-375           8-15-2002   TSO Table X
02-377           8-15-2002   TSO Table X
02-380           8-15-2002   TSO Table X
02-381           8-15-2002   TSO Table VI
02-382           8-15-2002   TSO Table X
02-385           9-19-2002   TSO Table V
02-399           9-19-2002   TSO Table III
02-402           9-19-2002   TSO Table III
02-403           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-404           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-405           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-406           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-407           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-408           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-409           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-410           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-413           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-415           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-417           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-428           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-430           9-19-2002   110.020,
                             110.021
02-433           9-19-2002   TSO Table X
02-434           9-19-2002   TSO Table IX
02-440           10-17-2002  TSO Table III
                             55.001—
                             55.005,
                             55.020—
                             55.024,
                             55.035—
                             55.047,
                             55.060—
                             55.066,
                             55.080—
                             55.085,
                             55.100—
                             55.105,
02-441           10-17-2002  55.120—
                             55.128,
                             55.140—
                             55.147,
                             55.160—
                             55.167,
                             55.180—
                             55.189,
                             55.200—
                             55.203,
                             55.215,
                             55.230—
                             55.232,
                             55.999
02-460           10-17-2002  TSO Table III
02-461           10-17-2002  TSO Table III
02-462           10-17-2002  TSO Table III
02-463           10-17-2002  TSO Table III
02-471           10-17-2002  TSO Table X
02-472           10-17-2002  TSO Table X
02-474           10-17-2002  TSO Table X
02-477           10-17-2002  TSO Table X
02-478           10-17-2002  TSO Table X
02-482           10-17-2002  TSO Table X
02-484           10-17-2002  TSO Table IX
02-485           10-17-2002  TSO Table IX
02-486           10-17-2002  TSO Table IX
02-487           10-17-2002  TSO Table IX
02-488           10-17-2002  TSO Table III
02-494           11-21-2002  TSO Table XVII
                             55.001—
                             55.005,
                             55.020—
                             55.024,
                             55.035—
                             55.047,
                             55.060—
                             55.066,
                             55.080—
                             55.085,
                             55.100—
                             55.105,
02-495           11-21-2002  55.120—
                             55.128,
                             55.140—
                             55.147,
                             55.160—
                             55.167,
                             55.180—
                             55.189,
                             55.200—
                             55.203,
                             55.215,
                             55.230—
                             55.232,
                             55.999
02-511           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-512           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-513           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-514           11-21-2002  TSO Table X
02-517           11-21-2002  TSO Table X
02-518           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-524           11-21-2002  TSO Table XII
02-526           11-21-2002  TSO Table XII
02-532           11-21-2002  TSO Table X
02-533           11-21-2002  TSO Table X
02-535           11-21-2002  TSO Table X
02-547           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-548           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-550           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
02-553           11-21-2002  TSO Table III
                             30.01—
02-555           12-2-2002   30.04,
                             30.06—
                             30.08
03-05            1-16-2003   TSO Table III
03-07            1-16-2003   TSO Table III
03-19            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-23            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-24            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-25            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-26            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-27            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-28            1-16-2003   TSO Table X
03-29            1-16-2003   TSO Table XIV
03-46            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-47            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-52            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-53            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-54            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-55            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-56            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-57            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-58            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-59            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-60            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-61            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-62            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-63            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-64            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-71            2-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-72            2-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-74            2-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-75            2-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-77            2-20-2003   Ch. 72, Sch. II
03-79            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-80            2-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-84            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-86            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-87            2-20-2003   TSO Table XII
03-89            2-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-90            2-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-93a           2-20-2003   TSO Table IX
03-103           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-104           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-105           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-106           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-107           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-108           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-109           3-20-2003   TSO Table III
03-113           3-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-114           3-20-2003   TSO Table IX
03-134           3-20-2003   TSO Table XII
03-135           3-20-2003   TSO Table X
03-138           4-17-2003   157.15—
                             157.18
03-154           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-155           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-156           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-157           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-159           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-161           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-163           4-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-166           4-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-167           4-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-169           4-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-185           4-17-2003   TSO Table IX
03-186           4-17-2003   TSO Table IX
03-187           4-17-2003   30.03
03-190           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-191           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-192           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-193           4-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-200           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-201           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-202           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-203           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-208           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-209           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-221           5-15-2003   TSO Table X
03-223           5-15-2003   TSO Table X
03-228           5-15-2003   TSO Table X
03-237           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-238           5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-239a          5-15-2003   TSO Table III
03-240           5-15-2003   TSO Table V
03-202           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-241           6-19-2003   TSO Table XVII
03-242           6-19-2003   TSO Table XVI
03-254           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-256           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-257           6-19-2003   TSO Table XIV
03-258           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-259           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-260           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-262           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-263           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-264           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-265           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-266           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-267           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-268           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-269           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-270           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-272           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-273           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-274           6-19-2003   Ch. 72, Sch. II
03-275           6-19-2003   Ch. 72, Sch. II
03-276           6-19-2003   Ch. 72, Sch. II
03-277           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-281           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-284           6-19-2003   TSO Table XII
03-285           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-286           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-287           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-288           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-289           6-19-2003   36.055—
                             36.060
03-290A          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290B          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290C          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290D          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290E          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290F          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290G          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-290H          6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-291           6-19-2003   TSO Table VI
03-292           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-294           6-19-2003   TSO Table III
03-295           6-19-2003   34.140
                             110.003,
                             110.016—
                             110.024,
                             110.026,
                             110.055,
                             110.072,
03-296           6-19-2003   110.097,
                             110.101,
                             110.120,
                             110.123,
                             110.140,
                             110.141,
                             110.155—
                             110.157
271-01           6-19-2003   TSO Table X
03-297           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-307           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-308           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-309           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-310           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-311           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-313           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-314           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-316           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-318           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-320           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-321           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-322           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-323           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-324           7-17-2003   TSO Table IX
03-325           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-326           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-328           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-330           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-332           7-17-2003   TSO Table X
03-334           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-335           7-17-2003   TSO Table IX
03-337           7-17-2003   TSO Table III
03-340           7-17-2003   TSO Table VI
03-341           7-17-2003   TSO Table VI
03-342           7-17-2003   TSO Table VI
03-343           7-17-2003   TSO Table VI
03-344           7-17-2003   TSO Table VI
03-349           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-350           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-351           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-353           8-21-2003   TSO Table XIV
03-362           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-363           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-364           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-365           8-21-2003   TSO Table X
03-366           8-21-2003   TSO Table X
03-367           8-21-2003   TSO Table X
03-369           8-21-2003   TSO Table X
03-371           8-21-2003   TSO Table X
03-372           8-21-2003   Ch. 72, Sch. I
03-373           8-21-2003   TSO Table X
03-374           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-377           8-21-2003   TSO Table IX
03-383           8-21-2003   TSO Table III
03-385a          9-18-2003   40.17
03-389           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-396           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-398           9-18-2003   TSO Table XIV
03-399           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-401           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-403           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-405           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-407           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-409           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-411           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-413           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-415           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-417           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-418           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-420           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-421           9-18-2003   TSO Table X
03-422           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-428           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-429           9-18-2003   36.032
03-430           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-432           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-433           9-18-2003   TSO Table III
03-435.5         10-16-2003  TSO Table XVI
03-440           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-441           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-442           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-447           10-16-2003  TSO Table XIV
03-455           10-16-2003  TSO Table X
03-456           10-16-2003  TSO Table XV
03-457           10-16-2003  TSO Table II
03-459           10-16-2003  TSO Table X
03-461           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-466           10-16-2003  TSO Table X
03-468           10-16-2003  36.023
03-469           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-470           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-471           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-472           10-16-2003  TSO Table IX
03-473           10-16-2003  TSO Table IX
03-474           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-475           10-16-2003  TSO Table III
03-478           11-20-2003  158.02
03-479           11-20-2003  TSO Table XIV
03-484           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-488           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-489           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-494           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-496           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-503           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-504           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-505           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-506           11-20-2003  TSO Table XIV
03-508           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-511           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-513           11-20-2003  Ch. 72, Sch. II
03-518           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-519           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-521           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-522           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-524           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-525           11-20-2003  33.003
03-530           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-531           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-532           11-20-2003  TSO Table III
03-534           11-20-2003  30.03
03-535           11-20-2003  TSO Table IX
03-536           11-20-2003  TSO Table IX
03-538           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-540           11-20-2003  TSO Table X
03-531           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-533           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-544           12-18-2003  TSO Table XIV
03-545           12-18-2003  TSO Table III
03-547           12-18-2003  TSO Table III
03-549           12-18-2003  TSO Table III
03-555           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-557           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-559           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-561           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-563           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-564           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-565           12-18-2003  TSO Table II
03-566           12-18-2003  TSO Table II
03-567           12-18-2003  TSO Table XV
03-568           12-18-2003  Ch. 72, Sch. II
03-569           12-18-2003  TSO Table V
03-570           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-572           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-579           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-580           12-18-2003  TSO Table X
03-581           12-18-2003  TSO Table III
04-01            1-15-2004   TSO Table XVII
04-02            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-03            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-04            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-10            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-13            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-14            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-15            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-16            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-17            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-18            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-19            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-20            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-21            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-22            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-23            1-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-25            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-29            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-30            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-32            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-33            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-34            1-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-35            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-36            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-37            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-38            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-39            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-40            1-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-50            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-51            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-52            2-19-2004   TSO Table IX
04-53            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-54            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-57            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-58            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-59            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-60            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-61            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-62            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-63            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-64            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-65            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-68            2-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-69            2-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-73            2-19-2004   TSO Table XIII
04-81            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-83            2-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-85            2-19-2004   TSO Table III
                             55.001—
                             55.005,
                             55.020—
                             55.024,
                             55.035—
                             55.047,
                             55.060—
                             55.066,
                             55.080—
                             55.085,
                             55.100—
                             55.105,
04-87            3-17-2004   55.120—
                             55.128,
                             55.140—
                             55.147,
                             55.160—
                             55.167,
                             55.180—
                             55.189,
                             55.200—
                             55.203,
                             55.215,
                             55.230—
                             55.232,
                             55.999
04-98            3-18-2004   TSO Table III
04-99            3-18-2004   TSO Table III
04-100           3-18-2004   TSO Table III
04-101           3-18-2004   TSO Table III
04-104           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-106           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-108           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-109           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-110           3-18-2004   33.123
04-111           3-18-2004   TSO Table III
04-112           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-113           3-18-2004   TSO Table IX
04-114           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-115           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-116           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-117           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-118           3-18-2004   TSO Table III
04-123           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-124           3-18-2004   TSO Table IX
04-126           3-18-2004   TSO Table X
04-133           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-134           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-137           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-138           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-139           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-142           4-15-2004   TSO Table V
04-143           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-145           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-147           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-149           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-151           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-153           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-154           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-156           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-158           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-159           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-166           4-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-167           4-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-170           5-20-2004   TSO Table XVII
04-173           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-174           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-181           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-183           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-184           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-185           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-186           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-187           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-188           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-189           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-191           5-20-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-192           5-20-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-193           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-195           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-197           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-199           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-200           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-201           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-202           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-203           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-205           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-207           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-208           5-20-2004   TSO Table X
04-214           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-215           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-216           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-217           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-218           5-20-2004   TSO Table III
04-232           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-234           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-235           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-237           6-17-2004   TSO Table V
04-238           6-17-2004   TSO Table X
04-246           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-247           6-17-2004   36.024
04-248           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-249           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-251           6-17-2004   157.01
04-252           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-253           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-254           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-255           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-256           6-17-2004   TSO Table III
04-257           6-17-2004   36.032
04-268           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-269           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-271           7-15-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-272           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-274           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-276           7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-277           7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-278           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-279           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-280           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-281           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-282           7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-284           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-286A          7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-286B          7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-287           7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-290           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-291           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-293           7-15-2004   TSO Table III
04-294           7-15-2004   TSO Table IX
04-300           7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-301           7-15-2004   TSO Table X
04-302           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-304           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-316           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-317           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-318           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-319           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-320           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-321           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-322           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-323           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-324           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-325           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-326           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-327           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-328           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-329           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-330           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-331           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-332           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-333           8-19-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-334           8-19-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-335           8-19-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-336           8-19-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. I
04-337           8-19-2004   Ch. 72, Sch. I
04-338           8-19-2004   TSO Table V
04-339           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-340           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-341           8-19-2004   TSO Table V
04-342           8-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-343           8-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-344           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-345           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-346           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-347           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-348           8-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-349           8-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-350           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-351           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-352           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-354           8-19-2004   TSO Table VII
04-358           8-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-361           8-19-2004   TSO Table X
04-362           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-363           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-364           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-365           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-366           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-368           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-369           8-19-2004   TSO Table IX
04-370           8-19-2004   TSO Table IX
04-371           8-19-2004   TSO Table IX
04-372           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-373           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-374           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-375           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-377           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-378           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-380           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-382           8-19-2004   TSO Table XII
04-383           8-19-2004   TSO Table III
04-386           9-16-2004   TSO Table XVII
04-387           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-388           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-389           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-390           9-16-2004   TSO Table XIV
04-398           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-399           9-16-2004   TSO Table X
04-400           9-16-2004   TSO Table X
04-401           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-402           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-403           9-16-2004   TSO Table X
04-404           9-16-2004   TSO Table X
04-405           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-406           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-407           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-408           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-409           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-410           9-16-2004   TSO Table V
04-415           9-16-2004   TSO Table X
04-416           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-418           9-16-2004   TSO Table III
04-421           9-16-2004   158.03
04-355           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-425           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-432           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-433           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-434           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-435           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-446           10-21-2004  TSO Table XIV
04-449           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-450           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-451           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-452           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-453           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-454           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-455           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-456           10-21-2004  TSO Table X,
                             TSO Table XV
04-457           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-458           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-459           10-21-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-460           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-463           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-464           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-465           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-466           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-467           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-468           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-469           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-470           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-471           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-472           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-473           10-21-2004  TSO Table X
04-477           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-478           10-21-2004  TSO Table IX
04-481           10-21-2004  TSO Table III
04-436           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-484           11-18-2004  TSO Table X
04-487           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-488           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-495           11-18-2004  TSO Table XIV
04-499           11-18-2004  TSO Table X
04-500           11-18-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-501           11-18-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-502           11-18-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-503           11-18-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-504           11-18-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-505           11-18-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-509           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-511           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-513           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-514           11-18-2004  TSO Table X
04-516           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-517           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-518           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-519           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-520           11-18-2004  TSO Table III
04-521           11-18-2004  TSO Table X
04-526           12-16-2004  TSO Table XVII
04-527           12-16-2004  TSO Table XVII
04-528           12-16-2004  TSO Table XVI
04-531           12-16-2004  TSO Table X
04-532           12-16-2004  TSO Table XIV
04-538           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-540           12-16-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-541           12-16-2004  Ch. 72, Sch. II
04-542           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-543           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-544           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-545           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-546           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-547           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-548           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-551           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-552           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-553           12-16-2004  TSO Table III
04-554           12-16-2004  TSO Table X
04-556           12-16-2004  TSO Table IX
04-560           12-16-2004  TSO Table X
04-5449          12-16-2004  TSO Table III
05-103           12-16-2004  TSO Table XIV
04-557           1-20-2005   TSO Table X
05-01            1-20-2005   TSO Table XVI
05-04            1-20-2005   TSO Table X
05-09            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-10            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-11            1-20-2005   TSO Table X
05-12            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-13            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-14            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-15            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-16            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-17            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-18            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-19            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-20            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-21            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-22            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-23            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-24            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-25            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-26            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-27            1-20-2005   TSO Table XII
05-28            1-20-2005   TSO Table X
05-29            1-20-2005   TSO Table X
05-30            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-31            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-32            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-33            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-34            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-35            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-36            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-37            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
05-39            1-20-2005   TSO Table VII
05-40            1-20-2005   TSO Table X
05-43            1-20-2005   TSO Table X,
                             TSO Table XII
05-45            1-20-2005   TSO Table III
95-02            1-20-2005   TSO Table XVII
05-47            2-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-48b           2-17-2005   TSO Table IX
05-55            2-17-2005   TSO Table IX
05-56            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-60            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-61            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-62            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-63            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-64            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-65            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-66            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-67            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-68            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-69            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-70            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-71            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-72            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-73            2-17-2005   TSO Table V
05-74            2-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-75            2-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-76            2-17-2005   TSO Table XII
05-77            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-78            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-79            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-80            2-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-82            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-83            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-84            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-85            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-86            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-87            2-17-2005   TSO Table IX
05-88            2-17-2005   TSO Table III,
                             TSO Table XII
05-90            2-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-93            3-17-2005   TSO Table XVI,
                             TSO Table XVII
05-94            3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-98            3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-99            3-17-2005   TSO Table IX
05-100           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-101           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-102           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-104           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-109           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-111           3-17-2005   TSO Table XII
05-112           3-17-2005   TSO Table IX
05-114           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-115           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-116           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-117           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-118           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-119           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-120           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-121           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-122           3-17-2005   TSO Table XII
05-124           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-126           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-129           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-130           3-17-2005   TSO Table III
05-131           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-132           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-133           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-134           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-135           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-136           3-17-2005   TSO Table X
05-139           3-17-2005   TSO Table IX
05-148           4-21-2005   TSO Table IX
05-149           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-150           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-151           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-152           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-153           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-158           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-160           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-161           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-162           4-21-2005   TSO Table V
05-163           4-21-2005   TSO Table V
05-164           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-166           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-167           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-168           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-169           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-170           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-172           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-173           4-21-2005   TSO Table V
05-174           4-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-175           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-176           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-180           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-186           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-187           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-191           4-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-192           5-19-2005   TSO Table XVI
05-195           5-19-2005   TSO Table IX
05-196           5-19-2005   TSO Table IX
05-198           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-201           5-19-2005   TSO Table X
05-202           5-19-2005   TSO Table X
05-203           5-19-2005   TSO Table X
05-206           5-19-2005   TSO Table XIV
05-207           5-19-2005   TSO Table X
05-208           5-19-2005   TSO Table X
05-209           5-19-2005   TSO Table X
05-210           5-19-2005   TSO Table XII
05-211           5-19-2005   TSO Table XII
05-212           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-213           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-214           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-215           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-216           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-217           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-218           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-219           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-220           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-221           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-227           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-228           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-229           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-230           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-231           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-232           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-233           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-234           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-235A          5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-235B          5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-236           5-19-2005   TSO Table III
05-237           6-16-2005   TSO Table XVI
05-241           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-242           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-244           6-16-2005   TSO Table XIV
05-248           6-16-2005   TSO Table X
05-249           6-16-2005   TSO Table X
05-250           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-251           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-252           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-253           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-258           6-16-2005   Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-259           6-16-2005   Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-260           6-16-2005   TSO Table XII
05-261           6-16-2005   TSO Table X
05-262           6-16-2005   TSO Table III,
                             TSO Table X
05-263           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-265           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-266           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-272           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-289           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-291           6-16-2005   36.055
05-293           6-16-2005   TSO Table III
05-294           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-295           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-296           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-297           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-298           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-299           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-300           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-301           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-302           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-303           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-304           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-305           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-306           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-307           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-308           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-309           6-16-2005   TSO Table VI
05-266           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-311           7-21-2005   TSO Table XVII
05-312           7-21-2005   TSO Table XVII
05-313           7-21-2005   TSO Table XVI
05-314           7-21-2005   TSO Table XVI
05-322           7-21-2005   TSO Table XIV
05-326           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-327           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-328           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-329           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-330           7-21-2005   Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-331           7-21-2005   Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-332           7-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-333           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-334           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-335           7-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-336           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-337           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-338           7-21-2005   TSO Table V
05-339           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-340           7-21-2005   51.02—
                             51.04
05-343           7-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-346           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-348           7-21-2005   TSO Table X
05-349           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-526           7-21-2005   TSO Table III
05-351           8-18-2005   TSO Table XVI
05-353           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-354           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-355           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-356           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-357           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-358           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-360           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-361           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-362           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-363           8-18-2005   TSO Table X
05-364           8-18-2005   TSO Table X
05-366           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-367           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-368           8-18-2005   TSO Table X
05-369           8-18-2005   TSO Table XIII
05-371           8-18-2005   TSO Table X
05-372           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-373           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-374           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-375           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-376           8-18-2005   TSO Table X
05-377           8-18-2005   TSO Table X
05-379           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-382           8-18-2005   TSO Table IX
05-383           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-384           8-18-2005   113.05
05-385           8-18-2005   10.20
05-387           8-18-2005   TSO Table III
05-389           8-18-2005   TSO Table IV
05-390           9-15-2005   TSO Table X
05-394           9-15-2005   TSO Table XIV
05-398           9-15-2005   TSO Table X
05-400           9-15-2005   TSO Table III
05-401           9-15-2005   TSO Table III
05-402           9-15-2005   TSO Table III
05-403           9-15-2005   Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-404           9-15-2005   Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-405           9-15-2005   TSO Table III
05-406           9-15-2005   TSO Table X
05-407           9-15-2005   TSO Table III
05-411           9-15-2005   TSO Table X
05-414           9-15-2005   TSO Table IX
05-415           9-15-2005   TSO Table IX
05-417           9-15-2005   TSO Table X
05-452           9-15-2005   TSO Table IX
05-419           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-421           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-422           10-20-2005  TSO Table XVII
05-424           10-20-2005  TSO Table XIV
05-427           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-428           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-433           10-20-2005  TSO Table X
05-434           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-435           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-436           10-20-2005  Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-437           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-438           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-439           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-443           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-444           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-445           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-446           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-450           10-20-2005  114.001,
                             114.002
05-451           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-459           10-20-2005  TSO Table X
05-460           10-20-2005  TSO Table X
05-461           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-463           10-20-2005  TSO Table III
05-462           10-20-2005  TSO Table X
05-464           11-17-2005  TSO Table XVII
05-468           11-17-2005  TSO Table XIV
05-472           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-473           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-474           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-475           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-476           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-478           11-17-2005  TSO Table X
05-480           11-17-2005  Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-481           11-17-2005  Ch. 72, Sch. II
05-482           11-17-2005  TSO Table X
05-484           11-17-2005  TSO Table X
05-485           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-486           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-491           11-17-2005  TSO Table X
05-492           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-493           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-496           11-17-2005  TSO Table III
05-503           11-17-2005  TSO Table X
05-507           12-15-2005  TSO Table XIV
05-513           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-516           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-517           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-518           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-519           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-520           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-525           12-15-2005  TSO Table X
05-530           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-531           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-532           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-533           12-15-2005  TSO Table X
05-534           12-15-2005  TSO Table X
05-535           12-15-2005  TSO Table X
05-536           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-545           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-547           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-548           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-549           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
05-552           12-15-2005  TSO Table III
06-01            1-19-2006   50.01
06-04            1-19-2006   TSO Table III
06-07            1-19-2006   TSO Table III
06-11            1-19-2006   TSO Table XIV
06-13            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-14            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-16            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-17            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-18            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-24            1-19-2006   TSO Table IX
06-25            1-19-2006   TSO Table III
06-27            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-28            1-19-2006   TSO Table III
06-29            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-30            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-31            1-19-2006   TSO Table III
06-32            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-33            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-34            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-35            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-36            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-37            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-38            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-39            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-40            1-19-2006   TSO Table X
06-41            1-19-2006   TSO Table III
06-43            2-16-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-48            2-16-2006   TSO Table IX
06-52            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-53            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-54            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-55            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-56            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-57            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-58            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-59            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-60            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-61            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-62            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-75            2-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-76            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-77            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-78            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-79            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-80            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-81            2-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-83            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-86            2-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-87            2-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-90            2-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-93            3-16-2006   TSO Table XIV
06-94            3-16-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-96            3-16-2006   TSO Table XII
06-97            3-16-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-98            3-16-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-99            3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-100           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-101           3-16-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-104           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-105           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-106           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-107           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-108           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-109           3-16-2006   TSO Table XII
06-110           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-111           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-112           3-16-2006   TSO Table IX
06-113           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-118           3-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-119           3-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-120           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-121           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
                             90.01 -
                             90.04,
                             90.06,
                             90.07,
                             90.08,
06-122           3-16-2006   90.12,
                             90.14,
                             90.15,
                             90.17 -
                             90.23,
                             90.25,
                             90.99
06-126           3-16-2006   TSO Table X
06-129           3-16-2006   TSO Table III
06-132           4-20-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-133           4-20-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-135           4-20-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-139           4-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-140           4-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-150           4-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-152           4-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-155           4-20-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-156           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-157           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-159           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-160           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-161           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-162           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-163           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-165           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-166           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-167           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-168           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-169           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-170           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-171           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-172           4-20-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-173           4-20-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-174           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-175           4-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-176           4-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-178           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-179           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-180           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-181           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-182           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-183           4-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-184           5-18-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-185           5-18-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-193           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-198           5-18-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-200           5-18-2006   TSO Table IV
06-203           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-204           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-205           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-206           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-207           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-208           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-209           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-210           5-18-2006   TSO Table X
06-211           5-18-2006   TSO Table XII
06-212           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-213           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-214           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-221           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-222           5-18-2006   TSO Table X
06-223           5-18-2006   36.041
06-226           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-227           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-228           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-229           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-230           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-231           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-232           5-18-2006   TSO Table IX
06-233           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-236           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-239           5-18-2006   TSO Table XII
06-240           5-18-2006   TSO Table III
06-244           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-245           6-15-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-246           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-247           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-249           6-15-2006   TSO Table XII
06-250           6-15-2006   TSO Table X
06-251           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-252           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-253           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-254           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-255           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-260           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-266           6-15-2006   36.055—
                             36.060
06-268           6-15-2006   TSO Table X
06-269           6-15-2006   TSO Table VI
06-272           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-273           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-274           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-275           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-276           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-277           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-278           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-279           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-280           6-15-2006   TSO Table III
06-286           7-20-2006   40.17
06-287           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-288           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-289           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-290           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-291           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-293           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-304           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-305           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-306           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-307           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-308           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-309           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-311           7-20-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-312           7-20-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-313           7-20-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-316           7-20-2006   TSO Table X
06-317           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-319           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-321           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-322           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-323           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-328           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-330           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-331           7-20-2006   TSO Table III
06-333           8-17-2006   TSO Table XVI
06-337           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-338           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-339           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-340           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-341           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-342           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-343           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-344           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-345           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-346           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-347           8-17-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-348           8-17-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-349           8-17-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-350           8-17-2006   Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-358           8-17-2006   TSO Table III
06-369           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-370           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-371           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-372           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-373           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-374           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-375           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-376           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-377           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-378           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-379           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-380           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-381           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-382           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-383           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-384           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-385           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-386           9-21-2006   Ch. 73, Sch. I
06-388           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-389           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-394           9-21-2006   TSO Table X
06-397           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-398           9-21-2006   TSO Table III
06-412           10-19-2006  TSO Table XVI
06-413           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-414           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-415           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-416           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-417           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-418           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-419           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-420           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-421           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-422           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-423           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-424           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-425           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-426           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-427           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-428           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-429           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-430           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-431           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-432           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-433           10-19-2006  TSO Table X
06-434           10-19-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-435           10-19-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-436           10-19-2006  Ch. 73, Sch. I
06-437           10-19-2006  TSO Table X
06-439           10-19-2006  TSO Table V
06-440           10-19-2006  TSO Table V
06-441           10-19-2006  TSO Table X
06-442           10-19-2006  TSO Table X
06-443           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-444           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-446           10-19-2006  TSO Table III
06-448           10-19-2006  36.024
06-452           10-19-2006  TSO Table IX
06-453           10-19-2006  TSO Table IX
06-465           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-466           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-467           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-471           11-16-2006  TSO Table X
06-474           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-475           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-479           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-480           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-481           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-482           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-483           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-484           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-488           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-489           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-490           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-491           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-492           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-493           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-497           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-498           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-499           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-500           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-501           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-502           11-16-2006  TSO Table III
06-503           12-4-2006   30.01—
                             30.08
06-504           12-21-2006  TSO Table XVII
06-505           12-21-2006  TSO Table XVII
06-512           12-21-2006  TSO Table X
06-513           12-21-2006  TSO Table III
06-515           12-21-2006  TSO Table X
06-520           12-21-2006  TSO Table III
06-522           12-21-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-524           12-21-2006  TSO Table XVI
06-527           12-21-2006  TSO Table X
06-529           12-21-2006  TSO Table III
06-531           12-21-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-532           12-21-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-533           12-21-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-534           12-21-2006  Ch. 72, Sch. II
06-538           12-21-2006  TSO Table III
06-541           12-21-2006  TSO Table III
06-545           12-21-2006  TSO Table III
07-09            1-18-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-10            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-11            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-12            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-13            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-14            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-15            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-16            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-17            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-19            1-18-2007   TSO Table X
07-21            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-24            1-18-2007   TSO Table X
07-30            1-18-2007   TSO Table IX
07-34            1-18-2007   TSO Table X
07-35            1-18-2007   TSO Table III
07-40            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-53            2-15-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-55            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-56            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-57            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-58            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-59            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-60            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-61            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-66            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-67            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-68            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-69            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-70            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-71            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-72            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-73            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-74            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-75            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-76            2-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-77            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-81            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-82            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-85            2-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-87            3-15-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-88            3-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-95            3-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-96            3-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-97            3-15-2007   TSO Table III
07-100           3-15-2007   TSO Table XII
07-101           3-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-102           3-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-107           3-15-2007   TSO Table IX
07-108           3-15-2007   39.04,
                             39.99
07-115           3-15-2007   TSO Table IX
07-116           3-15-2007   TSO Table X
07-122           4-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-128           4-19-2007   40.17
07-133           4-19-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-134           4-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-136           4-19-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-137           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-140           4-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-146           4-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-147           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-151           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-152           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-153           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-154           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-155           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-156           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-157           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-169           4-19-2007   TSO Table XII
07-170           4-19-2007   TSO Table XII
07-171           4-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-173           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-188           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-189           4-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-195           5-17-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-196           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-197           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-198           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-201           5-17-2007   TSO Table XII
07-202           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-203           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-204           5-17-2007   Ch. 72, Sch. II
07-205           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-206           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-207           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-209           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-210           5-17-2007   TSO Table III
07-217           5-17-2007   TSO Table X
07-218           5-17-2007   TSO Table X
07-224           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-225           6-21-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-226           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-227           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-228           6-21-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-229           6-21-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-230           6-21-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-232           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-233           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-235           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-236           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-237           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-238           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-239           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-240           6-21-2007   TSO Table XII
07-241           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-242           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-244           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-245           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-247           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-248           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-249           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-250           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-257           6-21-2007   36.055
07-258           6-21-2007   TSO Table VI
07-259           6-21-2007   TSO Table VI
07-260           6-21-2007   TSO Table VI
07-261           6-21-2007   TSO Table VI
07-262           6-21-2007   TSO Table VI
07-263           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-264           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-265           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-266           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-267           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-268           6-21-2007   TSO Table III
07-269           6-21-2007   TSO Table IX
07-270           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-271           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-272           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-273           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-274           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-275           6-21-2007   TSO Table X
07-280           7-19-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-281           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-283           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-284           7-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-285           7-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-286           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-287           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-288           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-289           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-290           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-292           7-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-296           7-19-2007   39.03
07-301           7-19-2007   TSO Table III
07-302           7-19-2007   TSO Table X
07-304           8-16-2007   TSO Table XII
07-308           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-309           8-16-2007   TSO Table X
07-310           8-16-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-311           8-16-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-312           8-16-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-313           8-16-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-315           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-316           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-317           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-318           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-319           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-320           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-321           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-322           8-16-2007   Ch. 72, Sch. II
07-323           8-16-2007   TSO Table X
07-324           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-325           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-326           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-327           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-328           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-329           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-330           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-331           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-332           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-334           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-337           8-16-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-338           8-16-2007   TSO Table X
07-348           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-349           8-16-2007   TSO Table X
07-350           8-16-2007   TSO Table III
07-351           8-16-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-352           9-20-2007   158.02
07-353           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-354           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-355           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-356           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-357           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-358           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-359           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVII
07-360           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-362           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-367           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-368           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-369           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-370           9-20-2007   TSO Table XVI
07-373           9-20-2007   Ch. 72, Sch. II
07-374           9-20-2007   TSO Table X
07-376           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-377           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-379           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-380           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-381           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-382           9-20-2007   TSO Table X
07-384           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-387           9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-388           9-20-2007   TSO Table IX
07-389           9-20-2007   TSO Table IX
07-390-A         9-20-2007   TSO Table III
07-415           10-8-2007   34.107
07-392           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-393           10-18-2007  TSO Table XVII
07-394           10-18-2007  TSO Table XVI
07-398           10-18-2007  TSO Table X
07-399           10-18-2007  TSO Table X
07-400           10-18-2007  TSO Table XVI
07-401           10-18-2007  TSO Table XVI
07-403           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-404           10-18-2007  Ch. 72, Sch. II
07-405           10-18-2007  Ch. 72, Sch. II
07-410           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-411           10-18-2007  TSO Table X
                             51.01—
07-412           10-18-2007  51.13,
                             51.99
07-415           10-18-2007  34.108
07-416           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-417           10-18-2007  36.042
07-420           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-422           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-423           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-424           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-425           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-426           10-18-2007  TSO Table III
07-430           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-433           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-438           11-15-2007  TSO Table XVI
07-439           11-15-2007  TSO Table XVI
07-440           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-441           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-442           11-15-2007  TSO Table XVI
07-443           11-15-2007  TSO Table XII
07-445           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-446           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-447           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-450           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-451           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-452           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-453           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-454           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-455           11-15-2007  Ch. 72, Sch. II
07-456           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-457           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-458           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-459           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-460           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-461           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-462           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-463           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-465           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-466           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-467           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-469           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-470           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-473           11-15-2007  TSO Table X
07-475           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-476           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-477           11-15-2007  40.18
07-480           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-481           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-482           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-483           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-484           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-485           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-486           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-487           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-488           11-15-2007  TSO Table XII
07-490           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-491           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-492           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-493           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-494           11-15-2007  TSO Table III
07-496           12-20-2007  TSO Table III
07-502           12-20-2007  TSO Table III
07-503           12-20-2007  TSO Table III
07-505           12-20-2007  TSO Table III
07-506           12-20-2007  TSO Table III
07-507           12-20-2007  TSO Table III
07-508           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-509           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-510           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-511           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-512           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-513           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-514           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-515           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-516           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-517           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-518           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-519           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-520           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
07-524           12-20-2007  TSO Table X
08-01            1-17-2008   TSO Table XVII
08-02            1-17-2008   TSO Table XVII
08-14            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-15            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-16            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-18            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-19            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-20            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-21            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-22            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-23            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-24            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-25            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-26            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-27            1-17-2008   TSO Table XII
08-28            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-29            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-30            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-31            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-32            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-33            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-34            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-35            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-37            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-38            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-40            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-41            1-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-45            2-21-2008   TSO Table XVII
08-47            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-50            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-53            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-59            2-21-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-60            2-21-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-61            2-21-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-62            2-21-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-63            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-67            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-68            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-70            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-72            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-75            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-76            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-77            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-78            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-79            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-80            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-81            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-82            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-86            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-87            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-96            2-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-97            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-98            2-21-2008   TSO Table III
03-133           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-101           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-104           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-105           3-20-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-106           3-20-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-107           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-108           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-109           3-20-2008   TSO Table X
08-110           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-111           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-112           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-113           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-115           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-116           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-117           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-118           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-127           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-128           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-129           3-20-2008   36.043
08-130           3-20-2008   36.027
08-135           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-136           3-20-2008   TSO Table III
08-137           3-20-2008   TSO Table IX
08-139           4-17-2008   TSO Table XVII
08-146           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-157           4-17-2008   TSO Table X
08-159           4-17-2008   Ch. 72, Sch. II
08-160           4-17-2008   Ch. 72, Sch. II
08-161           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-162           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-163           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-164           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-165           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-166           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-168           4-17-2008   Ch. 72, Sch. II
08-172           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-173           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-174           4-17-2008   TSO Table IX
08-175           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-187           4-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-190           4-17-2008   TSO Table X
08-194           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-196           5-15-2008   37.02
08-200           5-15-2008   70.12,
                             70.99
08-202           5-15-2008   TSO Table X
08-203           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-204           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-207           5-15-2008   TSO Table XII
08-208           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-209           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-213           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-214           5-15-2008   TSO Table X
08-216           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-217           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-219           5-15-2008   40.19
08-220           5-15-2008   40.21
08-223           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-224           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-225           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-226           5-15-2008   TSO Table III
08-230           6-19-2008   TSO Table X
08-231           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-232           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-236           6-19-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-237           6-19-2008   TSO Table XVI
08-238           6-19-2008   TSO Table X
08-240           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-241           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-242           6-19-2008   TSO Table X
08-243           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-245           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-249           6-19-2008   36.055—
                             36.060
08-253           6-19-2008   TSO Table VI
08-254           6-19-2008   TSO Table X
08-255           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-256           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-257           6-19-2008   TSO Table III
08-258           6-19-2008   TSO Table X
08-259           6-19-2008   113.06
08-260           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-271           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-272           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-273           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-276           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-278           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-280           7-17-2008   TSO Table X
08-282           7-17-2008   TSO Table X
08-286           7-17-2008   TSO Table X
08-287           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-288           7-17-2008   TSO Table X
08-294           7-17-2008   TSO Table III
08-298           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-300           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-306           8-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-307           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-308           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-309           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-311           8-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-312           8-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-313           8-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-314           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-316           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-320           8-21-2008   Ch. 72, Sch. II
08-321           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-323           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-325           8-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-326           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-327           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-330           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-332           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-333           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-334           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-335           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-337           8-21–2008 TSO Table X
08-338           8-21-2008   TSO Table X
08-340           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-341           8-21-2008   TSO Table III
08-345           9-11-2008   TSO Table III
08-352           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-357           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-360           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-361           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-362           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-363           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-365           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-379           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-380           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-382           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-383           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-386           9-18-2008   TSO Table III
08-388           10-16-2008  TSO Table X
08-391           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-394           10-16-2008  TSO Table XV
08-396           10-16-2008  TSO Table X
08-398           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-399           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-401           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-414           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-415           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-416           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-417           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-421           10-16-2008  36.024
08-423           10-16-2008  40.20
08-425           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-426           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-427           10-16-2008  TSO Table III
08-428           10-16-2008  TSO Table IX
08-431           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-445           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-446           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-448           11-20-2008  TSO Table X
08-449           11-20-2008  TSO Table X
08-450           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-451           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-454           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-456           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-458           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-459           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-466           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-467           11-20-2008  TSO Table IX
08-468           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-469           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-470           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-471           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-472           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-475           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-476           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-477           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-478           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-479           11-20-2008  TSO Table III
08-480           12-1-2008   30.01—
                             30.08
08-490           12-18-2008  TSO Table XVI
08-498           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-499           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-500           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-501           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-502           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-503           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-507           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-508           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-509           12-18-2008  TSO Table X
08-510           12-18-2008  TSO Table III
08-512           12-18-2008  TSO Table X
09-06            1-15-2009   TSO Table X
09-09            1-15-2009   TSO Table X
09-11            1-15-2009   TSO Table III
09-12            1-15-2009   TSO Table III
09-14            1-15-2009   TSO Table XII
09-16            1-15-2009   TSO Table III
09-19            1-15-2009   TSO Table III
09-23            1-15-2009   TSO Table X
09-24            1-15-2009   TSO Table X
09-25            1-15-2009   TSO Table X
09-27            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-31            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-33            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-34            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-35            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-36            2-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-37            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-44            2-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-45            2-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-48            2-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-49            2-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-50            2-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-58            3-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-59            3-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-60            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-61            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-63            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-64            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-65            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-66            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-67            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-68            3-19-2009   TSO Table X
09-76            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-77            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-79            3-19-2009   TSO Table III
09-82            4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-91            4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-93            4-16-2009   TSO Table XVI
09-94            4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-96            4-16-2009   TSO Table X
09-101           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-104           4-16-2009   Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-105           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-106           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-107           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-108           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-110           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-112           4-16-2009   TSO Table X
09-113           4-16-2009   157.15—
                             157.18
09-117           4-16-2009   TSO Table IX
09-118           4-16-2009   TSO Table IX
09-119           4-16-2009   TSO Table IX
09-125           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-126           4-16-2009   TSO Table III
90-116           4-16-2009   TSO Table IX
09-88            4-19-2009   TSO Table IX
09-131           5-21-2009   TSO Table VIII
09-136           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-137           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-138           5-21-2009   TSO Table X
09-139           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-140           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-142           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-144           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-145           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-147           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-148           5-21-2009   TSO Table III
09-151           5-21-2009   TSO Table X
09-158           5-21-2009   TSO Table X
09-159           5-21-2009   TSO Table X
09-161           5-21-2009   TSO Table XII,
                             TSO Table XIV
09-166           5-21-2009   TSO Table IX
                             154.001—
                             154.009,
                             154.020—
                             154.031,
                             154.045—
                             154.048,
                             154.060—
                             154.068,
                             154.080—
                             154.086,
                             154.100—
                             154.107,
                             154.120—
                             154.158,
                             154.170—
                             154.173,
                             154.185—
                             154.187,
                             154.200,
                             154.215,
                             154.216,
                             154.230—
                             154.235,
                             154.250,
                             154.251,
09-167           6-18-2009   154.265—
                             154.269,
                             154.280—
                             154.286,
                             154.300—
                             154.302,
                             154.315—
                             154.320,
                             154.335—
                             154.339,
                             154.350—
                             154.361,
                             154.375—
                             154.384,
                             154.395—
                             154.404,
                             154.415—
                             154.421,
                             154.435—
                             154.437,
                             154.450—
                             154.454,
                             154.465—
                             154.472,
                             154.999,
                             Ch. 154, App. A,
                             Ch. 154, App. B
09-171           6-18-2009   36.055—
                             36.060
09-174           6-18-2009   TSO Table X
09-176           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-177           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-178           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-179           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-180           6-18-2009   TSO Table IX
09-183           6-18-2009   TSO Table X
09-188           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-189           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-190           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-191           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-192           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-193           6-18-2009   TSO Table X
09-195           6-18-2009   TSO Table III
09-197           7-16-2009   TSO Table VIII
09-198           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-204           7-16-2009   TSO Table XVI
09-205           7-16-2009   TSO Table XVI
09-207           7-16-2009   TSO Table II
09-208           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-209           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-211           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-213           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-214           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-215           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-217           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-218           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-219           7-16-2009   TSO Table XII
09-220           7-16-2009   TSO Table III
09-227           7-16-2009   TSO Table X
09-229           7-16-2009   TSO Table XIV
09-231           8-20-2009   TSO Table XVI
09-234           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-236           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-238           8-20-2009   TSO Table XII
09-239           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-240           8-20-2009   TSO Table X
09-241           8-20-2009   TSO Table X
09-243           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-248           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-249           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-251           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-253           8-20-2009   TSO Table IX
09-254           8-20-2009   TSO Table X
09-255           8-20-2009   TSO Table III
09-265           9-17-2009   TSO Table XVI
09-267           9-17-2009   TSO Table X
09-268           9-17-2009   TSO Table X
09-269           9-17-2009   TSO Table X
09-270           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-271           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-272           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-273           9-17-2009   TSO Table X
09-275           9-17-2009   TSO Table X
09-276           9-17-2009   Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-277           9-17-2009   Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-278           9-17-2009   Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-279           9-17-2009   Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-280           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-281           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-285           9-17-2009   TSO Table X
09-286           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-289           9-17-2009   TSO Table XII
09-296           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-297           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
09-298           9-17-2009   TSO Table IX
09-299           9-17-2009   TSO Table III
-10-15-2009      TSO Table XVI
09-303           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-319           10-15-2009  TSO Table X
09-320           10-15-2009  TSO Table X
09-322           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-323           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-324           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-325           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-326           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-327           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-328           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-329           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-330           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-331           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-332           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-333           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-334           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-335           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-336           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-337           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-338           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-339           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-340           10-15-2009  Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-341           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-343           10-15-2009  TSO Table X
09-345           10-15-2009  TSO Table X
09-347           10-15-2009  TSO Table X
09-348           10-15-2009  TSO Table XVI
09-352           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-353           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-354           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-355           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-358           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-359           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-361           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-362           10-15-2009  TSO Table III
09-363           10-15-2009  TSO Table IX
09-364           10-15-2009  TSO Table XII
09-365           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-366           11-19-2009  TSO Table VIII
09-367           11-19-2009  TSO Table X
09-375           11-19-2009  TSO Table X
09-377           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-378           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-379           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-380           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-381           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-382           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-383           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-384           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-385           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-386           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-387           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-392           11-19-2009  TSO Table X
09-393           11-19-2009  TSO Table XVI
09-394           11-19-2009  TSO Table XVI
09-395           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-396           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-397           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-398           11-19-2009  TSO Table X
09-399           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-400           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-403           11-19-2009  TSO Table X
09-404           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-405           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-406           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-407           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-408           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-409           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-410           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-411           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-412           11-19-2009  TSO Table III
09-415           12-17-2009  TSO Table XVII
09-425           12-17-2009  TSO Table X
09-431           12-17-2009  TSO Table X
09-432           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-433           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-434           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-435           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-436           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-437           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-438           12-17-2009  TSO Table X
09-439           12-17-2009  TSO Table XVI
09-440           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-441           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-444           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-445           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-446           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-447           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-448           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-449           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-450           12-17-2009  TSO Table X
09-451           12-17-2009  TSO Table XIV
09-455           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-456           12-17-2009  TSO Table III
09-458           12-17-2009  TSO Table X
10-01            1-21-2010   TSO Table VIII
10-13            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-14            1-21-2010   TSO Table X
10-16            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-17            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-18            1-21-2010   TSO Table X
10-23            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-24            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-25            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-26            1-21-2010   TSO Table X
10-27            1-21-2010   TSO Table III
10-29            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-30            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-31            2-18-2010   TSO Table IX
10-36            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-37            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-38            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-39            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-40            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-41            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-42            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-43            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-44            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-45            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-46            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-49            2-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-50            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-51            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-52            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-53            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-54            2-18-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. I
10-55            2-18-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. I
10-56            2-18-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. I
10-57            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-58            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-59            2-18-2010   TSO Table XII
10-61            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-62            2-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-63            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-67            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-68            2-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-69            2-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-70            2-18-2010   33.150
10-71            3-18-2010   TSO Table XVI
10-73            3-18-2010   TSO Table VIII
10-72            3-18-2010   55.005;
                             55.245
10-74            3-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-75            3-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-77            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-78            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-79            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-80            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-81            3-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-82            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-83            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-84            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-85            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-86            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-87            3-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-88            3-18-2010   TSO Table III
10-89            3-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-96            3-18-2010   TSO Table X
10-101           4-15-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-102           4-15-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-103           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-104           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-105           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-106           4-15-2010   TSO Table XII
10-107           4-15-2010   TSO Table XII
10-108           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-109           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-110           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-111           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-112           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-113           4-15-2010   TSO Table XVI
10-116           4-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-118           4-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-119           4-15-2010   TSO Table IX
10-121           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-123           4-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-124           4-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-125           4-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-127           4-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-128           4-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-131           5-20-2010   TSO Table XVII
10-134           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-135           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-140           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-141           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-142           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-144           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-145           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-146           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-147           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-148           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-149           5-20-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. I
10-150           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-155           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-156           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-157           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-158           5-20-2010   TSO Table III
10-159           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-160           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-161           5-20-2010   TSO Table X
10-163           6-17-2010   TSO Table VIII
10-165           6-17-2010   TSO Table XVII
10-166           6-17-2010   TSO Table X
10-167           6-17-2010   TSO Table X
10-175           6-17-2010   TSO Table X
10-176           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-177           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-178           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-180           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-181           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-182           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-183           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-184           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-185           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-186           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-187           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-188           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-189           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-190           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-191           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-192           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-193           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-194           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-195           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-196           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-197           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-198           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-199           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-200           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-201           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-202           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-203           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-204           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-205           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-206           6-17-2010   Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-207           6-17-2010   TSO Table X
10-208           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-209           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-210           6-17-2010   TSO Table VI
10-211           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-212           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-213           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-214           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-215           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-216           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-218           6-17-2010   TSO Table X
10-219           6-17-2010   TSO Table X
10-223           6-17-2010   TSO Table III
10-224           7-15-2010   TSO Table XII
10-233           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-234           7-15-2010   TSO Table XVI
10-235           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-236           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-237           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-238           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-239           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-240           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-241           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-242           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-243           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-244           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-245           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-246           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-247           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-248           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-249           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-251           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-255           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-256           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-257           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-258           7-15-2010   TSO Table X
10-273           7-15-2010   TSO Table III
10-262           8-19-2010   TSO Table XVII
10-274           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-275           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-276           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-277           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-278           8-19-2010   TSO Table X
10-279           8-19-2010   TSO Table X
10-280           8-19-2010   TSO Table X
10-282           8-19-2010   TSO Table X
10-283           8-19-2010   TSO Table X
10-284           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-285           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-286           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-287           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-288           8-19-2010   TSO Table III
10-293           9-16-2010   TSO Table XVII
10-297           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-298           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-299           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-300           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-301           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-302           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-303           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-305           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-306           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-307           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-308           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-309           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-313           9-16-2010   39.05
10-314           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-315           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-316           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-318           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-319           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-320           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-321           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-322           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-323           9-16-2010   TSO Table III
10-324           9-16-2010   TSO Table X
10-331           10-21-2010  TSO Table VIII
10-339           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-340           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-341           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-342           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-343           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-344           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-345           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-346           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-348           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-349           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-352           10-21-2010  TSO Table IX
10-353           10-21-2010  TSO Table IX
10-356           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-357           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-358           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-359           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-361           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-362           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-363           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-364           10-21-2010  TSO Table X
10-365           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-366           10-21-2010  TSO Table III
10-387           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-388           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-389           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-390           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-391           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-392           11-18-2010  Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-393           11-18-2010  Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-394           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-398           11-18-2010  TSO Table III
10-399           11-18-2010  TSO Table III
10-401           11-18-2010  TSO Table III
10-402           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-403           11-18-2010  TSO Table III
10-404           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-405           11-18-2010  TSO Table X
10-406           12-6-2010   30.01—
                             30.08
10-416           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-417           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-418           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-419           12-16-2010  TSO Table XVI
10-422           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-423           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-424           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-425           12-16-2010  TSO Table X
10-426           12-16-2010  TSO Table III
11-04            1-20-2011   163.02
11-07            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-08            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-09            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-10            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-11            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-12            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-13            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-14            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-15            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-16            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-17            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-18            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-19            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-20            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-21            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-22            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-23            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-24            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-25            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-26            1-20-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-27            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-28            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-29            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-30            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-31            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-32            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-33            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-34            1-20-2011   35.01
11-37            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-38            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-39            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-40            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-41            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-42            1-20-2011   TSO Table III
11-43            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-44            1-20-2011   TSO Table X
11-46            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-47            2-17-2011   TSO Table VIII
11-48            2-17-2011   TSO Table VIII
11-49            2-17-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-57            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-58            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-60            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-61            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-62            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-63            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-64            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-65            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-66            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-67            2-17-2011   TSO Table XII
11-68            2-17-2011   TSO Table XII
11-69            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-70            2-17-2011   TSO Table XII
11-71            2-17-2011   TSO Table X
11-72            2-17-2011   TSO Table X
11-73            2-17-2011   TSO Table X
11-77            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-78            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-82            2-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-83            2-17-2011   TSO Table V
11-84            2-17-2011   TSO Table XII
11-85            2-17-2011   TSO Table XI
11-88            3-17-2011   TSO Table XVI,
                             TSO Table XVII
11-93            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-94            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-95            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-96            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-97            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-98            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-99            3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-100           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-101           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-102           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-103           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-104           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-105           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-106           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-107           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-108           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-109           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-110           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-111           3-17-2011   TSO Table X
11-112           3-17-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-113           3-17-2011   TSO Table III
11-119           3-17-2011   TSO Table IX
11-120           3-17-2011   TSO Table X
11-123           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-124           4-21-2011   TSO Table VIII
11-126           4-21-2011   TSO Table X
11-132           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-133           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-135           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-136           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-137           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-139           4-21-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-140           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-141           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-142           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-143           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-148           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-152           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-153           4-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-154           5-19-2011   TSO Table XV
11-159           5-19-2011   158.01
11-161           5-19-2011   TSO Table VIII
11-167           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-168           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-169           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-170           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-172           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-173           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-175           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-176           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-177           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-178           5-19-2011   TSO Table X
11-180           5-19-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-185           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-186           5-19-2011   TSO Table X
11-189           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-190           5-19-2011   TSO Table X
11-191           5-19-2011   TSO Table III
11-192           6-16-2011   TSO Table VIII
11-200           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-201           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-202           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-203           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-204           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-205           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-206           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-207           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-208           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-209           6-16-2011   TSO Table V
11-210           6-16-2011   TSO Table XII
11-212           6-16-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-218           6-16-2011   TSO Table VI
11-223           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-224           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-225           6-16-2011   TSO Table III
11-226           6-16-2011   TSO Table IX
11-227           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-228           6-16-2011   40.01
11-229           6-16-2011   TSO Table X
11-231           7-21-2011   158.01
11-232           7-21-2011   TSO Table XII
11-233           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-234           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-236           7-21-2011   TSO Table X
11-237           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-238           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-239           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-240           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-241           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-242           7-21-2011   TSO Table X
11-243           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-244           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-245           6-21-2011   TSO Table III
11-248           7-21-2011   TSO Table X
11-250           7-21-2011   TSO Table X
11-251           7-21-2011   TSO Table IX
11-254           7-21-2011   TSO Table X
11-252           7-21-2011   TSO Table XII
11-259           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-261           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-263           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-264           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-265           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-266           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-267           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-268           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-269           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-270           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-271           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-272           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-273           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-274           8-18-2011   Ch. 72, Sch. II
11-275           8-18-2011   Ch. 72, Sch. II
11-276           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-277           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-278           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-279           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-280           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-281           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-282           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-283           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-284           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-286           8-18-2011   TSO Table XVI
11-288           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-289           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-290           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-291           5-15-2011   114.001,
                             114.002
11-294           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-295           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-296           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-297           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-298           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-299           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-300           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-301           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-302           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-303           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-304           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-305           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-306           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-307           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-308           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-309           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-310           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-311           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-312           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-313           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-314           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-316           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-317           8-18-2011   TSO Table VI
11-318           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-319           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-322           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-323           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-324           8-18-2011   TSO Table X
11-325           8-18-2011   TSO Table III
11-330           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-331           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-334           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-335           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-336           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-337           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-338           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-339           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-340           9-15-2011   TSO Table X
11-341           9-15-2011   TSO Table X
11-342           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-343           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-344           9-15-2011   TSO Table X
11-345           9-15-2011   TSO Table XII
11-346           9-15-2011   TSO Table XII
11-347           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-348           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-353           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-354           9-15-2011   TSO Table XII
11-355           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-356           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-357           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-358           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-359           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-360           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-361           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-362           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-364           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-365           9-15-2011   39.06
11-366           9-15-2011   TSO Table III
11-367           9-15-2011   TSO Table XII
11-369           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-370           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-371           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-372           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-373           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-374           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-375           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-379           10-20-2011  TSO Table XII
11-380           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-381           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-382           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-383           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-384           10-20-2011  TSO Table V
11-386           10-20-2011  TSO Table X
11-387           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-388           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-389           10-20-2011  TSO Table XII
11-391           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-392           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-393           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-394           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-398           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-399           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-400           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-401           10-20-2011  TSO Table XII
11-402           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-403           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-404           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-405           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-406           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-407           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-408           10-20-2011  TSO Table IX
11-413           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-414           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-416           10-20-2011  TSO Table III
11-424           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-425           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-426           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-427           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-428           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-429           11-17-2011  TSO Table X
11-433           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-434           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-435           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-436           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-437           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-438           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-439           11-17-2011  TSO Table XII
11-440           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-441           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-442           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-448           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-450           11-17-2011  TSO Table III
11-453           12-15-2011  TSO Table VIII
11-455           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-462           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-463           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-464           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-465           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-466           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-467           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-468           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-469           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-470           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-471           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-472           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-473           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-474           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-475           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-476           12-15-2011  TSO Table XII
11-477           12-15-2011  TSO Table XVI
11-478           12-15-2011  TSO Table XVI
11-479           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-480           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-481           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-482           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-483           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-484           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-487           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-490           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-491           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-492           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-493           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-494           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
11-495           12-15-2011  TSO Table III
12-01            1-19-2012   TSO Table XVI
12-09            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-13            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-14            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-15            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-16            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-17            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-18            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-19            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-21            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-22            1-19-2012   TSO Table IX
12-27            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-29            1-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-30            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-37            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-38            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-39            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-40            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-41            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-42            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-43            2-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-44            2-16-2012   TSO Table X
12-58            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-59            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-62            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-72            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-73            3-15-2012   TSO Table X
12-74            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-75            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-76            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-77            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-78            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-79            3-15-2012   TSO Table X
12-80            3-15-2012   TSO Table X
12-81            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-82            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-83            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-84            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-87            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-88            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-92            3-15-2012   TSO Table X
12-93            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-95            3-15-2012   TSO Table III
12-96            4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-105           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-106           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-107           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-108           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-109           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-110           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-113           4-19-2012   TSO Table X
12-114           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-115           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-116           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-117           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-118           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-119           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-120           4-19-2012   40.25
12-121           4-19-2012   40.24
12-126           4-19-2012   TSO Table IX
12-131           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-132           4-19-2012   TSO Table IX
12-133           4-19-2012   TSO Table IX
12-134           4-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-137           5-17-2012   TSO Table VIII
12-145           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-147           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-148           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-149           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-150           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-151           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-157           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-158           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-159           5-17-2012   TSO Table X
12-160           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-161           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-162           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-163           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-164           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-165           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-166           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-167           5-17-2012   TSO Table X
12-168           5-17-2012   TSO Table X
12-172           5-17-2012   TSO Table X
12-173           5-17-2012   TSO Table X
12-180           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-181           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-182           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-183           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-185           5-17-2012   TSO Table III
12-196           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-197           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-198           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-199           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-200           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-201           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-202           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-203           6-21-2012   TSO Table X
12-205           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-206           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-210           6-21-2012   TSO Table VI
12-211           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-212           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-216           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-217           6-21-2012   TSO Table IX
12-218           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-219           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-220           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-223           6-21-2012   TSO Table III
12-233           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-239           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-240           7-19-2012   TSO Table X
12-242           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-243           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-244           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-247           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-248           7-19-2012   TSO Table III
12-254           8-16-2012   TSO Table VIII
12-259           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-260           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-261           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-262           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-263           8-16-2012   TSO Table X
12-264           8-16-2012   TSO Table X
12-265           8-16-2012   TSO Table X
12-267           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-269           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-272           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-273           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-275           8-16-2012   TSO Table III
12-285           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-286           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-287           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-288           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-292           9-20-2012   TSO Table X
12-300           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-301           9-20-2012   TSO Table XII
12-302           9-20-2012   TSO Table X
12-303           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-305           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-306           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-307           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-308           9-20-2012   TSO Table III
12-315           9-20-2012   TSO Table X
12-325           10-18-2012  TSO Table X
12-328           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-329           10-18-2012  TSO Table IX
12-330           10-18-2012  TSO Table IX
12-331           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-332           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-335           10-18-2012  TSO Table X
12-336           10-18-2012  TSO Table X
12-337           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-338           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-339           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-340           10-18-2012  TSO Table III
12-348           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-349           11-15-2012  TSO Table X
12-351           11-15-2012  TSO Table X
12-352           11-15-2012  TSO Table X
12-355           11-15-2012  TSO Table IX
12-357           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-359           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-360           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-361           11-15-2012  TSO Table IX
12-362           11-15-2012  TSO Table X
12-363           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-365           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-366           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-367           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-368           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-369           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-370           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-371           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-372           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-373           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-374           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-377           11-15-2012  TSO Table III
12-378           12-3-2012   30.01 -
                             30.08
12-383           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-384           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-385           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-386           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-387           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-388           12-20-2012  TSO Table X
12-390           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-391           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-392           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-393           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-394           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-395           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-396           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
12-397           12-20-2012  TSO Table III
13-01            1-17-2013   TSO Table XVII
13-02            1-17-2013   TSO Table III
13-08            1-17-2013   TSO Table III
13-09            1-17-2013   TSO Table III
13-10            1-17-2013   TSO Table XVI
13-11            1-17-2013   TSO Table X
13-12            1-17-2013   TSO Table III
13-13            1-17-2013   TSO Table X
13-24            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-26            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-27            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-28            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-29            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-30            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-36            2-21-2013   TSO Table IX
13-37            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-38            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-39            2-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-41            2-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-42            2-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-43            2-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-44            2-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-48            3-21-2013   TSO Table XVII
13-55            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-56            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-57            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-59            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-60            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-61            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-62            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-63            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-64            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-65            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-66            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-67            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-68            3-21-2013   TSO Table XVI
13-69            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-70            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-71            3-21-2013   TSO Table III
13-76            3-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-77            3-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-78            3-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-79            3-21-2013   TSO Table IX
13-80            3-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-81            3-21-2013   TSO Table X
13-88            4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-91            4-18-2013   TSO Table X
13-92            4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-93            4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-94            4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-95            4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-96            4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-97            4-18-2013   TSO Table V
13-98            4-18-2013   39.07
13-101           4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-102           4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-103           4-18-2013   TSO Table X
13-107           4-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-108           4-18-2013   TSO Table X
13-109           4-18-2013   TSO Table X
13-111           5-16-2013   TSO Table VIII
13-118           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-119           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-120           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-121           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-122           5-16-2013   TSO Table X
13-124           5-16-2013   TSO Table X
13-126           5-16-2013   TSO Table X
13-127           5-16-2013   TSO Table X
13-128           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-129           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-130           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-131           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-132           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-133           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-134           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-135           5-16-2013   TSO Table XVI
13-136           5-16-2013   TSO Table XVI
13-140           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-141           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-143           5-16-2013   TSO Table III
13-148           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-150           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-151           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-152           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-153           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-154           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-155           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-156           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-157           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-158           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-159           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-163           6-20-2013   TSO Table XII
13-164           6-20-2013   TSO Table X
13-165           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-166           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-167           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-168           6-20-2013   TSO Table III
13-169           6-20-2013   TSO Table X
13-178           7-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-179           7-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-180           7-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-181           7-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-184           7-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-185           7-18-2013   TSO Table III
13-189           7-18-2013   TSO Table X
13-203           8-15-2013   TSO Table X
13-204           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-205           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-207           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-209           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-210           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-218           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-219           8-15-2013   TSO Table III
13-223           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-231           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-232           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-236           9-19-2013   TSO Table X
13-238           9-19-2013   TSO Table XVI
13-241           9-19-2013   TSO Table IX
13-242           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-244           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-255           9-19-2013   TSO Table X
13-256           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-257           9-19-2013   TSO Table X
13-258           9-19-2013   TSO Table III
13-259           9-19-2013   TSO Table XII
13-261           9-19-2013   TSO Table X
13-262           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-263        10-17-2013  33.122
13-265           10-17-2013  155-13.70
13-267           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-278           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-279           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-280           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-281           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-282           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-283           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-284           10-17-2013  TSO Table IX
13-286           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-287           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-288           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-289           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-290           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-291           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-292           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-293           10-17-2013  TSO Table X
13-294           10-17-2013  TSO Table X
13-295           10-17-2013  TSO Table III
13-296           11-21-2013  TSO Table XVII
13-301           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-302           11-21-2013  40.08
13-303           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-304           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-305           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-306           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-307           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-308           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-309           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-310           11-21-2013  TSO Table X
13-311           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-313           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-314           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-315           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-316           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-317           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-318           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-319           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-320           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-321           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-322           11-21-2013  TSO Table X
13-323           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-324           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-325           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-326           11-21-2013  TSO Table III
13-327           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-328           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-329           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-331           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-332           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-334           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-335           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-336           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-337           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-338           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-339           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-340           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-341           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-342           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-343           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-344           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-345           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-346           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-347           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-348           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-350           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-351           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-352           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-354           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
13-356           12-19-2013  TSO Table III
14-296           11-24-2014  TSO Table XVI
15-38            2-19-2015   155-13.70
15-40            2-19-2015   150.120
15-185           6-18-2015   TSO Table II
15-244           8-20-2015   Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-361           11-25-2015  110.023
17-25            2-16-2017   TSO Table XVII
18-327           12-8-2018   TSO Table III
21-236           7-15-2021   TSO Table VIII
23-382           11-16-2023  TSO Table III
23-387           11-16-2023  TSO Table III
                            
 
REFERENCES TO HIGHWAY RESOLUTIONS
Hwy. Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Hwy. Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
1             1-18-1978   TSO Table XII
3             1-18-1978   TSO Table V
4             1-18-1978   TSO Table V
5             1-18-1978   TSO Table V
3             2-15-1978   TSO Table V
5             3-23-1978   TSO Table V
6             4-21-1978   TSO Table V
7             4-21-1978   TSO Table V
3             5-18-1978   TSO Table XII
2             6-20-1978   TSO Table XV
4             7-20-1978   TSO Table V
5             7-20-1978   TSO Table V
1             8-24-1978   TSO Table XII
11            8-24-1978   TSO Table XII
12            8-24-1978   TSO Table XII
7             10-26-1978  TSO Table XII
9             10-26-1978  TSO Table V
1             11-30-1978  TSO Table XII
2             11-30-1978  TSO Table XII
3             11-30-1978  TSO Table V
5             3-21-1979   TSO Table II
6             3-21-1979   TSO Table II
1             4-25-1979   Ch. 72, Sch. II
1             5-23-1979   TSO Table V
2             5-23-1979   TSO Table V
2             6-20-1979   Ch. 72, Sch. II
4             7-25-1979   Ch. 72, Sch. II
5             7-25-1979   Ch. 72, Sch. II
5             8-29-1979   TSO Table XII
6             9-26-1979   TSO Table V
1             11-14-1979  TSO Table V
2             11-14-1979  TSO Table V
4             11-30-1979  TSO Table V
4             1-23-1980   TSO Table V
6             1-23-1980   Ch. 72, Sch. II
7             1-23-1980   Ch. 72, Sch. II
8             1-23-1980   Ch. 72, Sch. II
9             1-23-1980   Ch. 72, Sch. II
2             2-20-1980   TSO Table V
3             4-23-1980   TSO Table III
3             5-21-1980   TSO Table V
9             5-21-1980   TSO Table X
2             6-25-1980   TSO Table IV
3             6-25-1980   Ch. 72, Sch. II
2             7-23-1980   Ch. 72, Sch. II
3             7-23-1980   TSO Table III
5             7-23-1980   TSO Table V
3             9-24-1980   TSO Table V
4             9-24-1980   TSO Table V
1             10-29-1980  TSO Table XII
2             10-29-1980  TSO Table XII
3             10-29-1980  TSO Table XII
7             10-29-1980  TSO Table V
8             10-29-1980  TSO Table V
9             10-29-1980  TSO Table V
10            10-29-1980  TSO Table V
3             1-22-1981   TSO Table XII
1             2-26-1981   TSO Table V
1             3-11-1981   TSO Table V
5             3-26-1981   Ch. 72, Sch. II
6             3-26-1981   Ch. 72, Sch. II
2             4-23-1981   TSO Table V
3             5-28-1981   TSO Table XII
5             5-28-1981   TSO Table V
4             6-25-1981   TSO Table XII
1             7-19-1981   TSO Table III
4             7-23-1981   TSO Table X
4             8-27-1981   TSO Table XII
5             8-27-1981   TSO Table V
6             8-27-1981   TSO Table V
4             10-22-1981  TSO Table V
5             10-22-1981  TSO Table XII
2             1-28-1982   TSO Table XII
3             1-28-1982   Ch. 72, Sch. II
82-41         4-7-1982    TSO Table XII
2             4-22-1982   Ch. 72, Sch. II
3             6-24-1982   Ch. 72, Sch. I
2             7-22-1982   TSO Table V
3             7-22-1982   TSO Table V
2             8-26-1982   TSO Table V
3             8-26-1982   TSO Table V
4             8-26-1982   TSO Table V
5             10-28-1982  TSO Table V
2             1-20-1983   TSO Table X
3             1-20-1983   TSO Table V
4             1-20-1983   TSO Table V
2             4-21-1983   TSO Table III
3             4-21-1983   TSO Table III
4             4-21-1983   TSO Table V
1             5-19-1983   TSO Table III
2             5-19-1983   TSO Table X
6             5-19-1983   TSO Table V
7             5-19-1983   TSO Table V
8             5-19-1983   TSO Table V
9             5-19-1983   TSO Table V
1             6-16-1983   TSO Table III
3             6-16-1983   TSO Table VII
4             6-16-1983   TSO Table V
1             7-21-1983   TSO Table III
3             7-21-1983   TSO Table III
4             7-21-1983   TSO Table III
5             7-21-1983   TSO Table VII
1             8-18-1983   TSO Table III
3             8-18-1983   TSO Table V
4             8-18-1983   TSO Table V
5             8-18-1983   TSO Table III
6             8-18-1983   TSO Table XIII
8             9-15-1983   TSO Table V
9             9-15-1983   TSO Table V
3             10-20-1983  TSO Table V
4             10-20-1983  TSO Table V
5             10-20-1983  TSO Table V
2             11-17-1983  Ch. 72, Sch. II
3             11-17-1983  TSO Table V
1             1-19-1984   TSO Table III
3             1-19-1984   TSO Table III
4             1-19-1984   TSO Table III
5             1-19-1984   Ch. 72, Sch. II
6             1-19-1984   TSO Table V
7             1-19-1984   TSO Table V
8             1-19-1984   TSO Table IX
1             2-16-1984   TSO Table V
2             2-16-1984   TSO Table III
3             2-16-1984   TSO Table III
5             2-16-1984   Ch. 72, Sch. II
7             2-16-1984   Ch. 72, Sch. II
1             3-15-1984   TSO Table III
2             3-15-1984   Ch. 72, Sch. II
5             3-15-1984   TSO Table XIII
1             4-19-1984   TSO Table III
4             4-19-1984   Ch. 72, Sch. II
5             4-19-1984   TSO Table V
6             4-19-1984   TSO Table III
2             5-7-1984    Ch. 72, Sch. II
1             5-17-1984   TSO Table III
1             6-21-1984   TSO Table III
3             6-21-1984   TSO Table V
2             7-19-1984   TSO Table X
1             8-16-1984   TSO Table III
11            8-16-1984   TSO Table V
12            8-16-1984   TSO Table V
13            8-16-1984   TSO Table III
14            8-16-1984   TSO Table V
3             9-20-1984   Ch. 73, Sch. I
4             9-20-1984   TSO Table XV
5             9-20-1984   TSO Table V
6             9-20-1984   TSO Table V
2             10-18-1984  Ch. 72, Sch. II
3             10-18-1984  Ch. 72, Sch. II
4             10-18-1984  TSO Table V
1             11-15-1984  Ch. 72, Sch. I
2             11-15-1984  TSO Table X
3             11-15-1984  TSO Table V
1             12-20-1984  TSO Table III
4             12-20-1984  TSO Table III
5             12-20-1984  TSO Table III
6             12-20-1984  Ch. 72, Sch. II
7             12-20-1984  Ch. 72, Sch. I
2             1-17-1985   TSO Table X
3             1-17-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
4             2-21-1985   TSO Table III
1             3-21-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
2             3-21-1985   TSO Table III
2             3-21-1985   TSO Table III
3             3-21-1985   39.01
2             5-16-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
3             5-16-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
4             5-16-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
5             5-16-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
1             6-20-1985   TSO Table III
2             6-20-1985   TSO Table X
3             6-20-1985   TSO Table X
1             7-18-1985   TSO Table III
3             7-18-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
4             7-18-1985   TSO Table X
5             7-18-1985   TSO Table V
6             7-18-1985   TSO Table VII
7             7-18-1985   TSO Table VII
85-100        8-15-1985   TSO Table III
85-101        8-15-1985   Ch. 72, Sch. II
85-102        8-15-1985   TSO Table X
85-138        10-17-1985  TSO Table III
85-140        10-17-1985  TSO Table X
85-180        12-19-1985  Ch. 72, Sch. II
85-181        12-19-1985  TSO Table VII
85-182        12-19-1985  TSO Table VII
86-4          1-16-1986   TSO Table III
86-5          1-16-1986   Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-6          1-16-1986   Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-7          1-16-1986   Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-9          1-16-1986   TSO Table X
86-18         2-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-20         2-20-1986   Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-21         2-20-1986   Ch. 72, Sch. II
86-22         2-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-23         2-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-24         2-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-25         2-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-39         3-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-40         3-20-1986   Ch. 73, Sch. I
86-41         3-20-1986   Ch. 73, Sch. I
86-44         3-20-1986   TSO Table VII
86-48         3-20-1986   TSO Table III
86-52         4-17-1986   TSO Table III
86-53         4-17-1986   TSO Table X
86-81         6-19-1986   TSO Table III
87-61         6-18-1987   TSO Table III
87-76         7-16-1987   TSO Table III
87-77         7-16-1987   TSO Table III
87-78         7-16-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. I
87-103        8-20-1987   TSO Table III
87-116        9-17-1987   TSO Table III
87-117        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-118        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-119        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-120        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-121        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-122        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-123        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-124        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-125        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-126        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-127        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-128        9-17-1987   Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-164        11-19-1987  Ch. 72, Sch. II
87-165        11-19-1987  Ch. 72, Sch. II
3             1-21-1993   Ch. 72, Sch. II
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed         Code Section
                             154.001—
                             154.009,
                             154.020—
                             154.031,
                             154.045—
                             154.048,
                             154.060—
                             154.068,
                             154.080—
                             154.086,
                             154.100—
                             154.107,
                             154.120—
                             154.144,
                             154.155—
                             154.158,
                             154.170—
                             154.173,
                             154.185—
                             154.187,
                             154.200,
                             154.215,
                             154.216,
                             154.230—
                             154.235,
                             154.250,
-        7-8-1970            154.251,
                             154.265—
                             154.269,
                             154.280—
                             154.286,
                             154.300—
                             154.302,
                             154.315—
                             154.320,
                             154.335—
                             154.339,
                             154.350—
                             154.361,
                             154.375—
                             154.384,
                             154.395—
                             154.404,
                             154.415—
                             154.421,
                             154.435—
                             154.437,
                             154.450—
                             154.454,
                             154.465—
                             154.472,
                             154.999,
                             Ch. 154, App. A,
                             Ch. 154, App. B
                             160.01—
-        7-18-1973           160.13,
                             160.99
                             160.01—
-        9-11-1973           160.13,
                             160.99
                             160.01—
-        9-19-1973           160.13,
                             160.99
84-16    2-16-1984           111.04
85-91    8-8-1985            TSO Table XII,
                             TSO Table XIII
85-173   11-21-1985          TSO Table X
85-174   11-21-1985          TSO Table X
86-87    6-19-1986           TSO Table X
86-88    6-19-1986           TSO Table X
86-110   8-21-1986           TSO Table X
86-111   8-21-1986           TSO Table X
87-4     1-15-1987           TSO Table X
87-5     1-15-1987           TSO Table X
87-148   10-15-1987          TSO Table X
87-149   10-15-1987          TSO Table X
87-162   1-21-1988           TSO Table VII
88-75    6-16-1988           114.001,
                             114.002
                             30.01—
-        12-3-1990           30.04,
                             30.06,
                             30.07
92-195   9-17-1992           34.085—
                             34.092
                             95.01—
92-206   9-17-1992           95.06,
                             95.99
                             30.01,
                             30.03,
-        12-7-1992           30.04,
                             30.06,
                             30.07
-        12-17-1992          30.02
                             160.01—
-        5-25-1993           160.13,
                             160.99
-        12-5-1994           30.01—
                             30.04
                             30.01—
-        12-2-1996           30.04,
                             30.06,
                             30.07
                             160.01—
-        1-16-1997           160.13,
                             160.99
                             110.018,
                             110.019,
                             110.025,
                             110.070,
                             110.074,
99-115   3-18-1999           110.075,
                             110.117,
                             110.118,
                             110.121,
                             110.122,
                             110.124
                             74.11,
99-116   3-18-1999           74.13,
                             74.19
99-210   5-20-1999           93.020
                             30.01—
-        12-4-2000           30.04,
                             30.06,
                             30.07
                             30.01—
-        12-20-2001          30.04,
                             30.06—
                             30.08
                             32.052,
04-168   5-20-2004           32.066—
                             32.069,
                             32.999
                             32.052,
05-499   11-17-2005          32.066—
                             32.069,
                             32.999
                             110.001—
                             110.003,
                             110.015—
                             110.027,
                             110.041—
                             110.044,
                             110.055—
                             110.057,
                             110.070—
05-500   11-17-2005          110.075,
                             110.091—
                             110.101,
                             110.115—
                             110.124,
                             110.135—
                             110.142,
                             110.155—
                             110.157,
                             110.999
                             116.01,
                             116.02,
                             116.15—
05-501   11-17-2005          116.18,
                             116.30—
                             116.32,
                             116.99
07-86    3-15-2007           158.01
07-0291  7-1-2007            90.27
08-418   10-16-2008          114.001,
                             114.002
                             41.001—
                             41.005,
                             41.015,
                             41.016,
                             41.030—
                             41.035,
                             41.050,
                             41.065—
                             41.071,
                             41.085—
08-461   11-20-2008          41.092,
                             41.105,
                             41.106,
                             41.120,
                             41.121,
                             41.135—
                             41.138,
                             41.150—
                             41.153,
                             41.165—
                             41.175
09-169   6-18-2009           TSO Table XVI
                             120.01,
09-181   6-18-2009           120.19—
                             120.26,
                             120.99
                             93.020—
09-245   8-20-2009           93.029,
                             93.999
                             97.01 ,
                             97.02,
09-290   9-17-2009           97.04—
                             97.09,   
                             97.99
                             53.01—
09-291   9-17-2009           53.14,
                             53.99,
                             Ch. 53, App. A
09-388   11-19-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-389   11-19-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-390   11-19-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-391   11-19-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-426   12-17-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-427   12-17-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-428   12-17-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-429   12-17-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
09-430   12-17-2009          Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-07    1-21-2010           Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-08    1-21-2010           Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-09    1-21-2010           Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-10    1-21-2010           Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-11    1-21-2010           Ch. 72, Sch. II
10-12    1-21-2010           Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             164.001—
                             164.004,
                             164.020—
                             164.025,
                             164.035—
                             164.047,
                             164.060—
                             164.067,
                             164.080—
                             164.085,
                             164.100—
                             164.105,
                             164.120—
10-164   6-17-2010           164.126,
                             164.140—
                             164.150,
                             164.160—
                             164.167,
                             164.180—
                             164.183,
                             164.195—
                             164.197,
                             164.999,
                             Ch. 164, App. B,
                             Ch. 164, App. C,
                             Ch. 164, App. D,
                             Ch. 164, App. E
10-220   6-17-2010           33.165,
                             33.166
10-260   8-19-2010           55.245
                             162.01,
                             162.02,
                             162.15—
                             162.19,
10-368   11-18-2010          162.30,
                             162.45,
                             162.46,
                             162.60,
                             162.61,
                             162.99
11-45    1-20-2011           50.40—
                             50.44
11-46    2-17-2011           164.105,
                             Ch. 164, App. A
                             51.01—
                             51.08 ,
                             51.10 ,
11-74    2-17-2011           51.11,
                             51.13,
                             51.99,
                             Ch. 51, App. A,
                             Ch. 51, App. C
11-87    3-17-2011           154.063
11-130   4-21-2011           40.22
11-174   5-19-2011           Ch. 72, Sch. II
11-220   6-16-2011           36.055
                             10.01 -
                             10.21,
                             10.99,
                             43.01 -
                             43.17,
                             76.01,
                             76.99,
                             74.01 -
                             74.19,
                             74.99,
                             77.01 - 77.13,
                             77.99,
                             90.99,
                             93.040 -
11-287   8-18-2011           93.052,
                             93.999,
                             130.01,
                             130.02,
                             130.15 -
                             130.21,
                             130.99,
                             131.01 -
                             131.04,
                             131.99,
                             132.01 - 132.05,
                             132.99,
                             133.01 -
                             133.05,
                             133.99
11-292   8-18-2011           Adopting Ordinance
11-351   9-21-2011           114.001,
                             114.002
11-385   10-20-2011          Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-07    1-19-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-08    1-19-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-152   5-17-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-153   5-17-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-154   5-17-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-155   5-17-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-156   5-17-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
12-213   6-21-2012           36.055
12-246   7-19-2012           Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             155-1.10 -
                             155-1.130,
                             155-2.10 -
                             155-2.40,
                             155-3.10 -
                             155-3.40,
                             155-4.10 -
                             155-4.40,
                             155-5.10 -
                             155-5.40,
                             155-6.10,
                             155-6.20,
                             155-7.10 -
                             155-7.30,
                             155-8.10 -
                             155-8.60,
                             155-9.10 -
                             155-9.210,
-        Effective 10-1-2012 155-9.230 -
                             155-9.270,
                             155-10.10,
                             155-10.20,
                             155-11.10 -
                             155-11.130,
                             155-12.10 -
                             155-12.110,
                             155-13.10 -
                             155-13.130,
                             155-14.20 -
                             155-14.140,
                             155-15.10 -
                             155-15.60,
                             155-16.10 -
                             155-16.100,
                             155-17.10,
                             155-17.20,
                             155-18.10,
                             155-18.20
12-323   10-18-2012          Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             97.01 -
                             97.02,
                             97.04,
12-326   10-18-2012          97.06,
                             97.09,  
                             97.99,
                             Ch. 97, App. A
                             53.02 -
                             53.11,
12-327   10-18-2012          53.14,
                             53.99,
                             Ch 53, App. A
13-90    4-18-2013           Ch. 72, Sch. II
13-161   6-20-2013           36.032
13-198   8-15-13             166.042
13-276   10-17-2013          Ch. 72, Sch. II
13-277   10-17-2013          Ch. 72, Sch. II
14-44    3-20-2014           155-7.30,
                             155-18.20
                             150.001 -
                             150.012,
                             150.030,
                             150.110,
                             150.120,
14-103   5-15-2014           150.140,
                             150.150,
                             150.160,
                             150.170,
                             150.180,
                             150.999
14-117   5-15-2014           Ch. 72, Sch. II
14-118   5-15-2014           Ch. 72, Sch. II
14-192   7-17-2014           114.001,
                             114.002
14-231   9-18-2014           155-7.30
                             51.01  -
                             51.13 ,
14-279   10-16-2014          51.99 ,
                             Ch. 51, App. A ,
                             Ch. 51, App. B ,
                             Ch. 51, App. C
15-11    1-15-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-12    1-15-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-13    1-15-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-14    1-15-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-39    2-19-2015           155-7.30
                             53.01 -
15-49    2-19-2015           53.14,
                             53.99,
                             Ch. 53, App. A
15-99    4-16-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-102   4-16-2015           121.01 -
                             121.04
15-148   5-21-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-149   5-21-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-158   5-21-2015           78.10 -
                             78.65
15-159   5-21-2015           110.023
15-168   6-18-2015           155-14.110
15-183   6-18-2015           110.023
15-201   7-16-2015           155-9.280
15-202   7-16-2015           155-13.30
15-203   7-16-2015           155-18.20
                             97.01 ,
                             97.02,
15-232   8-20-2015           97.04 -
                             97.09,  
                             97.99,
                             Ch. 97, App. A
15-251   9-17-2015           Ch. 72, Sch. II
15-303   10-15-2015          110.023
15-370   12-17-2015          Ch. 72, Sch. II
16-27    2-18-2016           155-10.10
16-35    2-18-2016           Ch. 72, Sch. II
16-96    4-21-2016           Ch. 72, Sch. II
16-209   7-21-2016           Ch. 53, App. A
                             155-7.30,
                             155-8.10,
                             155-9.110,
16-227   12-15-2016          155-10.10,
                             155-15.40,
                             155-18.10,
                             155-18.20
                             51.01,
                             51.02,
                             51.05,
16-235   8-18-2016           51.08,
                             51.09,
                             51.10,
                             51.11,
                             Ch. 51, App. A
                             155-7,
16-258   9-15-2016           155-8,
                             155-11
16-302   10-20-2016          Ch. 72, Sch. II
16-303   10-20-2016          114.001,
                             114.002
16-368   12-15-2016          160.03
17-173   7-20-2017           110.023,
                             110.141
17-231   10-19-2017          90.01
17-257   10-19-2017          155-14.90
17-274   10-19-2017          37.02
                             114.003,
                             114.004,
                             114.015,
                             114.016,
                             114.035,
17-276   10-19-2017          114.055,
                             114.075,
                             114.076,
                             114.077,
                             114.090,
                             114.091,
                             114.999
                             155-1.50,
                             155-1.100,
                             155-1.110,
                             155-2.40,
                             155-3.30,
                             155-7.20,
                             155-7.30,
                             155-8.30,
                             155-8.40,
                             155-8.50,
                             155-8.60,
                             155-9.40,
                             155-9.50,
                             155-9.80,
                             155-9.100,
                             155-9.110,
                             155-9.120,
                             155-9.130,
                             155-9.140,
                             155-9.160,
                             155-9.170,
                             155-9.240,
                             155-9.245,
                             155-9.270,
                             155-9.280,
                             155-10.10,
                             155-10.20,
18-1     1-18-2018           155-11.30,
                             155-11.50,
                             155-11.60,
                             155-11.65,
                             155-12.30,
                             155-12.40,
                             155-12.50,
                             155-12.60,
                             155-12.70,
                             155-12.80,
                             155-12.90,
                             155-13.30,
                             155-13.40,
                             155-13.50,
                             155-13.60,
                             155-13.110,
                             155-13.140,
                             155-14.10,
                             155-14.100,
                             155-14.110,
                             155-14.140,
                             155-15.40,
                             155-15.60,
                             155-16.10,
                             155-16.30,
                             155-16.40,
                             155-16.70,
                             155-18.10,
                             155-18.20
18-47    2-15-2018           70.12,
                             70.99
18-48    2-15-2018           70.12
18-95    4-19-2018           97.05,
                             Ch. 97, App. A
                             150.002,
                             150.030,
                             150.120,
18-115   5-17-2018           150.140,
                             150.150,
                             150.160,
                             150.170,
                             150.180
                             150.002,
                             150.030,
                             150.120,
18-116   5-17-2018           150.140,
                             150.150,
                             150.160,
                             150.170,
                             150.180
                             155-3.30,
18-192   10-18-2018          155-10.10,
                             155-13.30,
                             155-18.20
18-193   7-19-2018           155-7.30,
                             155-10.10
18-194   7-19-2018           155-14.110
18-221   8-16-2018           155-7.30,
                             155-8.60
                             155-7.30,
18-222   8-16-2018           155-9.280,
                             155-18.20
18-223   8-16-2018           150.003,
                             150.011
18-226   8-16-2018           122.01 -
                             122.14
18-240   9-20-2018           155-7.30,
                             155-18.20
18-241   9-20-2018           155-10.10,
                             155-13.30
18-250   9-20-2018           Ch. 72, Sch. II
18-261   9-20-2018           110.023
18-277   10-18-2018          Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             55.061,
18-305   11-15-2018          55.062,
                             55.080
18-306   11-15-2018          Ch. 164, App. B
18-325   11-15-2018          Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             114.001,
                             114.002,
                             114.003,
                             114.015,
                             114.016,
18-326   11-15-2018          114.035,
                             114.055,
                             114.075,
                             114.076,
                             114.090,
                             Ch. 114, App. A
19-9     1-17-2019           Ch. 72, Sch. II
19-51    3-21-2019           155-13.70
                             110.003,
19-71    3-21-2019           110.020,
                             110.022,
                             110.023
19-88    4-18-2019           155-3.30,
                             155-18.10
19-89    4-18-2019           155-16.40
19-145   6-20-2019           37.03 -
                             37.06
19-156   6-20-2019           Ch. 72, Sch. II
19-157   6-20-2019           Ch. 72, Sch. II
19-158   6-20-2019           Ch. 72, Sch. II
19-185   7-18-2019           Ch. 73, Sch. I,
                             74.99
                             120.01,
                             120.02,
                             120.15 -
19-186   8-15-2019           120.18,
                             120.24,
                             120.25,
                             120.99
19-190   7-18-2019           110.023
19-206   8-15-2019           70.12
19-237   9-19-2019           155-7.30,
                             155-9.170
                             164.004,
19-238   9-19-2019           164.022,
                             164.023
                             55.005,
19-239   9-19-2019           55.022,
                             55.023
                             155-9.130,
19-241   9-19-2019           155-9.290,
                             155-10.10
19-281   10-17-2019          Ch. 51, App. A
19-352   12-19-2019          155-7.30,
                             155-18.20
19-366   12-19-2019          Ch. 72, Sch. II
19-367   12-19-2019          Ch. 72, Sch. II
19-373   12-19-2019          110.023
20-53    2-20-2020           Ch. 72, Sch. II
20-54    2-20-2020           Ch. 72, Sch. II
20-95    3-19-2020           110.023
                             56.001 -
                             56.006,
                             56.020 -
                             56.035,
                             56.045 -
                             56.057,
                             56.064 -
20-231   7-16-2020           56.084,
                             56.100 -
                             56.103,
                             56.120 -
                             56.125,
                             56.140 -
                             56.151,
                             56.170 -
                             56.179
                             155-7.30,
20-266   8-20-2020           155-9.300,
                             155-18.20
20-267   8-20-2020           155-10.10
20-363   10-15-2020          Ch. 72, Sch. II
20-368   10-15-2020          110.023
20-428   11-19-2020          114.015,
                             Ch. 114, App. A
20-478   12-17-2020          155-7.30,
                             155-14.100
20-491   12-17-2020          Ch. 72, Sch. II
20-519   12-22-2020          114.015
                             110.019,
20-520   12-22-2020          110.022,
                             110.024,
                             110.025
                             150.001 -
                             150.006,
                             150.008 -
                             150.012,
                             150.030,
                             150.040,
                             150.050,
                             150.060,
                             150.070,
                             150.080,
                             150.110,
21-102   8-19-2021           150.114 -
                             150.116,
                             150.120,
                             150.130,
                             150.140,
                             150.150,
                             150.160,
                             150.170,
                             150.180,
                             150.190,
                             150.999,
                             158.02
21-138   5-20-2021           155-10.10,
                             155-18.20
21-139   5-20-2021           155-2.30,
                             155-3.30
21-203   6-17-2021           110.023
                             155-7.30,
21-233   7-15-2021           155-9.20,
                             155-9.25,
                             155-18.20
21-270   8-19-2021           TSO Table XVII
21-284   8-19-2021           110.023
21-338   10-21-2021          Ch. 72, Sch. II
21-339   10-21-2021          Ch. 72, Sch. II
21-352   10-21-2021          53.15
21-353   10-21-2021          50.43
21-397   11-18-2021          Ch. 72, Sch. II
21-398   11-18-2021          Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             116.01,
                             116.02,
                             116.15,
                             116.16,
21-442   12-16-2021          116.18,
                             116.30,
                             116.31,
                             116.33,
                             116.99
22-23    2-25-2022           150.180
                             55.005,
22-24    2-25-2022           55.020,
                             164.004,
                             164.020
22-78    4-21-2022           Ch. 72, Sch. II
22-79    4-21-2022           Ch. 72, Sch. II
22-120   5-19-2022           Ch. 72, Sch. II
22-121   5-19-2022           Ch. 72, Sch. II
22-122   5-19-2022           Ch. 72, Sch. II
22-164   6-16-2022           116.18
22-235   8-18-2022           Ch. 72, Sch. II
                             110.001 -
                             110.003,
                             110.015 -
                             110.027,
                             110.040 -
                             110.044,
                             110.055 -
                             110.057,
                             110.070 -
22-236   8-18-2022           110.075,
                             110.090 -
                             110.101,
                             110.115 -
                             110.124,
                             110.135 -
                             110.142,
                             110.155 -
                             110.157,
                             110.999
                             155-7.30,
22-226   9-15-2022           155-8.30,
                             155-9.245,
                             155-16.40
                             155-7.30,
22-256   10-20-2022          155-8.30,
                             155-9.220
22-257   9-15-2022           155-7.30
22-258   9-15-2022           155-7.30,
                             155-9.240
22-283   9-15-2022           Ch. 73, Sch. I
22-387   1-19-2023           150.170
22-423   11-17-2022          110.023
22-450   11-17-2022          33.122,
                             33.123
23-17    1-19-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-18    1-19-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-47    2-16-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-48    2-16-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-53    2-16-2023           110.023
                             155-7.30,
                             155-9.245,
23-70    3-16-2023           155-9.260,
                             155-16.10,
                             155-16.40,
                             155-18.20
23-88    3-16-2023           Ch. 73, Sch. I
23-92    3-16-2023           110.023
23-113   4-20-2023           53.15
23-131   5-18-2023           TSO Table XVII
23-151   5-18-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-172   6-15-2023           155-10.10
23-220   7-19-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-224   7-19-2023           110.023
23-173   8-17-2023           155-7.30
23-289   9-21-2023           56.081
23-308   9-21-2023           Ch. 72, Sch. II
23-312   9-21-2023           30.02
23-353   11-16-2023          155-7.30,
                             155-8.10
                             90.01 -
                             90.15,
                             90.17 -
24-19    1-18-2024           90.23,
                             90.25,
                             90.27 -
                             90.30,
                             90.99
24-91    4-18-2024           70.12
                             97.01 -
24-100   4-18-2024           97.09,
                             97.99
                            
 
